
When death fell asleep between my legs
One arm slung over my knee
I pulled her up to my leaking breasts
And heard her grind her teeth 
— 
Does not inhabit herself
Stun guns of solar hair and eye flash hide her age
Born in a mirror in water precariously unheld
Will never die 
— 
Sometimes runeface spreads
Wind wrinkling a lake
Dolphins flipping at eyes and mouth 
Sometimes a crucifix
Nose the bent of spine
Splayed veins from eyebolts 
— 
A bit inconvenient
To die just to drop 
This sticky lover
That loveless parent 
If only one could just get plastic surgery
Change lives behind the shrubbery 
— 
Not fair 
I get older so
Do you I
Never catch 
Up you train me
For your death 
To my patterns you do
Patterns I want something 
To shock you
My namesake tree 
To drop all its leaves
In the center of spring 
Remind me what
I gain by being here 
Love me in a hurry 
— 
Our granaries flowed with deposits of sweetest kernels
Like squirrels we were the saviors of a future
In winter’s clamp we siphoned liqueurs using deep-stemmed waterlilies
Returning to redeem we found brittle rock-sugar
Clouded air traps
Ice spikes
Fossil prints 
— 
Whenever I open my mouth: crater 
Blisters I take for moonwalking shoes 
Sentries out the front
Slips at the backdoor 
The bloat floats 
Fatwrapped
Fleafeeling 
— 
Two people have a third person between them
One of them is always responsible for her disappearance 
Parched beehives in their stomachs they look everywhere 
Lightning and smoke form duration in the I Ching clouds
She won’t say shoo


^^EOP^^


After
the small bomb of his orgasm
I stole his mother’s crucifix,
darted through the back doors. 
I never saw the dogs.
Quick like Krishna’s gopis they swarmed me.
Pink tongues of threat and purebred musk.
Rosaries of saliva.
Jaws open like warm ovens for bread and fish. 
I tried their father’s language on them 
stay calm hold still
hold still stay there
don’t run stay calm
don’t panic I said
stay still calm
I said stay 
When the ridgeback bitch rushed me,
I sank the gold christ in her eye,
felt her piss soak my sandals.
She buckled into the death,
I whimpered
easy easy now
no one has to get hurt.


^^EOP^^


Small words craft a spell
for honey-scented light;
a white sail flung to earth
makes a river of cold and diamonds,
makes blood shiver. 
This is an old string
undone, useful as a lie
to the dreaming,
sleeping like water in the veins,
used to the hunger
of the unfed. 
Taste is the shape of lovers’ hands,
the arched sky, a bowl of knives,
that tame bird in blue—
your name is
the squall and surrender
of things to come. 
Night is for never,
bloodshot hours and the must of books,
breath of moth-winged longing. 
Pack your things:
strike out before light.
 


^^EOP^^


I put in a butterfly, first.
Shake its purple noondust air
into the furthest corner where
it will be safe. 
Then, I put in the snake
that he bit a mouthful out of,
silenced with a stone. 
What else was there room for,
after that?
 


^^EOP^^


Ask him at four the con man with the fancy herb
whether the shirt will still fit
the grain still stream millward
the girl still hold her balance
on the fraying rope 
How to hold and frame no, see see see
as if for the first time
the raw unpolished yellow skin
of the door the warm brick skin
of the terrace the downy cream floor 
You must be alert to coffee stain and mosquito bite
red cloud of panic on the inner arm
the river’s pulse beating in the brain
its gilded fish bursting the weir of sleep
source forgotten mouth unknown 
upstream and downstream braided one current from which the wounded dolphin leaps
slipping from this skin of water to the next
finding balance on a wave it’s you and me both
asking who’s really native in passage


^^EOP^^





For Rick and Stephanie



Because today our hands unravel a perfect orange
we each left our homes
drank ripening light before boarding
put our hands together into red soil 
we each left home
to place new juice in our mouths
put our hands together into red soil
kept our eyes open for tiny seeds 
unfamiliar juice in our mouths
each season we unlatched door
eyes open for tiny seeds signaling first growth
kept away wilder foraging creatures 
each season unlatching door                                   and because windows kept their promise to open
ripening light before boarding                    sun did indeed round out
foraging creature feeding grass                                            sky no longer called out      private song
our mouths welcome            smooth rind singing sweet
                                                                                          juice in our mouths


^^EOP^^


There is a place not far from here where
two rivers meet the sea, a shore dark
and pitted as a caiman’s back.
My thoughts drift here when I pray to you,
to swollen water and lonely spit,
tide-risen belly of a mangrove god. 
Every white room I enter is untruth.
The doctor is not my maker. He can barely keep
my bones together. He cannot sew me
into wholeness, even with your holy medallion
round my neck. Oh saint, there is so much
I cannot tell you. 
Perhaps I will confide in Xochiquetzal,
goddess of childbirth, mother of ocelots and flowers.
Perhaps I will write letters
to my own mother with invisible pigment
made of colostrum and brine. 
But these words are all seeds, hard-shelled
and deep-veined like nutmeg, falling to earth
in careless handfuls. I know this forest of silence
is of my own making. 
Now what can you say to me
that the wild Atlantic has not?
I’ve already heard the one about
everything happening for a reason. 
Dear saint, I know you will not
take me in your pristine arms
and make me weightless, even if I beg.
Behind my eyes at night there is only water,
my unborn child inside me a turn of turtles
flailing in the deep, crossing the unknown. 
 


^^EOP^^


My suited and booted grandpa
reminds me of a weighty door
hewed from fired vesi or oak.
If, upon turning the brass knob
in his breast, you push against him,
he’s swift to push against you,
and for an instant you’re a doorman
and he the mule of a man-door
until the moment of letting go
when he pulls you along after him
into an open room where history
reclines vacantly on an armchair.
 


^^EOP^^


St. Andrews. Forbach. Gothenburg. Sète. Douai. Roubaix. The towns we knew as shapes at night, or a stranger in the next berth half-hidden beneath a duvet. A whirling midnight of boat-hopping in Nantes. Half of Lyon from 2001: all the mornings julienned into sunshine and periwinkle skies at Croix-Rousse; Sunday ends at La Cigale (or was it La Fourmi, or both?), redolent of the ashes and smoke and crimson drapes of Wong Kar-wai; the salad bowl tossing an ever-delayed sunrise over your cracked skylight; those 73 lines (563 words) you managed to fit alongside eternity on an un-postmarked card. Some constellations—Aquarius, Aries, Hydra, Pegasus. The blue-and-canary-yellow polka-dotted python who still gobbles me up on the 99th square. A weekend in Rouen where I drank the sun with a red plastic straw. Dimples on your stubbled left cheek that surface from a dream at 5 am alone, my wonder at their constancy. Your hands wrapped around my fugitive breath even through those dreams. The sight of a baby in the metro who looked like she could be ours (and my relief she was not). The July afternoon the sun left the map of Spain on a thigh. The year I turned cartographer at beachside siestas, mapping the stir of sand across your back, the blue rivulets under your skin navigating their way toward a heartbeat. The giant, prismatic, poster of Mira Nair’s Monsoon Wedding covering fissures on a kitchen wall; two wickerwork laundry baskets from Dinjan; wooden ladles, now splintered; that livid indigo hand-braided quilt: the first among joint possessions. Twelve-hour road trips across France under unwashed stars to help resettle schoolmates. Piles of moldy Satyajit Ray VHS tapes. A map of free Bangladesh. The Māori mask gifted by a fellow passenger on the train from Georgetown. Noughts-and-crosses played on the rafters of a hotel ceiling. Every yesterday but the second, quieter than the first yet more fragrant. Keep them, and stay: yes, they are yours from today.  














What will I take instead, you ask? Solenoid, ouroboros and African paayal: words we learnt from each other. Sputters of   laughter over the misspelling of récipiendaire in my hundred-and-twenty-paged dissertation you went on to supervise. A first date with Patrice Chéreau’s Intimacy that left us bereft of voice but not touch. The spring lost in Paris, and retrieved in Rome: neonate but blithe and loud. Den Bosch and its soundless mornings, where even birds meditate. Dublin, yes, despite the disasters with missing kathak ankle bells and katana. Those shy cities that blush at dusk when the sun’s gaze fills with sudden desire. Others undressed by moonlight. The unsubsidized, incomplete report “Science and the Art of Rolling Balls and Other Machines.” All the lines of poetry you thought, and refused to write. The crackle and splutter of toast burning before breakfast. A tuneless humming muffled by shower curtains. Matinal half-hour radio-switch battles between RFI and BBC World. Sighting the smile on a natal cleft as you reach up for the tin of dark chocolate. Haroun and the Sea of Stories and Invisible Cities, more mine than yours: yes, I can play dirty on this. Canal Saint-Martin—but only the curve between the café Le Valmy and Pont de la Grange-aux-Belles. Koodiyattam as a birthday surprise when the gods left their paddy fields and invaded Paris, complete with cobalt and emerald cheeks, human woes and joys. The first encounter with Pina Bausch’s Café Müller. Every single one with her Rite of Spring. My fear of dying alone in a strange city at night. Copper and caramel: the two shades your gaze seems to traverse between dusk and daybreak. Other constellations: Pisces and Lynx and Phoenix. The ancient fleece jacket each would wear when the other was not around. All of Terry Pratchett’s Discworld books we owned together. The word together, as well. The fact you shared aloud in surprise at tea: a giraffe’s heart weighs an incredible 24 pounds. Today. Tomorrow. A spring tide of tomorrows  


^^EOP^^


As we approached the front door, I noticed
grills on the windows, bullet pockmarks 
in the wall; inside, a maid served us salad,
potato and cilantro soup—and I saw, 
in the amphitheater above Medellín,
the stage where twenty-eight poets read; 
clouds gathered; in the ensuing downpour,
I expected the five thousand people to rush out; 
instead, a sea of umbrellas appeared,
and people swayed under them; when the readings 
resumed, a poet stood, chanted in Vietnamese,
and when I stepped up to the podium, 
two rivers flowed down the steps to the far right
and left; as I read our emotions resemble leaves 
and alive to their shapes we are nourished, 

^^EOP^^


Forgive me.
I say to the wall.
My life is paper.
My jaws rust. 
Wanderer: singing.
The sky is my home.
I throw roses into it
to color it red. 
Stop: these roads
grow from me.
My journey must end
because my destinations
have ended. 
Kneeling like a priest,
seeing the spherical eyes
of flies, my wish:
emptiness and sudden light. 
Resurrection: I am dead
from it—the attempt to live
again. 
It sings as me when I sleep:
the world dressed in yellow.
Never have songs
meant for me what they do
when you sing. 
I leave you: haloes and clothes.
I leave you violently.
Like the wail of an exile. 
Forget me: my truth.
My masterpiece is
my nonexistence. 
Sunrise: unbreakable dawn.
I open your book.
It has no pages.


^^EOP^^


he walks like a monologue
pauses like the word saudade 
he rarely makes a turn
yet becomes an acute angle 
landscapes and shadows
return 
to a partially foaming home
corners start talking 
a girl waves back
prodigally 
becomes available to touch
now, even if a knee 
doesn’t blur, doesn’t bend
the world will still turn bokeh 
otters will remain otters
doors will remain doors 
the keys won’t fit


^^EOP^^


A snake eats a mynah
head first, yellow legs extend
from the snake’s filled mouth
The cattle bellow
tethered to ancient trees
Dung fills the tall grass
Thunder strikes at the humid air
There is no I
in the breath
Roots wind through fallen leaves
The terror of an owl smashes
into a tree trunk
loses a wing
drops below into dried weeds
There is no I
in the breath
The seasons are muscular and original
What should I
speak
Thunder strikes again and again
What is real must be harvested
each day and threshed and ground
put through fire
then eaten
What should I
imagine
in this place where we become
Our sight is made from our seasons
Bring us
the rain


^^EOP^^


for you who heard useless
           through honey trees in time of wasp and stalk 
for you who raised surface                             we all mixed from hunger
           generated off-color milk                            borne from chemical cousins 
                     for train of mouths                          you who haven’t sat down
                                          breathing a first bowl                         days waiting
                                                                              for fog and spiced sky  
                                                                               I watch you weave
                                                       them bare grassy cane              would not wash out no matter
           tired body in shift and glitter                      how we found red 
                                                                                              into whatever wore
                                                                      me stolen a sheen
                                                                                                          of milk memory saw
                                                                                 alone on the porch  
                                                                       to sleep and take up
                                                                                  a branch of that country
                                            to allow maps of fire
                                                        our own fields of rain


^^EOP^^


May all beings, seen and unseen, be well, happy, and peaceful, including ourselves.
May there be peace in the world, peace in our hearts, peace in our minds.
May we use this wonderful opportunity of  human life to awaken.
May we be grateful for wisdom and compassion,
this infinite boundlessness that surrounds us,
waiting to be used by us, to open our hearts and minds
so that we may see things as they truly are,
how brief our lives, how dependent upon others we are,
and so with each act may we bring wholesomeness, humility,
and the courage to do no harm, not least of all to ourselves.
As we journey through this life may we move deeper into insight,
and see things as they truly are,
this wonderful opportunity to awaken.
May we be grateful for the teachers in all their guises who appear before us.
May we love those who are hardest to love, including ourselves.
May leaders who will work for the peace of the planet step forward,
and may we support them.
May those who have gone before us rest in peace, rest in comfort, rest in joy,
and may we remember to remember them.
May the next life be a happy one.
May we cultivate in our hearts, in our minds, here and now, here on earth,
generosity, a land of plenty for all.
May our wish for peace spread like a mother’s soothing hand
and reach the distressed, fevered places of the world
and protect each child the right to be fed, to be sheltered, to be schooled.
The right to go to sleep without fear.
May we journey safely, work contentedly, and return home to loved ones well and happy.
May the path of forgiveness and acceptance
be the path of peace,
and may we find it.
May we use this wonderful opportunity to awaken
and together find true happiness, open spaciousness without borders.


^^EOP^^


He was first a snake and was in love with her—a she-snake. And then he molted and after he molted he was a turtle and he met another she-turtle and fell in love with her. When he deshelled after years, he became a four-legged animal, black spots sprouting over his fur, and he fell for a leopard. He moved this way through the jungles, the savannas, the deserts, the skies, through the oceans, the air, the land and beneath it, changing and changing and meeting and falling in love with new she-species.
 
The lovers he left behind did not change. They were who they were. The same.
 

They were individualistic so to speak, but now they were also heartbroken and full of hate for him—the one who had left in the middle of, sometimes, passionate lovemaking.
 
They had no idea how it was to live so many lives in one life like him.

To take no breaks with rebirths from being mosquito to man.

Sometimes evolution and progress is so fast, blessings and curses are all mixed up, and One.


^^EOP^^


1 
Christ meets Peter after the Resurrection
Peter is old
Christ is reborn, rejuvenated, young
He clasps his oldest disciple to his breast:
When you were young
You wore clothes you liked and went wherever you wished
But now in old age
You will put out your hands like a child
To be dressed in clothes others wish you to wear
To be led where they want you to go ... 
Peter clasped Jesus for long
And wept Like a child 
2 
Mother Mary found Christ dead
It was left to her to clean up the mess
After that he gave that spectacular show: The Resurrection
To dazzle the world and Time
It wasn’t the first time she was left alone:
At the foot of the Mount of Olives he told her
“Woman, what art thou to me”
At the resurrection he told the other Mary: Noli me tangere
(Women had become touch-me-nots)
But at 15 Mary felt the womb stir
She took on world-blame to birth god’s son Then she must’ve felt so alone So alone and so frightened


^^EOP^^


I pledge to sit upright in my coffin
as soon as the morgue-ice melts, and turn
a cheek grayer than this dusk. Kiss it
even if it doesn’t remind you of yesterday,
but let your tact disregard the breath
of a corpse mingled with the musk
you emptied on my breast. The belched outrage
from a belly domed in gas is simply
my way of saying, “Honey, I’m home.”
The carrion fly counting the fibers
in my nose is no heavenly harbinger.
Discount it as you’d discount a bird
on a cliché and fear nothing for there’s nothing
left to fear. Darling, I’m in no hurry.
Take your time in bringing me a rose
of that pinot we once praised to the sky
and let my tongue gad about in a warm
crimson bay. I swear to lie back forever
when the stylus roundly vexes a scratch
in our nuptial song, and it all begins again.


^^EOP^^


Why do we look
for sutures and siblings 
in all the wrong places,
when Google gives us 
22,950,000,000 results
for the word home?


^^EOP^^


what lights up the lightbulb filaments
of your recall Old Man
this streak of fire
through the thin wire of memory and mind what line from which poet? 
the ibex looking down quizzically
at our car from cliff
the croc sunning corrugated hide
on the banks of the Rapti
as I cross the river rolling on elephant back wary elephant treating riverbed like a mine
trundling diagonal across the current 
and red-robed monk slowing down life not through asanas, but with mumbled prayer
that slow-rolls the cylindrical prayer drum 
and stars at their night shift
  in Ladakh 
2 
I don’t remember the dripping deciduous word-leaf holistic halfway-through its never-ending fall
from the tree of knowledge 
3 
and your eyes I remember them bright as a window of a just-lit room seen from the cinder-dark outside
the black-moment cinder-dark
that was I at that moment 
4 
sad isn’t it (not a bit)
the spyglass getting hazed in the cold
as it peeps into the mist and melancholy
of the gone-by guzishta
Urdu word for the past
memory sabotaging memory
past subverting past


^^EOP^^


An evening of expected rain. Out the window clouds lifted
their skirts and the wind poured in. We were the mothers
lingering over the dessert tray, placing the sweets in our
mouths, one by one. We were the soothers and givers,
keepers of children and men. Those days, our skin bunched
up at the bra line, eyelids gathering like crinoline as it folds.
Yet standing there at the table, there was nothing in the world
we were in want of, not even the loves that had escaped us.
Whatever we suffered, we let go of willingly. To know we
were not the same women as before did not pain us. When
the others spoke their voices swept over us like bees hovering
over lilacs. Outside, lights strobed over the Hudson; we watched
a white boat riding the crest of a wave, headed to sea. We
felt an ache we realized was happiness, almost unbearable.


^^EOP^^


Between the woodpile and the window
a line of small black ants is moving,
some to the north, some to the south.
 
Their constant industry is admirable,
as are their manners when they pause
in meeting to exchange a touch.
 
I must have brought their home inside
for fuel, heating my small house.
And if it burned I too would move
 
along all points of the compass rose,
touching my neighbors on the path.


^^EOP^^





for South Africa



What is the difference between here and there?
Between what is seen and the elusive face?
Fascism or imperialism,
South Africa, New York,
South Bronx, Soweto, Harlem, East Harlem, Namibia,
Lower East Side, Sharpville, Williamsburg, Watts, Johannesburg.
 
What is the difference?
Between sunburnt hands knocking vainly on the blind doors of apartheid?
That haven of disunity that forgets how it was molded from the dirt,    
descended from the rich clay wombed mother,
that bore a continent through slavery,
here or there denied its inheritance,
here or there in iron ore chains,                                 
stripped from the same sacred vessels, plucked from the same mountain breast
that nourished the birth of all creation,
that brought forth Yoruba incantations for life,
the science and precision of Mayan astrology,
the wisdom and passion of the Cherokee,
that filled the sky of the children of the Hopi,
offering hommage to a sungod where Arawak rivers of fire mountain blood
dance out a heartbeat for the darkness and the ocean of a million coquí.
 
Here? There? What is the difference?
When hunger thrives from unemployed nightmares created on a neon trip
down madison avenue by mercenaries of the inner soul,
paying first class rates just above the poverty line?
 
What is the difference in the name of the bank
that funds the weapons of racism?
That suppresses nations of builders into limbo/drug/ depression/regression,
oppression on a master scale?
 
South Africa. New York. What is the difference in the face of greed?
How does it construct its smile from the burning bones of Vietnamese families,
or the screams of a million martyred students in a stadium filled horror
that witnessed the slashing of the poet's tongue, the murder of Víctor Jara,
the hanging of Benjamin Meloise?
 
South Africa. New York.
Chile. Guatemala. Puerto Rico. Nicaragua.
Ireland. Ethiopia. El Salvador. Panama.
Kent State. Attica. Beirut.
What is the difference in the perfect equation?
That brings food to every table in a banquet of sharing and dignity applied?
That writes this book of truth. That diffuses the bomb of oblivion.
That ignites the fires of compassion. That lights the torches of liberation.
To set South Africa free.
That will set South Africa free.
 
—That MUST set South Africa free.
 


^^EOP^^


When grief comes to you as a purple gorilla
you must count yourself lucky.
You must offer her what’s left
of your dinner, the book you were trying to finish
you must put aside
and make her a place to sit at the foot of your bed,
her eyes moving from the clock
to the television and back again.
I am not afraid. She has been here before
and now I can recognize her gait
as she approaches the house.
Some nights, when I know she’s coming,
I unlock the door, lie down on my back,
and count her steps
from the street to the porch.
Tonight she brings a pencil and a ream of paper,
tells me to write down
everyone I have ever known,
and we separate them between the living and the dead
so she can pick each name at random.
I play her favorite Willie Nelson album
because she misses Texas
but I don’t ask why.
She hums a little,
the way my brother does when he gardens.
We sit for an hour
while she tells me how unreasonable I’ve been,
crying in the check-out line,
refusing to eat, refusing to shower,
all the smoking and all the drinking.
Eventually she puts one of her heavy
purple arms around me, leans
her head against mine,
and all of a sudden things are feeling romantic.
So I tell her,
things are feeling romantic.
She pulls another name, this time
from the dead,
and turns to me in that way that parents do
so you feel embarrassed or ashamed of something.
Romantic? She says,
reading the name out loud, slowly
so I am aware of each syllable, each vowel
wrapping around the bones like new muscle,
the sound of that person’s body
and how reckless it is,
how careless that his name is in one pile and not the other.
 


^^EOP^^


Richie playing the maracas
is the universe becoming fluid
and the Nuyorican Café
floor becoming platform
for the shape of art
to mimic so that the artifact
becomes direct message
         no symbols of
         but the very thing itself
the knife in the belly
and the blues singing soft
shoes of pain as my gut
kicks my nerves insisting
on its pain vomiting more pain
about gifts that on a Christmas
day reached a dead child
too late to be played with
but it wasn't the deliverer's fault
it was his uncle who kept forgetting
that Christmas falls with love
not on a calendar but on the tenderest
feelings where the self of all others wants
love and sharp edges that awake
the internal mind into a self-created speech
that reaches over into your listener's system
and reschedules his entire psychic set,
I once had a friend who in one afternoon
traced all of my spinal short-circuits
and rearranged my electrical flow
into more fluid work than the switch-on,
switch-off, I'm overloaded crisis
that results in nausea, asphyxiation and the
swallowing of my tongue
          hay algo
          hay un epileptic fit
trying to reduce me into a trembling
mass of jellied nerves, formless,
shuddering, there, on the subway floor
while hundreds of passengers masochistically
look on both enjoying my crisis and feeling sorry
for me, the poor wretch, lying on the dirty
concrete subway floor imploring my muscles
and nerves to keep cool and cut the short-
circuit tongue down my throat menace
out and institute a no-nonsense
coherent I'm a mechanical and predictable
human being behavior modification program
to counter my muscular violence against myself
which keeps calling attention to itself while the
transit cop is almost breaking both my legs
by throwing his full weight on me as he
tries to hold my legs still and my mouth open
grabbing at my tongue, yanking it out,
shaking my shoulders, slapping my face,
working to neutralize the short-circuit
in my spine till Dr. Psychiatrist starts
to define my mind and its connections
into a State Asylum where I can get more
medication than I do out on the streets
or have the medication forced on me by a
well-meaning nurse who relates herself to me
through an every four hour give him his
dosage routine
          hay algo
          it’s 11:59 p.m. 1975
and I got one more minute of talk
before 1976 finds me shooting up and down
behind the Nuyorican Café bar trying to
decide if nuclear war will ravage
New York before I find out just how
to divide the line so that it repairs
short-circuits that block the world
from coming together! it is 12 a.m.
the new year’s been bombed and over the T.V.
the hottest news release tells us that at La Guardia
Airport an explosion was so strong that tiny,
invisible slivers of glass have penetrated the skin
of many but the slivers are so fine that
it cannot be detected where they’ve entered
the body
and here it is 1976 enters in like a
glass sliver undetected yet causing pain.
 


^^EOP^^





                                        What I assume you shall assume. 
                                                                 Walt Whitman (1)



This Self—Hispanic, Latin, blond, black,
olive-skinned, native and immigrant—
dispersed far and wide
was here with everyone, yesterday and again today;
today and tomorrow; does not stop,
virginal atom of nakedness and dust,
of Manhattan’s universal son
the uncaged cosmos
and the echoes’ whirlwind. 
Child with the wisdom of questions,
offspring of poor and rich, of lettered and unlettered,
of rails, planting times, classes and cares,
which will sprout, embodied, with nothing forgotten,
seed in its newly bloodstained earth,
which gathers hands, pupils, voices,
the savor of oceans,
the smell of sweet jungles,
God's pollen, days and nights
at center of the Self that dances with many,
men, women, young people and old
in the light of the infinite’s furrows,
with open hands, without walls,
free roots of mine and everyone's
at the foot of the song
that now celebrates
without creeds or schools.
 
With all the colors that stir up their race,
Roman, Celtic, Hebrew, Moor,
Hispanic, Aborigine, with kingdoms of multitudes
fresh in the tree of life. 
Grass, girl or boy child, suppliant germ
of love and timepieces in the atmosphere,
God of the promise and the future,
modern and ancient in the new people,
come and gone from among the old people,
humanity's heart in the moon, hands' mirror,
the breath of syllables.
Because it is voice, hum of green and dry leaves
that loves equally,
in the color of its time, the park that is, am,
are, today, here, yesterday and forever,
the mystery's imprecise territory. 
This Self is Puerto Rican, Chicano,
from Cuba free dancer of merengues,
from Santo Domingo and all the Caribbean,
from El Salvador and Nicaragua.
It comes from Mexico, Central America,
from Costa Rica, Tikal, Guatemala,
from their rainforests, lakes of salt and honey,
from Panama, Colombia, Peru and Venezuela,
the corn crops of the Argentine pampas,
Chile's veins of grapes, Bolivia's reed flute,
from the Mayas, Quechuas, Aztecs, Incas,
from the Guaranís, from the Amazon, Ecuador,
from the Uruguay of the Charrúas and its shores,
gauchos, criollos, Europeans, mestizos,
mulattos, the fair-skinned, Turks, Asians, Syrian or Lebanese,
waifs, streetwalkers, huddled masses of Latin America
with their many names. 
It is harassed and startled by propellers and shrapnel,
by ashes and the hammer’s hard-won pennies.
Boss and day laborer; still the job’s slave,
painter of trenches, resourceful creator of roofs, pavement
on the agony of yesterday’s blood and the even-now
of the Monday of beginnings and the Sunday of holy days.
 
It is expressed and is not expressed by welcomes,
the yowls of rejection and the sunless silence
of indifference, every day, gray hands.
 
It belongs to family and sometimes they invite it, other times exclude it
from family suppers and their menu of dawns;
when the assemblage is gathered, they have become used
to its only cooking, serving, or cleaning up after the meal.
 
It suffers now, and in the next gust of wind, the discriminating smoke
of random breath, for good or bad of those
who intoxicated breathe ignorance or haughtiness
without clusters of stars, mountains, heavenly clouds,
wellsprings of gifts and of meadows.
 
The dream of your creation, fatherland of many fatherlands,
at the same time defined and disturbed
in the ferment of capricious laws
that attacked freedom and happiness in their path
and the paths of all who signed your articles.
 
It likes and does not like the words, the eve
of silences, words dyed in the antagonism
of empires and conquests, welcomes, coffins and slights,
gold pieces received and robbed.
 
They will not destroy this Self, although it be teacher or student,
follower or leader. They tried without luck
because history and its soul, to which we belong
and it belongs in this cloth of substances and times,
do not allow it.
  I am large, I contain multitudes.
They will not manage to deny me or ignore me or declare me undocumented:
I am written in you, in all,
as all are in me,
in clay and in the breeze's gentle sky,
in the delightful meaning of your body.
 
With the people’s wise voice, it complains and does not complain.
Like everyone, it triumphs in its defeats and loses, sometimes,
in the victories of bridges,
because the shank’s good fortune carries it inside
and outside of agony's navel.
It sings with the voice of ravaged fields,
the sweat of stria and its gifts,
the robust and oppressive body of cities.
It aims to be the river’s voice and not only of the forbidden,
but also strictly unknown voices.
 
If would not wish for entrance to a forest
whose roots it must avoid. 
In everyone’s Self,
the poem’s universal soul,
in each innumerable Walt Whitman,
cosmos without rubrics,
wave among waves, shared worlds
inside vibrating yellow,
I dance, I smile, I cry: I celebrate myself, and sing myself.  
 
 


^^EOP^^


                    
                    
                    my first try I made a hit it dropped from morning gray the smallest shadow both wings slipped
inward mid-flight the man barked Now I shot again and again a third time with each arrow
through the target I thought was it luck or was it skill luck or skill as the last one fell
 
 
its awkward shape made me run there pulsing on the ground I was astounded by its size a
gangly white goose throbbed heaved its head my eyes dropped blood flowers opened in the
snow of its neck behind my shoulder stepping down from a yellow bus
 
 
child made their way across the field I shot once more to end it quickly close range its death
did I do this to spare the bird from suffering or to spare the children the sight my motives in
humid cold yes my knuckles in the cold steamed bright red
 
 
because on my stomach in grass in rubber boots pockets and vests I slid along with that hunter I
did as he directed from quiver my draw my black lashes in steely eyed release it felt good there
it felt strong my breath in autumn was an animal there I thought did I really do this        did I 
really yet what difference is muscle is an arrow powered upward or any flight to center when I
did not hear it though I clearly mouthed poor thing poor thing poor thing
 
                

^^EOP^^





                        I think I could turn and live with animals, 
                                 they are so placid and self-contained. 
[ . . . ] They do not sweat and whine about their condition.
                                                        Walt Whitman (32)



Who does not marvel at the spider’s creative saliva,
the ant’s perfection,
the butterfly’s unsettled elegance,
that the running blackberry would adorn the parlors of heaven?
 
I used to fly into high dudgeon
with the insult “beast”;
now in my soul I honor it
in spite of extravagant haughtiness.
 
As when I pet Babe, my placid sheepdog,
my animal-companion,
who rejoices in my arrivals,
licks me in the time of solitude,
plays, begs, offers me therapy,
understands me, guides;
to the point, as he barks, of seeming to call out in a wondrous language,
paying heedless attention to incongruent commands,
and at each goodbye howling his sentiments
with an authentic whimper.
 
Also my girlfriend’s cat and T. S. Eliot’s practical ones
pull it off with their spoiled ways,
the rogue Mistoffelees, mysterious
Macavity dissembling his smooth crime.
 
Our follies do not begin to match their stratagems;
they are all indisputable circus performers.
Recently in the zoo's theater
the audience enjoyed a sea lion's applause,
its ball-handling skills, and other acrobatics.
I witnessed, wonderstruck,
in the oceanic snow of the Patagonian Steppe,
a rage of penguins
and their solemn march.
We are touched by the mama's promenades with her ducklings
and the melody of puppy love still moves us.
Little rabbits with their ears' alert softness
share our patios.
The splendor of spirited stallions fresh and responsive to my caresses,                              
with their bodies that tremble with pleasure as we race around and return.
 
The Olympic kiss of Leda by the swan
revives every so often in a sigh.
 
The sublimity of eagle’s flight.
It has been said that the poem is a bird,
the whole universe a winged purpose.
 
I wish, sometimes, to possess some of their gifts and talents. They bring me tokens of myself, they evince them plainly in their possession.
 
And you, eloquent Whitman, insist to us
that a mouse is miracle enough to stagger sextillions of infidels,
 
that the cow crunching with depress’d head surpasses any statue,
that what the oxen express in their eyes
says more than all the print I have read in my life.
 
There they stand, with the donkey, in the manger.
 
They accept what they are and what they have
with neither resentment nor complaints.
They don't need mirrors to fashion their beauty.
They live naked, unshod, in the hours’ Eden.
They sing the breaking of day with a trilling not learned in school.
Elk and other species snort when surprised
or watch you without fuss, contemplating your presence.
They move away, peaceful, toward forest and the wisdom of its trees.
They comprehend their place in the vastness of the universe.
They sleep in peace. They don’t trouble themselves over blame or sin;
nor worries about money
or the corruption of more distant ambitions.
 
They seem contented in their proper niches
of plants, earth, air, fields, and rocks.
 
Who would not trade their qualities
for some human ones that afflict us?
 
What library did tigers’ eyes or lions’ noontide golden
color suggest to Borges?
 


^^EOP^^





                                            The friendly and flowing savage, who is he? 
                                                                              Walt Whitman (39)



 There is something in the root of
the word jungle that conjures,
savage; it challenges
the fictitious trappings of the civilized.
 
Someone revealed that my grandmother
used to be an anarchist.
I yearn for the discredited independence
of barbarity,
of the sort destroyed by conquest,
its rock solid wisdom,
its culture’s temples,
its communion with infinite nature,
its clear-sighted breath in the air
where water touches it.
 
I escape to the primitive frontier
with a liberated body
of the soul's hierarchy
and all its decrees.
I am native to the territory
of animals and forests,
mountains, lakes, universe of progeny,
audacious pioneer of my own center.
 
What civilized pomposity
does war embody?
That of sepulchers, injustices
and a heap of anonymous cruelties?
 
I, we, all of us want to be the friendly and flowing savage
who subdues civilization
with arbitrary behaviors
like those of snow-flakes, words simple as grass, uncomb'd head, laughter, and naiveté.
 
Hostile only against those who exhaust
the generosity of grains,
those who sacrifice the land,
sweet sprinklings of rain,
butterflies, flowers, their brothers and sisters,
those who uproot the tender pages
of nimble books of calendars,
those who sell freedom
with blood on their hands.
 
We long for the birth of new forms from the tips of his fingers
and that, lawless, they might love us.
 


^^EOP^^


My uncle always insisted,
“strike the first punch,
put your enemy on the run.”
I always threw the first punch,
I remember,
“attack, attack, attack,
put the hurting
on his limbs,"
I remember,
I remember
the night my uncle
got angry because I said
his wife thought his nuts
were christmas walnuts
and that she cracked them
every day of the year,
his left arm twitched,
I leapt at him
and struck first.
 


^^EOP^^





for Lela



Half blue, feet first
she battled into the world.
Hardly surviving the blood cord twice wrapped,
tense around her neck. Hanging.
Womb pressing, pushing,
pulling life from mother’s child.
Fragile flesh emerging perfect in blueness,
like the lifeline that sustained her,
yet limp, almost a corpse.
 
Her mother claims the virgin interceded.
Invoked through divine promise, in prayer,
that caused her dark eyes to open,
her tongue to taste air like fire,
as the blueness faded,
tracing death on the tail of eclipse.
 
And as in birth from her darkness,
the free-giving sun inched slow to visibility,
revealing all color and form,
a great teacher, generous and awesome,
silent and reverent, loud and blasphemous,
constant,
sculpting edges of definition
in the shadow and light of multiple universes.
 
Half blue, feet first
she battled her way.
The world did not want another brown,
another slant-eyed-olive-indian-black-child.
Did not want another rainbow empowered song
added to repertoire in blue,
or azure, or indigo,
or caribbean crystal.
 Did not want another mouth to feed,
especially another rock-the-boat poet,
another voice opened wide,
fixed on a global spectrum of defiance.
 
The meaning of war defined her. Gasping and innocent,
before she knew her mother,
before she discovered herself, barely alive,
gathering weapons into her being with each breath that filled her,
growing stronger,
determined
to beat all the odds.
 
 


^^EOP^^


"People go out to vote
but the guerrillas obstruct them."
That's what's said on Channel 4 in Manhattan.
On the 28th of March we're made to understand
that Democracy is being obstructed
by the left, "the guerrillas
fire against the Salvadoran people,"
but that chaos was invented in the White House
and it doesn't afflict the public in Chatatenango,
there aren't any guarantees
for the public to take hold of!
although some go out and vote pretending
that the machinery is not fraudulent,
that Duarte doesn't repress,
not withstanding that it's written in every man's bible,
that in El Salvador Christ has not yet
freed his folk.
 


^^EOP^^





for Aya



We never met, but I knew her.
By that ray of life that passed into her son,
brilliant as sky through cane fields,
casting pastel shadows on a jíbaro’s balcón,
abundant fruit and flower scented
from an ancient caribbean, full of spirit
y la vida india.
 
I never heard her cry, but I was there,
at the birth, when the hurricane growled,
fierce and terrible, screaming,
as she listened to its thunder within herself,
her womb stretching,
pushing out the manchild she offered the world,
not in regret, but full
of remembrances, of land-plowing farmers,
plátano covered rainforests,
asphalt paths carved in slavery
through migrant jungles and concrete mountains.
 
I never saw the high curve of her taíno face
with its delicate brown cheek,
or felt the caress of her motherly hands. But I knew her,
recognized in emanating points of vision
from a craftmaker’s fingertips,
in precision woven tapestries, like gifts from ancestors,
marking borderlines where families become whole.
 
We never spoke, or shared a conversation,
but I can still hear the music
composed in the black latino brew of her kitchen.
Smells and leftover renditions of creole beans and salsa,
of mamá-cooking ladles tapping three/two clave
from sinks to pots to laundry machines
in survival ritual symphonies.
 
We never exchanged a word,
yet she whispered to my soul,
the way mother teachers son to love his child,
the way father shares with daughter the meaning of abuela,
the way bonds are secured,
like a sunday afternoon banquet at the table of Orisha
where all food is nourished,
love-seasoned.
 
I never knew her, yet she reached out,
as sister, woman, teacher,
as mother, a gentle wind,
touching me. Becoming mine.
 
 


^^EOP^^


Not tonight but tomorrow
when the light turns the peach
tree green and the Earth sprouts
its young leaves looking to repeat
the magical mystery tour of
photosynthetic conversion of light
and moisture into life—
Not tonight but tomorrow
when my body will have shed
its fear of turning old and soft
will I turn my speeding mind
into the tunnels of your psyche
to melt the calcium that constipates
your synapses into a lubricating powder—
Not tonight but tomorrow
when the Universe moves on
beyond the field of action
that is the Earth to me and you
will I discover the interplanetary clues
that signal the roots of my moment to you—
Not tonight but tomorrow
will I throw my feelings into
New York streets to stew
in the violence and despair
of our planet—
Not tonight but tomorrow
will the Earth turn green again.
 


^^EOP^^


To Whom It Does Concern:
 
        Could we please have just one space flight,            one nine-million dollar adventure into the great breath,            so that we could divide the loaves and fishes            and put 900 more people to work for a year.
             Or could we please have one nuclear missile,            so we can difuse it, sell the used parts            for one-point-ten billion worth of more than just            rice krispies breakfast-lunch-dinners.
             What if we could exchange an M-1 rifle for a solar reflector            so that our building could have heat all the time,            not wait for avaricious gun-toting landlords            to remember to call the oil company tomorrow            for the child next door with pneumonia today.
             We would even accept a leftover bomber,            or one two-million dollar high tech space suit,            however patronizing it may seem,            or a decommissioned aircraft carrier to relieve tight housing
                problems.
             Its not much, is it?            When you add it up, pull together the sum total            of the four billion dollars-a-day catastrophy fantasy,            the whole is worse than its parts.
             So to continue our list,            could you please refund on our next tax return            the difference between the limousines you drive,            and the tokens we do not have            to build our nation strong.
 
                                        Signed,
                                        The People of the Rest of the World
 


^^EOP^^


There were still shards of an ancient pastoral
in those shires of the island where the cattle drank
their pools of shadow from an older sky,
surviving from when the landscape copied such subjects as
“Herefords at Sunset in the Valley of the Wye.”
The mountain water that fell white from the mill wheel
sprinkling like petals from the star-apple trees,
and all of the windmills and sugar mills moved by mules
on the treadmill of Monday to Monday, would repeat
in tongues of water and wind and fire, in tongues
of Mission School pickaninnies, like rivers remembering
their source, Parish Trelawny, Parish St. David, Parish
St. Andrew, the names afflicting the pastures,
the lime groves and fences of marl stone and the cattle
with a docile longing, an epochal content.
And there were, like old wedding lace in an attic,
among the boas and parasols and the tea-coloured
daguerreotypes, hints of an epochal happiness
as ordered and infinite to the child
as the great house road to the Great House
down a perspective of casuarinas plunging green manes
in time to the horses, an orderly life
reduced by lorgnettes day and night, one disc the sun,
the other the moon, reduced into a pier glass:
nannies diminished to dolls, mahogany stairways
no larger than those of an album in which
the flash of cutlery yellows, as gamboge as
the piled cakes of teatime on that latticed
bougainvillea verandah that looked down toward
a prospect of Cuyp-like Herefords under a sky
lurid as a porcelain souvenir with these words:
“Herefords at Sunset in the Valley of the Wye.”
 
Strange, that the rancour of hatred hid in that dream
of slow dreams and lily-like parasols, in snaps
of fine old colonial families, curled at the edge
not from age or from fire or the chemicals, no, not at all,
but because, off at its edges, innocently excluded
stood the groom, the cattle boy, the housemaid, the gardeners,
the tenants, the good Negroes down in the village,
their mouths in the locked jaw of a silent scream.
A scream which would open the doors to swing wildly
all night, that was bringing in heavier clouds,
more black smoke than cloud, frightening the cattle
in whose bulging eyes the Great House diminished;
a scorching wind of a scream
that began to extinguish the fireflies,
that dried the water mill creaking to a stop
as it was about to pronounce Parish Trelawny
all over, in the ancient pastoral voice,
a wind that blew all without bending anything,
neither the leaves of all the album nor the lime groves;
blew Nanny floating back in white from a feather
to a chimerical, chemical pin speck that shrank
the drinking Herefords to brown porcelain cows
on a mantel piece, Trelawny trembling with dusk,
the scorched pastures of the old benign Custos; blew
for the decent servants and the lifelong cook,
and shriveled to a shard that ancient pastoral
of dusk in a gilt-edged frame now catching the evening sun
in Jamaica, making both epochs one.
 
He looked out from the Great House windows on
clouds that still held the fragrances of fire,
he saw the Botanical Gardens officially drown
in a formal dusk, where governors had strolled
and black gardeners had smiled over glinting shears
at the lilies of parasols on the floating lawns,
the flame trees obeyed his will and lowered their wicks,
the flowers tightened their fists in the name of thrift,
the porcelain lamps of ripe cocoa, the magnolia’s jet
dimmed on the one circuit with the ginger lilies
and left a lonely bulb on the verandah,
and, had his mandate extended to that ceiling
of star-apple candelabra, he would have ordered
the sky to sleep, saying, I’m tired,
save the starlight for victories, we can’t afford it,
leave the moon on for one more hour, and that’s it.
But though his power, the given mandate, extended
from tangerine daybreaks to star-apple dusks,
his hand could not dam that ceaseless torrent of dust
that carried the shacks of the poor, to their root-rock music,
down the gullies of Yallahs and August Town,
to lodge them on thorns of maca, with their rags
crucified by cactus, tins, old tires, cartons;
from the black Warieka Hills the sky glowered fierce as
the dials of a million radios,
a throbbing sunset that glowed like a grid
where the dread beat rose from the jukebox of Kingston.
He saw the fountains dried of quadrilles, the water-music
of the country dancers, the fiddlers like fifes
put aside. He had to heal
this malarial island in its bath of bay leaves,
its forests tossing with fever, the dry cattle
groaning like winches, the grass that kept shaking
its head to remember its name. No vowels left
in the mill wheel, the river. Rock stone. Rock stone.
 
The mountains rolled like whales through phosphorous stars
as he swayed like a stone down fathoms into sleep,
drawn by that magnet which pulls down half the world
between a star and a star, by that black power
that has the assassin dreaming of snow,
that poleaxes the tyrant to a sleeping child.
The house is rocking at anchor, but as he falls
his mind is a mill wheel in moonlight,
and he hears, in the sleep of his moonlight, the drowned
bell of Port Royal's cathedral, sees the copper pennies
of bubbles rising from the empty eye-pockets
of green buccaneers, the parrot fish floating
from the frayed shoulders of pirates, sea-horses
drawing gowned ladies in their liquid promenade      
across the moss-green meadows of the sea;
he heard the drowned choirs under Palisadoes,
a hymn ascending to earth from a heaven inverted
by water, a crab climbing the steeple,
and he climbed from that submarine kingdom
as the evening lights came on in the institute, 
the scholars lamplit in their own aquarium,
he saw them mouthing like parrot fish, as he passed
upward from that baptism, their history lessons,  
the bubbles like ideas which he could not break:
Jamaica was captured by Penn and Venables,
Port Royal perished in a cataclysmic earthquake.
 
Before the coruscating façades of cathedrals
from Santiago to Caracas, where the penitential archbishops
washed the feet of paupers (a parenthetical moment
that made the Caribbean a baptismal font,
turned butterflies to stone, and whitened like doves
the buzzards circling municipal garbage),
the Caribbean was borne like an elliptical basin
in the hands of acolytes, and a people were absolved
of a history which they did not commit;
the slave pardoned his whip, and the dispossessed
said the rosary of islands for three hundred years,
a hymn that resounded like the hum of the sea
inside a sea-cave, as their knees turned to stone,
while the bodies of patriots were melting down walls
still crusted with mute outcries of La Revolución!
“San Salvador, pray for us, St. Thomas, San Domingo, ora pro nobis, intercede for us, Sancta Lucia
of no eyes,” and when the circular chaplet
reached the last black bead of Sancta Trinidad
they began again, their knees drilled into stone,
where Colón had begun, with San Salvador’s bead,
beads of black colonies round the necks of Indians.
And while they prayed for an economic miracle,
ulcers formed on the municipal portraits,
the hotels went up, and the casinos and brothels,
and the empires of tobacco, sugar, and bananas,
until a black woman, shawled like a buzzard,
climbed up the stairs and knocked at the door
of his dream, whispering in the ear of the keyhole:
"Let me in, I'm finished with praying, I'm the Revolution.
I am the darker, the older America."
She was as beautiful as a stone in the sunrise,
her voice had the gutturals of machine guns
across khaki deserts where the cactus flower
detonates like grenades, her sex was the slit throat    
of an Indian, her hair had the blue-black sheen of the crow.
She was a black umbrella blown inside out                 
by the wind of revolution, La Madre Dolorosa,
a black rose of sorrow, a black mine of silence,
raped wife, empty mother, Aztec virgin
transfixed by arrows from a thousand guitars,
a stone full of silence, which, if it gave tongue
to the tortures done in the name of the Father,
would curdle the blood of the marauding wolf,
the fountain of generals, poets, and cripples
who danced without moving over their graves
with each revolution; her Caesarean was stitched
by the teeth of machine guns, and every sunset
she carried the Caribbean's elliptical basin
as she had once carried the penitential napkins
to be the footbath of dictators, Trujillo, Machado, 
and those whose faces had yellowed like posters,
on municipal walls. Now she stroked his hair
until it turned white, but she would not understand
that he wanted no other power but peace
that he wanted a revolution without any bloodshed,
he wanted a history without any memory,
streets without statues,
and a geography without myth. He wanted no armies
but those regiments of bananas, thick lances of cane,
and he sobbed, "I am powerless, except for love.”
She faded from him, because he could not kill;
she shrank to a bat that hung day and night
in the back of his brain. He rose in his dream.
 
The soul, which was his body made as thin
as its reflection and invulnerable
without its clock, was losing track of time;
it walked the mountain tracks of the Maroons,
it swung with Gordon from the creaking gibbet,
it bought a pack of peppermints and cashews
from one of the bandanna’d mammies outside the ward,
it heard breath pitched to the decibels
of the peanut vendors' carts, it entered a municipal wall
Stirring the slogans that shrieked his name: saviour! 
and others: lackey! he melted like a spoon
through the alphabet soup of CIA, PNP, OPEC,
that resettled once he passed through with this thought:
I should have foreseen those seraphs with barbed-wire hair,
beards like burst mattresses, and wild eyes of garnet,
who nestled the Coptic Bible to their ribs, would
call me Joshua, expecting him to bring down Babylon
by Wednesday, after the fall of Jericho; yes, yes,
I should have seen the cunning bitterness of the rich
who left me no money but these mandates:
 
His aerial mandate, which
contained the crows whose circuit
was this wedding band that married him to his island.
His marine mandate, which
was the fishing limits
which the shark scissored like silk with its teeth
between Key West and Havana;
his terrestrial:
the bled hills rusted with bauxite;
paradisal:
the chimneys like angels sheathed in aluminium.
 
In shape like a cloud
he saw the face of his father,
the hair like white cirrus blown back
in a photographic wind,
the mouth of mahogany winced shut,
the eyes lidded, resigned
to the first compromise,
the last ultimatum,
the first and last referendum.
One morning the Caribbean was cut up                       
by seven prime ministers who bought the sea in bolts—   
one thousand miles of aquamarine with lace trimmings;
one million yards of lime-coloured silk,                      
one mile of violet, leagues of cerulean satin—         
who sold it at a markup to the conglomerates,
the same conglomerates who had rented the water spouts
for ninety-nine years in exchange for fifty ships,
who retailed it in turn to the ministers                  
with only one bank account, who then resold it   
in ads for the Caribbean Economic Community,
till everyone owned a little piece of the sea,
from which some made saris, some made bandannas;
the rest was offered on trays to white cruise ships
taller than the post office; then the dogfights   
began in the cabinets as to who had first sold
the archipelago for this chain store of islands.
 
Now a tree of grenades was his star-apple kingdom,
over fallow pastures his crows patrolled,
he felt his fist involuntarily tighten
into a talon that was strangling five doves,
the mountains loomed leaden under martial law,
the suburban gardens flowered with white paranoia
next to the bougainvilleas of astonishing April;
the rumours were a rain that would not fall:
that enemy intelligence had alerted the roaches'
quivering antennae, that bats flew like couriers,
transmitting secrets between the embassies;
over dials in the war rooms, the agents waited
for a rifle crack from Havana; down shuttered avenues
roared a phalanx of Yamahas. They left
a hole in the sky that closed on silence.
 
He didn’t hear the roar of the motorcycles
diminish in circles like those of the water mill
in a far childhood; he was drowned in sleep;
he slept, without dreaming, the sleep after love
in the mineral oblivion of night
whose flesh smells of cocoa, whose teeth are white
as coconut meat, whose breath smells of ginger,
whose braids are scented like sweet-potato vines
in furrows still pungent with the sun.
He slept the sleep that wipes out history,
he slept like the islands on the breast of the sea,
like a child again in her star-apple kingdom.
 
Tomorrow the sea would gleam like nails    
under a zinc sky where the barren frangipani          
was hammered, a horizon without liners;
tomorrow the heavy caravels of clouds would wreck
and dissolve in their own foam on the reefs
of the mountains, tomorrow a donkey's yawn         
would saw the sky in half, and at dawn        
would come the noise of a government groaning uphill.    
But now she held him, as she holds us all,    
her history-orphaned islands, she to whom 
we came late as our muse, our mother,
who suckled the islands, who, when she grows old
with her breasts wrinkled like eggplants,
is the head-tie mother, the bleached-sheets-on-the-river-rocks
        mother,   
the gospel mother, the t'ank-you-parson mother    
who turns into mahogany, the lignum-vitae mother,
her sons like thorns,  
her daughters dry gullies that give birth to stones,
who was, in our childhood, the housemaid and the cook,
the young grand' who polished the plaster figure    
of Clio, Muse of history, in her seashell grotto         
in the Great House parlour, Anadyomene washed  
in the deep Atlantic heave of her housemaid's hymn.  
 
In the indigo dawn the palms unclenched their fists,
his eyes opened the flowers, and he lay as still
as the waterless mill wheel. The sun's fuse caught;
it hissed on the edge of the skyline, and day exploded
its remorseless avalanche of dray carts and curses,
the roaring oven of Kingston, its sky as fierce
as the tin box of a patties cart. Down the docks     
between the Levantine smells of the warehouses
nosed the sea-wind with its odour of a dog's damp fur.
He lathered in anger and refreshed his love.
He was lathered like a horse, but the instant
the shower crowned him and he closed his eyes,
he was a bride under lace, remarrying his country,
a child drawn by the roars of the mill wheel’s electorate,
those vows reaffirmed; he dressed, went down to breakfast,
and sitting again at the mahogany surface
of the breakfast table, its dark hide as polished
as the sheen of mares, saw his father's face
and his own face blent there, and looked out
to the drying garden and its seeping pond.
 
What was the Caribbean? A green pond mantling
behind the Great House columns of Whitehall,
behind the Greek façades of Washington,
with bloated frogs squatting on lily pads
like islands, islands that coupled as sadly as turtles
engendering islets, as the turtle of Cuba
mounting Jamaica engendered the Caymans, as, behind
the hammerhead turtle of Haiti-San Domingo
trailed the little turtles from Tortuga to Tobago;
he followed the bobbing trek of the turtles
leaving America for the open Atlantic,
felt his own flesh loaded like the pregnant beaches
with their moon-guarded eggs—they yearned for Africa,
they were lemmings drawn by magnetic memory
to an older death, to broader beaches
where the coughing of lions was dumbed by breakers.
Yes, he could understand their natural direction
but they would drown, sea-eagles circling them,
and the languor of frigates that do not beat wings,
and he closed his eyes, and felt his jaw drop
again with the weight of that silent scream.             
He cried out at the turtles as one screams at children
with the anger of love, it was the same scream
which, in his childhood, had reversed an epoch         
that had bent back the leaves of his star-apple kingdom,
made streams race uphill, pulled the water wheel backward
like the wheels in a film, and at that outcry,
from the raw ropes and tendons of his throat,    
the sea-buzzards receded and receded into specks,
and the osprey vanished.                                         
                                             On the knee-hollowed steps
of the crusted cathedral, there was a woman in black,
the black of moonless nights, within whose eyes   
shone seas in starlight like the glint of knives
(the one who had whispered to the keyhole of his ear),
washing the steps, and she heard it first.        
She was one of a flowing black river of women
who bore elliptical basins to the feet of pauper
on the Day of Thorns, who bore milk pails to cows
in a pastoral sunrise, who bore baskets on their heads
down the haemophilic red hills of Haiti,
now with the squeezed rag dripping from her hard hands
the way that vinegar once dropped from a sponge,
but she heard as a dog hears, as all the underdogs
of the world hear, the pitched shriek of silence.
Star-apples rained to the ground in that silence,
the silence was the green of cities undersea,
and the silence lasted for half an hour
in that single second, a seashell silence, resounding
with silence, and the men with barbed-wire beards saw
in that creak of light that was made between
the noises of the world that was equally divided
between rich and poor, between North and South,
between white and black, between two Americas,
he fields of silent Zion in Parish Trelawny,
in Parish St. David, in Parish St. Andrew,
leaves dancing like children without any sound,
in the valley of Tryall, and the white, silent roar
of the old water wheel in the star-apple kingdom;
and the woman’s face, had a smile been decipherable
in that map of parchment so rivered with wrinkles,
would have worn the same smile with which he now
cracked the day open and began his egg.
 


^^EOP^^


                    
                    
                    The exhausted wing of a sounded out page reversed the void in the grass into a bee, a tiny kite the rain keeps learning. This is the story of recording the wars in a storm for a whole human hymn.
 
                

^^EOP^^


I.
 
Nothing happened here.
Meaning it was done.
  Over counts itself among
the studied synonyms
 
but beyond
those round mouths
 
opening for answers done is the opposite of over.
 
 
II.
 
What is the sum
when you add
 
cut flowers in cellophane
to teddy bears and prayers
 
and the difference  
when you take away
 
and take away
and take away?
 
Show your work. Attend to precision.
 
 
III.
 
The students are gone.
It is not summer.
 
The classroom snake
that fled its shattered tank
 
the long shadows
draping themselves over
 
the overturned desks
and the red pen fallen
 
to the floor will count
as symbols on a different
 
subject test. Let them be
innocent in this world.
 


^^EOP^^


                    
                    
                    I get tired of being the one to make all the decisions so when they ask me where I want to eat, I say that I don’t care, I’d eat anything  at this point. Next thing I know, I am face to face with a bowl of Girl Soup and I just can’t bring myself. Some of us at the table are in a hurry to eat the soup, they are specifically trying to eat the  girls quickly because they seem to know that if you wait too long they turn into cyborgs or robots, and those are harder to chew. I can see that some of the girls are still alive and perhaps would like to be extracted from the soup, but when I squint I see that there are girls all over the floor with varying amounts of soup clinging to their clothes (you didn’t think they were naked, did you?) and so there goes that idea. Just at the moment I think I am running out of options, something comes over me and I take a deep breath and I do it, I jump right in there, that bowl of Girl Soup, no one is checking IDs or questioning my size or gender or race or voter affiliation, and I quick round up all the girls in the bowl into a large huddle. We have now obliterated two major problems: huddled together we are too large to eat, and also we’ve taken care of the problem of the eater.
 
                

^^EOP^^


It starts
with a blank sheet,
an undanced floor,
 
air where no sound
erases the silence.
As soon as
 
you play the first note,
write down a word,
step onto the empty stage,
 
you've moved closer
to the creature inside.
Remember—
 
a square
can end up as frog, cardinal,
mantis, or fish.
 
You can make
what you want,
do what you wish.


^^EOP^^


I take her in my hands
I open her gently
I part her pages
I stare at her words
I want her letters in my mouth
I run my hand down her spine
I love reading her
I love making love to her
I let her fall asleep in my lap


^^EOP^^


I am so small walking on the beach
at night under the widening sky.
The wet sand quickens beneath my feet
and the waves thunder against the shore. 
I am moving away from the boardwalk
with its colorful streamers of people
and the hotels with their blinking lights.
The wind sighs for hundreds of miles. 
I am disappearing so far into the dark
I have vanished from sight.
I am a tiny seashell
that has secretly drifted ashore 
and carries the sound of the ocean
surging through its body.
I am so small now no one can see me.
How can I be filled with such a vast love?


^^EOP^^


My father worked with a horse-plough,
His shoulders globed like a full sail strung
Between the shafts and the furrow.
The horses strained at his clicking tongue. 
An expert. He would set the wing
And fit the bright steel-pointed sock.
The sod rolled over without breaking.
At the headrig, with a single pluck 
Of reins, the sweating team turned round
And back into the land. His eye
Narrowed and angled at the ground,
Mapping the furrow exactly. 
I stumbled in his hobnailed wake,
Fell sometimes on the polished sod;
Sometimes he rode me on his back
Dipping and rising to his plod. 
I wanted to grow up and plough,
To close one eye, stiffen my arm.
All I ever did was follow
In his broad shadow round the farm. 
I was a nuisance, tripping, falling,
Yapping always. But today
It is my father who keeps stumbling
Behind me, and will not go away


^^EOP^^





I Archipelagoes



At the end of this sentence, rain will begin.
At the rain's edge, a sail. 
Slowly the sail will lose sight of islands;
into a mist will go the belief in harbours
of an entire race. 
The ten-years war is finished.
Helen's hair, a grey cloud.
Troy, a white ashpit
by the drizzling sea. 
The drizzle tightens like the strings of a harp.
A man with clouded eyes picks up the rain
and plucks the first line of the Odyssey.
 


^^EOP^^


Tonight at dusk we linger by the fence
around the garden, watching the wound husks
of moonflowers unclench themselves slowly,
almost too slow for us to see their moving—
you notice only when you look away
and back, until the bloom decides,
or seems to decide, the tease is over,
and throws its petals backward like a sail
in wind, a suddenness about this as though
it screams, almost the way a newborn screams
at pain and want and cold, and I still hear
that cry in the shout across the garden
to say another flower is about to break.
I go to where my daughter stands, flowers
strung along the vine like Christmas lights,
one not yet lit. We praise the world by making
others see what we see. So now she points and feels
what must be pride when the bloom unlocks itself
from itself. And then she turns to look at me.


^^EOP^^


I ran across the street, I didn’t know any better.
Ran out in the street, I didn’t know no better.
I just knew a woman was there, though I’d never met her. 
She sat me in her parlor, distracted me with trinkets,
milky glass birds and fish, distracting trinkets.
She said my mother would be fine, but did she think it? 
The world was a blur of crystal wings and fins.
My tears were casked in crystal, wings and fins.
She was the first of many lady-friends. 
The tree shadows shortened, she brought me a drink of water.
Morning matured, she brought me a glass of water.
I drank it so fast, she went and brought another. 
I kept looking out the window, she didn’t ask me what for.
I watched out that window, she didn’t ask what for.
The seconds broke off and lay there on the floor. 
I imagined my mother’s route, as far as I could.
Her long morning walk, followed as far as I could.
Nothing I could do would do any good. 
Suffer the little children, and forbid them not.
Christ said suffer the little children, and forbid them not.
Said love thy neighbor, sometimes she’s all you got.


^^EOP^^


That’s a good one, the idea of the moon having a stem and somehow
stealing you, whoever you are, kind of like Persephone or Orpheus,
portrayed or alluded to in countless forms of art and popular culture
including poetry, film, opera, music, and painting. And it kind of fits
my mood this morning, something vaguely cartoonish and devoid
of real gravitas, but still, a kind of realism, even so. And the area
around is the void, outer space, nothing, because explaining things
is never as interesting as wanting them, the desire to know, set against
a backdrop of black velvet and rhinestones. Let’s say that you wake up
one day and realize you don’t remember anything that happened
yesterday. Maybe for five minutes or so. And for those five minutes
you’re thinking, as I was thinking this morning, that this is it. Car keys.
The word for when you really want something and work for it.
Your dog’s name. There are not enough blank pages for all this
forgetting, like debris falling back to earth, you and yours hiding in
the underbrush with hopes of your own, of rescue or escape.
When you don’t remember why you’re hiding in the underbrush,
you’ve been hiding in the underbrush forever. This whole other
existence leaps forward in possibility. And then the five minutes
are up, and it’s oh yeah, eggs, Saturday. Some day that was.
A chemist once told me luminol was her favorite color. It glows
a beautiful greenish-blue when it comes into contact with blood
by reacting to the iron in hemoglobin, looking a bit like the sky
this morning. It’s a kind of truth of blue, that uncovers, that
remembers. It’s used by investigators to detect blood at crime scenes
where no blood is visible. There are so many things to forget,
to lose, and in so many different ways. But even so, one can be wrong
about the past, and deduce from error, but still be right about
the future or the present. And when you don’t remember what day
it is, happy birthday. Despite all our best efforts, there’s a wolf
on the horizon making a movie of your approach, and it’s
a shipwreck playing across me as I’m pouring sugar into my cup.


^^EOP^^


Dark corridors, crammed bedrooms, stairs that smell
of cigarette smoke and impermanence.
Long days of waiting. Ringing of the bell 
that calls us to our dinner. Shillings and pence
that fill the hand. The wallpaper. The pulse
of other people’s half-heard arguments. 
The landlord’s dog. Interminable phone calls
in the lobby. Someone is falling apart,
another’s longing to be somewhere else. 
You hold on to the street map of your heart
and make yourself at home. You’re here at last,
whatever “here” now means. Now you can start 
your childhood again, the world a mythic past
you’ll wander into by mistake, the joys
of lost performance with a vanished cast 
of now-imagined names that other boys
might whisper just to put you in a spin.
It is another language that deploys 
the tottering edifice that you live in.
Strangers will come and go, are gone for good.
The bedrooms empty. Here is a new skin 
for you to wear in the enchanted wood.


^^EOP^^


She wanted to taste the fire inside the corn,
cried over photographs of other people’s cakes. 
Once she punched a cake. Those memories
surface often, like a flood of bus stop pigeons. 
She hoped to meet an owl before she died,
did nothing at all to further this agenda item 
other than looking up. Curious about clocks,
she asked a lot of questions regarding their guts. 
Was there an ocean inside them, for example?
How did the first craftsman know where to lodge 
the quiet snore of gears? She asked for holy
water to be distilled down into an adhesive seal 
that might ride the forehead all week long
the same way she tumbled her bike into hollows 
and ravines regardless of weather. Little reek
of the river which was mostly things left behind. 
Once she bit a tree. It was softer than expected.
The blossoms remained unchanged or fell like hail.


^^EOP^^


My grandmother was born in a city called [宜兰] 
Despite its name, no orchids grow there 
Five of my six aunts have names ending in [兰] 
My mother’s full name is [little wind] 
Orchid seeds are distributed by land, water & wind 
One of my aunts drowned in a river I invented from rain 
One of my aunts thinks skydiving is a synonym for when it rains 
the other way 
One of my aunts faked her visa & went to the vet once 
thinking it was the doctor 
she asks me how come dogs here have doctors 
I say because dogs here are domesticated 
the opposite of domestic is alien the opposite of flower 
is fist the opposite of purple is pray 
orchid comes from the Greek word meaning [testicle] 
Greek women believed eating orchids made their unborn 
babies boys 
for a son, my mother creamed her toes suckled coals liquefied flies fucked on full moon 
days flossed with a dagger darkened her bathwater ashed her cheekbones torched her crotch 
candied the blood boiled it with sugar & still 
she wept when she saw my face 
filmed it with her fingers 
weeded out my eyes & witched them into rivers 
my grandfather farmed orchids in a city named thirst 
when the war came, he pissed on his field 
to keep the orchids alive, he spent all his body’s water 
his organs dehydrated into stones I skip across sea-mirrors 
flowers bruise in the wind & weaponless 
crimes are called births 
water perpetrates want 
the army unburied our bodies in a field of salty orchids 
everyone in my family resembles a river’s 
rag-dolled neck 
in photos our faces overlap like venn diagrams of grief 
there is a breed of orchid called the ghost orchid & another breed called the blood orchid 
one is fictional & the other is edible & the other 
night I vased my throat like a stem & did not think of extinct species 
decades later reappearing like the lungfish 
one of the original fish that left the sea for land 
all migrations begin as mothers as mimicry 
a fish saw a tree & decided to stand 
without feet my brother says orchids 
look like pussies smell like 
pussies too he says I should know 
I do know I know the color of thirst 
is not salt but cylinder but a city leased to fire 
to architect the ash into an alibi 
my wife’s spit is my river is my silver 
bullet thirst 
is the mouth’s unit of memory memory 
begins in me like a bone 
to breed its breaks


^^EOP^^


Everything we do and say in patriarchy can be traced
back to “Strangers in the Night.” Your faded jeans, my
faint daytime smile. (Dazzling’s so expensive.) Bad
Mailer novels; lose-money-quick schemes. A fortune in
friendship, nevertheless. Beef farmers favor self-flesh
awareness. (Or brittle in toffee queen regimes.) Thoughts
as feats of strength. The figure in the woodpile as a
white snake, two needle bites. The end of the week, of
us, strangers now or not? I’m dressed in white, I am the
right blonde in the wrong seaplane, I haven’t learnt the 
language yet. The meta-leopards will have taken over
the aquarium. They’ll stroll this way like kangaroos to
green glass. Papa, I’ve upset you. There’ll be a line of
songs like crystals lining up to kiss the bell that says Big
Town. We are on the roof now, playing to Central Park
everyone hot in their coats. Paid for not stolen. They
admit to being too late for miracles, for charity. The
poem’s parents are in the front row. The poem’s friend
interprets. Can we repeat it without going back to the
start, the lover’s demand like ants beneath the plaint? 
In Eden, in Athens, estrangement flowers. We turn and
return. Is it love itself, beckoning from the lurid grass-
lands? There’s a cuteness to plaster’s novelty hiding of
the body. People are cited in the mouth, stand on the
ground. They fly like Lucy. You can deny it all for fun
and parties, as if the mind was the feeling that input
gives. It’s a power no one likes to admit, as it so often
leads to failure in later life, like living in a swimming
pool, or losing your tongue in the mail. What of
romances with characters from books? Alice says hello 
I remind her of a cookie in a dream she had of heaven or
hell—but which was it? Everything that happens in the
world has someone to say it’s their fault, repress it as
they may. The cutout in the cocktail bar wants to go
home with someone for once. The snakeskin hangs on
the gate like it’s a street corner, that each uttered “baby”
renews. Knowing can be a means to forgetting, also
We stand there as if the floor or wall is our companion
our fortress in trouble: mates a bit longer, keeping sex at
bay. Not everyone looks where they’re going or cares 
where others are. They’re the rugged ones, though fleet
as moths when crossing a highway. Sometimes, despite
our own egos, we admire this, as if wise that the pattern
of the one ahead won’t ultimately save or brave us
Don’t rush. The star we wake to mightn’t always be
there, so we wander outside as if air were itself a prayer
or someone’s. Is that for me? addressing an ivy or a wet
plank, suddenly hungry. Tell me what happened to Peter
and Wendy and the loser with the hook for a hand. Was
it all alright in the end? They say time is nothing but it 
takes the saying to make it so. To be the one is to
vanquish Sinatra, but also life (not that life is patriarchy)
Repress the possibility for the sake of staying young, as
around the bend a boat may contain the set of problems
that will have always been around. Attitudes to dancing
housework, contraception, ever music’s themes. A wall-
flower may remind themselves of wallpaper, peeling to
reveal a peasant who goes to sleep at dusk behind their
tux, but does that haunt you more than the possibility
of possessing truth? Is that what your glances are about?


^^EOP^^


Watch for them. Faint as aspen, peeled as birch,
walking the edge of the field raw. Any minute now, 
you should start to see remote women flickering in the distance,
their smiles more flickering inside the flickering. 
It isn’t hard to find them, but once you do, don’t believe them. 
Confessing is just a big part of their drama. 
Don’t we all know someone pale and drawn out from coming back  so many times,
someone worn thin from having to turn into the thread that turns into the rope
that turns into the river that leads her out of the fire she may have started? 
It was supposed to be fragrant
and perennial like blossoming.
Their returning. 
It was supposed to be copious and make you reach
for a wide jug hoping to catch it all. 
Come back, that’s what these women do. 
They climb out of oval frames hung on walls.
They use any open page as a little ladder.


^^EOP^^





For Steve



                         Remember when we almost drowned in ’03, the woods
            so thick we only knew the rainstorm by sound of thunder
and violence of the creek, how every day I’d take you to the Stop-N-Go 
                         for your case of Natty Lights? Think back to summertime,
            when after lunch you’d pull your shirt off and wring it in your hands
and count off one beer, wring some more, two beers, how in July you’d sweat 
                         all the way through last night’s binge. Think back to when
            we chopped paths across hardwood bottoms for skidders to plow
makeshift roads for Justiss Oil pumpjacks to suck black snot the earth 
                         doesn’t blow. I wanted to call in sick every day, to feel
            the sunrise through my bedroom pane instead of the company truck’s
windshield. But this isn’t about that. What was I? Eighteen? Drinking 
                         creamy coffee the color of soupy dishwater, the callouses
            of my hands sanding the white Styrofoam cup, whiskey from a flask
stirred into yours. I grew to welcome the start of a day filing blades, the rhythm 
                         I’d find scraping down, down, up and over. I didn’t care
            like you did for squaring drill sites with double-knots of orange flagging
for the loggers, how we kneeled, panting in the dirt, how you would pan your head 
                          to take inventory of the beech and white oaks rooted inside
            the flagged-off square. I don’t know what it mattered, Steve,
which tree we marked for loggers to fell, which sapling we ourselves chopped 
                         with machetes. Did the thicket not return what we gave?
            Did the thorn limbs and briars not cut your flesh into estuaries
of brackish pink creeks of sweat and blood? Nothing changes much, 
                         does it, Steve? I’m filing a brush hook’s edge for the first time
            in years and still hear you yelling at me, Not like that, Smith. Just give
that damn thing to me.

^^EOP^^





That [science] which treats of those conditions of knowledge which lie in the nature, not of thought itself, but of that which we think about ... has been called ... Architectonic, in so far as it treats of the method of building up our observations into system.
—Sir William Hamilton
... one of which systems is a poem.



1. what the chicago window was for 
mainly light. 
      the supporting function
on the sides      opens to let in
      air.      the proportion
wall to door   dependent on heat. 
      repeated upward
into cold      wind
      around the columns
and garland
      sky high   reflections off the face of their 
investment   the blueprint raises money longer
      hours   profit piles up 
the american beauty    of  work   yourself
      to death to look out on.   2. otis 
railroad architecture ran elevators
off the ground to get weight it needed up
like people off land to get over      then
an elevator railroad floated architecture
up floors open as plains to the sky
through walls into rooms coupled like cars
to each other without a climb
hallway distances like vistas through
zigzag mountain valleys as work’s landscape
the first time since walking sheep in the cloud
meadows far away from the later smoke
the elevators laid more meadow out
than the mountain had basis for
its little square created acreage out of air.  
more than the fiery iron horse   the hidden
legged spider wove worlds more tightly into
her realm of feeding upon   more needed
immediately   she trained her fare
into catching her by waiting for her to swallow
the fat rides she needed to keep her moving.
and moving faster with no feeling
of movement   she has architecture anesthetized
to no other way   as long as there is up
it will feed her with it.
she has learned
how to go streetwise   through airports
she tells you when
the moving walkway is ending.   3. 
the rookery
was built out of birds
which were actually
individual flames 
not really
birds with fiery plumage
they stood out against
the masonry of black smoke 
all that survived the fire.   I have
that x-periential thing about fire that makes me crazy
at even the thought of it   I  x.
so the idea of the city 
having only this place for birds to land after
took me a long time to visit.  
the difference between locate    identify know something about   and visit re-experience   identify with         is
in if   the roosts that become return   call back a sky 
unclear how much what’s left
tells that much
about what has been lost   enough
to nest its shard against which tomorrow lies best 
living its death until death is shown the lie
it lives into life.   it stirs
nothing suddenly.   more the politicking of birds
found a place to buy 
and sell    the audacity
to have survived.   as the architectonic of a city.   4. any programmable hall 
crown hall is a lyric
miniature of bridge
el and street-stacking
engineering. 
railroad
building   to art song.
the base   work. the columns
of profit.   and a capital. 
the vast empty spaces
re-created
inside are potential.
what ended frankenstein   always waiting 
to be given life   it already has.
any programmable hall   a machine.  
but these are new life
designing already
itself      piece
by piece      cell 
to embody   back maybe even
the species that crashed
into the vast invisible window
walls   in their migrations. 
the artificial intelligence of walls
in the first place   that beheld us in
to our cathedral
now   to other worlds 
out of the darkness.   the light
the open.   in their way   the intelligence.   5. against all that square straight up 
the hancock leans away in all
      faced direction from you
to the side   up ahead
      the darkness so strictly structured
it erupts in a gusher of sky   pure
      american   brought in 
against all that square straight up
      drill   out on the plain of it    all x-ed out
into simple
      optimistic shift of dimension. 
all tapering has its vanishing point.
      infinity its asymptote.
any two lines converging downtown has
      its hancock   its lift off      michigan avenue. pyramid   6. the aqua 
only underneath
the water from the street
can you see up 
the moss hanging floors
of the waterfall cliff
orchids of light
off the ledge balconies 
the re-vegetation
of the canyon
the re-visualization of our spaces
from our animal 
need to be curious about what’s around
our corners not just
that they square.  
the walls of wave canyons
beneath the southwest   wash out up here
with clear views divest of the ground
to dust   of much that has lifted them to where 
they can see
is runoff.
a drainage of romanoff
richness in its dissolution   of geography. 
the appalachian humps—
bodies bedded the long house
state to horizon    the smokies roused
from the valleys by the updrafts’ bump 
you to look up into
a landscape from a bird up   turned view.   7. 860-880 lake shore drive 
we were discussing how devoid of everything—
it was
             she was listening to our conversation
she said   she had lived in one
of his residences   and it was calmly scary  
how the building almost wasn’t there
yet everything you needed was
within reach
                      the way she went
at things was the way it was
already it was like there
were no walls
                           which made it feel
really spacious   she was never in a place
that fit her so every
where she turned was where
she wanted
it directed her in
that it didn’t 
everything was there
everything else was out of her way
it was as if he refused
to build in the way   anything ever again.   it was almost insane.
                                                                                                             
 
                               ( lake point )
rippley mies
van der rohe licorice
melting      farthest out 
into the lake
walls waving around
like a curtain   a sail
of window 
melting into solid wind
lotte lenya singing brecht
the remembered ship 
against which the rational was not a defense.
which loaded his tools.
nothing but the existence of line
left   not even a rule.   the pencil   the point wavering   8. marina 
pie in the sky with petal
pinched crust   stacked high
above its park of delivering vehicles
on the river   a pie boat too 
can cut in   (there’s a marina) home
to pinecone peel down balcony
symmetry fun for tie up
and sing dock of the day   as it. 
this city doesn’t hold back
bay manners up   nor not
talk straight    it does look like
a corncob.   a celestial gate   from here 
a bean.   cakes
of ice   with faces on them. us.   a fountain.  
the base.   the column.
of river   wheels   roof
over your head with food
and amenities layered in 
between
your work all day and immediate
need to sit down   without traffic
stacked up in one convenient 
location   residents willing to pay
for required.   freedom
of imagination   insight   into freedom—
the capital.      let’s say 
to try anything once
but more deeply   freedom from fear   of response.   9. the drawbridge houses 
the boats go by
the drawer
bridge pants’ flies
go up 
the river
like the moaners’ bench
of fifteen-year-old boys when
the girls go by. 
think how heavy the weight
that balancing   lifts
to let the delicately lilting
sails like skirts through   and the traffic 
back across
if it were in your pants to toss  
up or down.   the massive
concrete counterweights like balls.
streets go up   at the helens
navigating the obstructions    some 
not come down   except at some castrating
war of recollection      a reconnection.
think of the engineering
of the open and close   as of arms. 
who houses in the palaces of these gates.
what counter power holds place
on the bank of this flood
this flowing and crossing of desires? 
the palaces   balance’s hub
a dowry to house the form   of the beloved.   11. di chirico chapel 
a Franz Kline ceiling painting on
the tunnel vault of a building
which incorporated its partial collapse
from a bombing   the black paint swaths
beside the open to the night sky
the stars
the outdated old style of stars
lit the chamber pale
a standing shadow fell across the floor
through a small open door slanted off the wall
the no one there stood outside any light to block
her hoop balanced
on its own shadow not rolling   still
a dress model of its architecture rose   off the air.   12. the mecca 
this isn’t there
anymore   something famous 
is built over
it    that has nothing 
to do with it    or for
now 
as public
housing went up and 
torn down
too to defeat 
.
. 
.
.   13. 
robie house mock  horizon sub  urb laying down   
its give up retreat from the city   back into
the low against the ground   against the high
of skyscrapers      re-carpeted the nation outside. 
but is back now to reclaim
the collapsed properties   it let go grow
weed to re-gentry
heedless of tearing up whose rooms   back into profit. 
the however   here
police drawn blood on their doors   have lived
dangerous and can paint it angel mad    sign again 
anytime   if flipping back and forth for gain
were to spread too far   the spread could find their
horizontal shrunk to their floated upper floor.   14. shedd aquarium  Arapaima gigas   third
most ancient species   my totem fish
made so from the fact it targeted me
to eat.      six feet of it attacked me 
when forgetting protocol
I slipped my legs into its tank without
warning
it    I was feeding not food   it mauled 
my toe it thinking it a goldfish which
was usually how I announced service. 
The Shedd’s A. specimen is the oldest living
in the country   so old its heavy tail
dragged down its spine into that hump of the frail.
This might be the last time we meet.  
Some sheds you walk into with experience
of a specific song to reclaim.
I couldn’t see the building for checking first
the clarity of the tanks’ water   the name 
plates above the windows   how well
the shit was cleaned off the bottom   and if it came
there was nothing in a tank at all   having
eaten itself—      this first fame 
is what was always held up to the staff
for us to surpass.     and here I was   degrees
and jobs later   still holding it up
for inspection.   it is 
a beautiful building we have built
together this life    arapaima      gigas. huge thanks.


^^EOP^^


I won’t explain. My aunts spell
                                                                                 around the vanity mirror
& centerpiece me, my lips plummed,
                                                        my neck belled mid-flight. 
                 After the food’s uncooked, the heirloom paring knife
stitched up the bell peppers & dark meat,
                                                                    after the fiddle leaves
                             left their fiddles, the porch undressed of wasps & us
our old names—
                                          right here. As if even the evening
           didn’t let on. No parking lot, no gas stations. A scythe
of emptied prisons shudder
                                                       alongside the highway; bougainvillea
& gun oil in the sheets. All my cousins slow-dancing
                              in their cowboy boots & antlers. 
                                          My mothers singing to the dogwood tree
             blooming black across my arm. 
Your hand finally on the small of my back, without any kind of fear. 
This time, I’ll be a girl & you can be anything
alive. Take the rope off your wrists.
                                                      Somewhere far away from here,
               a star’s unspooling its star-white curtain. 
                                          What happens if we begin already angels?
Press your ears to my wingspan. Hum a little. 
We are the most possible kind of daughterhood.
                                                                                    I promise. 
Step into the light.
            Let me see the mark our rapture left behind.


^^EOP^^





In ASL gloss and English



                    
                    1
 
Morning wind-wind-everywhere
Water mouth-dry-mouth-dry finish
G-a-z-e-l-l-e-s gazelles
Hooves s-e-e-d-s there stuck.

Gazelles trot-trot
Hooves s-e-e-d-s fall-away
Grass meld-pillow protect.

Feel eyes-eyes-look-search hunger
Sense ready
Fingersnaps gazelle p-r-o-n-k how:

Legs-stiffen leap-straight-up
Back-shoulders-drop
Tail-up drop head-up drop p-r-o-n-k that.

Gazelles-pronk-pronk
Look-like eye-shimmer, eye-shimmer
Body-shimmer kill can’t.
From the winds that scheme to dry
every drop of moisture at dawn, they gather
seeds, lodged between their hooves.


Everywhere they trot, they leave behind
seeds, hoping that their grass-blades
will knife the knolls into pillows

when they sense other eyes prowling
for a kill. Then they shoot straight up,
their legs stiff with hiding quivers,

their backs arch upward, bridging
their shoulders and tails hanging limp,
as they drop their heads straight down,

their bodies shimmering like mirages
punching everyone’s eyes out.
They are too vibrant for slaughter.
 
 

2
 
 

Night pop-up stories shh
Stories stay no-no
Stories winds-blow-away
Secrets cherish-cherish.

Gazelles smell-smell lie-lie finish
Men hunters mind-dumb do-do
P-i-s-s here there over there
Gazelles smell-smell avoid finish.

Experience-experience happen-happen
Stories body-inspire
Moon eyes shine think-hide rifle
Gazelles catch-catch finish.

Hunters jaw-drop gazelles group
Move-together cloud-move-together
D-u-s-t rise avoid death.

Tend happen what
Hunters watch nights
Gazelles stand-stand tail-twitch-twitch
Hope land somewhere safe.
 

At night stories tiptoe with them.
No one ever records them. Not even the winds.
They are small, but secrets nurture them.


Their noses have learned the scent of lies.
Hunters keep marking their hiding places
with their piss. The gazelles case their borders.


They see things that inspire legends.
The glint of moon in black eyes staring at them
from the bush, calculating whether to shoot.


The stunned cackle of teeth when gazelles sail
en masse over clouds of dust, cracks of heat,
our bodies snapping the neck of death.

But most of the time they simply watch.
Their limbs, dexterous and inured to danger,
twitch dreams of unmarked countries.
 

 
 

3
 
C-h-e-e-t-a-h gazelles watch know-inside-out
Gazelles mother show legs-zigzag
Time surprise laughter-catch.

Leaves delicious gazelles attract eat
Eyes-open-look-that-way flicker
Gazelle-tails-perk-up-all
Mind-telepathy c-a-t finish.

Fingersnaps gazelles-scatter-from-center
Leave-behind smell-smell poop
Flies-flies-buzz c-h-e-e-t-a-h finish.

Gazelles-gallop escape
Cheetah-eyes-stay-same run-run-after
Gazelles-zigzag-sideways.

Hair-bare-escape
Cheetah-teeth cheetah-claw
Gazelles-zigzag fast, slow
Cheetah-trip-trip
Gazelles-proud-pronk-pronk.
 

Gazelles know all about cheetahs.
They’ve learned from their mothers
the art of zigzagging, the power of surprise.

Leaves of succulence bid them closer. Distant
flicker of shadow, spots, ringed tail alerts them.
Their breaths murmur the scent of cat, now.


They scatter: a crater of half-chewed leaves,
dung, and flies flailing in his lightning wind
thundering from behind the scruffy bush.

They coagulate like veins galloping from his heart
of hunger, those cold eyes of cat sleeking speed,
until they twist abruptly, sideways, their necks

barely whisking the nick of his fangs and claw.
Changing tempo and direction, their hooves are staccato
music driving him to exhaustion. They pronk.
 


^^EOP^^


There’s nothing dandier than threadbare threads
worn by a discerning shabby dresser.
A collar’s fret or subtle fray is not lesser
because it’s worn away but models instead 
the bespoke tailoring of time itself.
Done poorly—the gentleman farmer’s
piecemeal pastoral, that NoHo charmer’s
duct-taped boots—it’s like an unread bookshelf 
of secondhand prose: a too-studied pose.
Done well, it draws you in to draw you near,
reveals the intricate pattern in the years’
inexorable ravel. Between decompose 
and deconstruct, what seemed a foppish quirk
grows wise. Design undone. We wear time’s work.


^^EOP^^


Paradise with a thousand stings, she replies.
Deep blue and blazing sky. Incessant cicadas,
scuttle of bug and roach. Fleas, mosquitos,
the threat of scorpions. Men leaning on doorposts,
crowding the bar. Smoking, drinking,
laughing descendants of slaves. Fire coral burns,
reef-edge barracudas. Truly lovely.
Matriarchal, she says, women with eight children
by many different men. The men would leave
as the spirit took them. I want
to know all the forces one can call spirit.
Tall, swaying fronds of the sugar cane fields.
Distant roar heralding a downpour. Snapping turtles.
Nearby shanty town, she says,
streets full of rubbish, rats in the gutter.
I admired the colonial-style homes, she says.
Colonial, I say.
Separate servant quarters and grounds
filled with samaan trees, the balconies overflowing
with hot-colored orchids and the locusts drawn close
by the palatial lights, colorful and clawing,
their hooks sunk deep into the bare skin of a sweating back.


^^EOP^^


his voice not so much hypnotic as reaching for the hypnotic 
but I leave it anyway sitting in the upright chair
of the windowless room 
for a place higher up that’s not quite
the windowless room— 
though I’m aware of my body’s particular kind
of breathing down there 
dressed in my favorite shirt and somehow
up here I’m dressed 
in that same shirt which is I feel suddenly
becoming very important 
its color pertaining to a quiet hue of knowing
I can’t quite explain 
and I do not think about the money I have
given him the man who is speaking 
but I’m looking instead down on a yellow
kitchen in Swindon 
upon a tiny remembered body I have found
crying or about to cry 
in little white shorts and there is carpet
streaked with blue 
and there is the noise of a terrible thing
that is happening 
and there is summer outside with its
other children 
“He doesn’t understand does he”
says the man 
“he is so young” and I understand the shirt
that he will have to grow through 
all of the terrible things to fit
I can feel my body now 
filling up the space inside its soft and
lavender-scented cotton


^^EOP^^


[byline]
northern triangle—First, I lived near mud, there, I carved some things. Then, I found a well, yo soy un bicho migrante. I had to climb trees, find mollusks, made a knife to eat them raw. Later, later-later, I worried about firewood, pots to cook. I asked ¿Where did my parents go? ¿Where? ¿There? I walked to another tree, another shore ... ¿Where are they now? I carved more: my face, my parents’, an alligator’s, yo soy un bicho migrante. ¡But no! I got tired of waiting, of playing, I wanted to see more. I found a river, found a road. Found more like me, a bunch of us waiting for more of us to flee. A tribe. A small village, yo soy un bicho migrante. I saw there were rules, clothes kept dry in plastic bags, phone numbers written inside pants. They also made fire, carved things into the mud. Asked ¿De donde sos vos? I pointed: de allá. Said I didn’t have plans. They answered, ¡Bienvenido! Tapped their feet on the dirt, yo soy un bicho migrante. We walked on the road, then along the road looking for food. Through the forest, through the mountains, we looked for mud, for frogs, for—¡There! ¡There they are! We played our favorite game, until I got bored again. Yo soy un bicho migrante. Nights are boring. Fireflies ... boring. Stars, the moon ... Well ... I began to let myself think ... babosadas came to mind: countries, passports. Then, I walked away from everyone, got to a mountain, then another one. Got to a river where I saw rats. ¿Have you seen the tribe? ¿A savage bunch that makes fires from trash? In a hurry they chased after me. I ran north. Found a few others. Or, maybe it was just me. To eat you have to believe, they said. Handed me something in the dark. Yo soy un bicho migrante. Saw pizza in the dark, hamburgers, clouds maybe. Maybe clouds. I saw fireflies. Few days had passed. I felt like an empty road. I invented machines. Planes. Fast cars. I barely had time to learn their names. I barely had time to say goodbye. Yo soy un bicho migrante. Years later, I filled forms. Wrote my name & woke up in a bed that had traveled 56 days, 56 nights. Then, came an election. War. Kids kept coming, but I had to find work. Wrote so many books my hands got tired. Made alternatives for plastic. Someone separated people into groups. Trees were cut extinct. But I destroyed fences, jailed kings, invented a replacement for countries. We searched for  purpose. Happiness. ¡Anyone could travel anywhere! We learned new languages. I had looked through the window I wasn’t supposed to. Yes, I looked. ¿What can I say? So I could be certain I looked & broke through. Yo soy un bicho migrante. But maybe, just maybe, I’ll return to that well & begin carving mud again. I’ll carve the whole world backwards. But no. Maybe not. Migrating has no beginning. No purpose. Yo solo soy uno de muchos bichos migrantes.
 


^^EOP^^


[byline]
ocotepeque, h.n.—I was born in a little town. This was not very long ago. I think I was four five years old. Parents let me do whatever: I looked up at the sun, I loved the sun, it burned a dot in my eyes. Mom was saying we must go catch the bus soon, instead I grabbed a piece of wood & etched it. Sucked it like my own thumb to learn something no one else had. Don’t judge my face. Girls like me. Boys like me with my long hair, I relish it. I love my father very much. More than anybody. He stayed. One morning I come home. He isn’t there. Down the road, this crowd. I drive the crowd away. This is my father, I say. Ask them this thing they allow: his body given to me. I dissect it. Anatomy, my father taught me.


^^EOP^^


[byline]
la herradura, s.v.—¿Do I have a mother? Have her pinkie in my hand crossing the street? Have her breath on my hair as she sings arru-rru mi niño to sleep. ¿Don’t you mean where? ¿What was your question? I’m older. Think more about memory. It makes me crazy. Obsessed. Her warm breasts on my belly as she knelt to tell me todo va estar bien. I’ll never see her again was the fear as if she’s gone, died, will never come back. I whispered it hidden in banana groves looking at the sky hoping one of those planes would take me to wherever she had left to. Whenever Mom hung the clothes to dry, not a cloud in the sky. I could see her sandals picking up dust. For a second. For a second I believe she’s back. It went like that every day. Every single night.  I’ll never see her again. But then, I did. Her face. Her hair. She was the same. So much had changed. I do not remember  what it was I truly felt.


^^EOP^^


what she told me. What I honor. They, as unambiguous as Lyrae is:
black, bard, badass; svelte with flourishing braids; a singularity and 
somehow all of them gathered as one like tributaries to the mouth of
the river of God—Gwendolyn and Lucille and June and—and I can’t 
count all the ways I was saved that day, emerging wet from the ritual
to find myself sitting in some stranger’s living room, a writer who’d 
been pushed out of their homeland by its persecutions, pulled into
America on the promise of asylum, the same America that commits 
my own kind to institutions with routine and rarely second thoughts
signaling the presence of conscience, and while we’re on the subject 
of right and wrong, know I’d read the news recently and retreated far
into my unfeeling before I received the blessing of her timely word, 
walking in bloody boots through hallways leading to the chambers
where tenderness is said to rest in all of us by symbology, but then 
I was called outside my bones again. And let me tell you, my friend:
you’ve never seen light before you’ve seen it. I swear, it’s as if with 
the snap of a finger I could recite the very definition of gold without
needing to run yolk from the promise of a child, a happy day’s glow 
spilling into the street like July’s laughter from a fire hydrant as we
left the house with folk who loved words and loved us—loved us— 
so expansively. And less than two nights later we’re all throwing our
asses in a circle, cuttin’ up, working up what was an effortless sweat, 
undeterred even as the music skipped on every hiccup of the fraying
wires, tethered just as strenuously to joy as ever, like always, trying 
to catch a good breath, but I paid it no mind, no mind, no mind—no,
I wasn’t absent upstairs exactly, I was hyper-present; what a ghost is 
to death I was to life, inside everything simultaneously—the sub and
the synth, the blown-off roof and hole-stomped floor, the rise of 
their chests and the fall—and only nigga returned me to this plane: my nigga, my nigga, a lyric left on my bottom lip like the sweet after- 
burn of Hennessy, but yo, it’s like I was being called for, called out
of need since I know that word only has such resonance in a world 
where we ain’t free. And, nah, we ain’t free, if you were wondering.
There are no shackles on me your eyes can see but none that I can’t 
feel as if they were appendages divided from me by the occurrence
of civil war, a set of chimeless chains that could be yanked on and 
bring me, even at my most upright, to my knees. And if it happens—
again—I suppose I could pray, there, at my literally lowest moment, 
immersed in the mess they’ve made that I’m tasked with cleaning
up for the commendation of pennies. I hope I don’t get shot while 
genuflect since that’s apparently a thing now in this country, but I
worry such a selfish ask won’t have sufficient fuel to reach heaven, 
that the bastardized sparrow will burn up in the atmosphere as easily
as tissue paper. And I recognize I’m rambling now, but I’m likewise 
increasing my odds of bumping into the point of all this since inside
the milk of me something was stirred by what she said, but it’s hard 
to translate a muscular language to a verbal one just as it’s hard to
relate to folk who don’t consider their own demise fifty ’leven times 
a day at least, and for that relapse not to be an injurious ideation but
an itch of practicality. What I wouldn’t pay for the chance to not pay 
attention to every little thing—how they talk near me and how they
talk when they believe I’m nowhere near, what they do or don’t do 
with each other that they do or don’t do with me, the questions they
feel quite content to ask me and the ones they never seem to though 
I leave the door open, the window, the bleeding heart. I know them
so well, people who wouldn’t know me from the next in the lineup; 
I know them so intimately you’d think I love them all, and the gag is
that I do, by some undesired miracle, and that is part of all this, too. 
To say they don’t deserve my time is an obvious statement, but they
take it anyway because it’s all they know, evident as I recount every 
transgression taking seconds off my time on this earth, summing up
to years, almost to the point I’m gone already, in response to which 
I either swallow spit or spit out ellipses. Ask the wounded wall what
I know of restraint, the manifesto I’d pen with what pours out from 
my punctured knuckles, though, perhaps, the poet was signaling that,
all along, I’ve been teaching the most important life lesson merely by 
domesticating rage, confining it inside the margins of the flesh that
my parents made for me, the page my life is written against each day 
in corrective red ink. And this seems like the appropriate moment
to divulge that her sermon came during a dialogue about poetic craft 
of all things, but if poetry can’t be applied to how one moves through
this world then I see very little worth in it, which is where it started 
for me. Poetry was a dead white thing in my life once, at the bottom
of the trash can with the doll of Jesus they’d tried pawning off on me 
back in Catholic school, but luckily I already knew one for us, by us,
and thus found the inner-strength to soldier through the barren winter 
of lyrical delight rocking a pair of big-ass Timberlands and other on-
trend threads a person of greater gravitas could’ve filled out better 
around the shoulders. But I digress—since what I really mean to be
speaking on is how the Cavalier poets weren’t really doing it for me 
during high school, not because their explicit sexuality or their taste
for material excess and ambitious proximity to the throne were such 
disagreeable subjects to me, at the time revisiting rap’s mafioso era,
but because when we painted those same pictures as we preferred to, 
our tongues spiraling like ballerinas and bullets, they sought the ban
on sale or talked down on it as being absent of any artistic merit, as if 
a nation’s worth of people surviving subjugation is more science than
art anyway, for if that were true, then we wouldn’t have a culture and 
America wouldn’t have great product to push to the rest of the planet
aside from all the bombs it seems much keener on dropping casually 
like Funkmaster Flex, and I’d already grown tired in my young age,
so tired, of trying to prove I’m not stupid even above trying to prove 
I’m smart. And those who doubt there’s a difference have digging
to do, deep into their pockets to get me what I’m owed for damages, 
for emotional distress and all things it’s been made feasible to sue for
with solid legal representation. Funny, I once longed to be a lawyer, 
little fool that I was, my back against a brick wall painted by spotlight,
rifles lined and aiming, in that night’s vision—legal fluency seemed 
the only option for release from this burden because it’s the language
my nemeses speak in. I do know bad English from black, but I know 
power even better because I’ve brushed up against it just as a person
in any number of neighborhoods around here may have brushed up 
against a police officer. Maybe it’s needless to say I didn’t go down
an attorney path; I actually don’t have a plan at all these days except 
evading the bullet and also the bullet points corporations thrive on,
as if any of this is simple, as if I, symptom of systemic dysfunctions 
enveloped by skeleton and skin, am something simple. I’d only ever
be two-dimensional if airbrushed on a blank T-shirt and even that 
would show depth to someone’s esteem for who I was with no one
else nearby, and all this means is that there is more to me or anyone 
alike than being menace or miscreant, minstrel or misanthrope, or
murdered as all four would be with equal fanfare. But what I really 
want is to know what they feel when their black friend dies in that
typical way for it’s maybe the only thing I don’t know about them, 
while we practice poker faces and draft FAQs. Forget seeing eye to
eye for a second. Set aside the particular grammars of forgiveness 
we use without pulling up the problem’s root: do they still feel full
people if they put the hammer down? And when they can’t answer, 
make note that I can because I have those tools and also others that
shall remain nameless in order to remain purposeful. That’s how I 
prefer it, besting all desertions of their decency, which I say since
you’ve caught me rare and raw tonight, sipping off the bottle top, 
slurring my songs, hitting my two-step on beat every. single. time.
Damn—how blessed they are to be able to watch me work around 
them—as illegibly as what the miraculous Phillis Wheatley wrote
all over her master’s walls, owned in the moment, I feel, solely by 
an ambition toward self-definition I also try applying prodigiously,
bringing them to speechlessness, a shaming kind of silence saying  listen, leave me be because there’s no explaining me, thus there’s
no exploiting me: what only a history under thumb and foot helps 
grasp before letting go, for one’s own good even more than mine.


^^EOP^^


Dear sip, dear shotgun, dear pound:
beneath the house, the kegs roll in;
the party flips its switches down. 
When drunk comes, it comes as sound,
a chord, a liftoff. I ride the rim,
dear sip, dear shotgun, dear pound. 
He could be anyone, and he abounds.
I slip inside a dance with him.
The party flips its switches down.  Let’s go, he says, upstairs now.
My cup spills. My shirt is skin.
Dear sip, dear shotgun, dear pound, 
I won’t. Get lucky. Get found.
But kegs run out, the hour brims,
the party flips its switches down, 
his hips to mine, his arms around,
a song ends, and dark begins—
dear sip, dear shotgun, dear pound,
the party flips its switches down.


^^EOP^^


but all I want to do is marry them on a beach 
that refuses to take itself too seriously. 
So much of our lives has been serious. 
Over time, I’ve learned that love is most astonishing 
when it persists after learning where we come from. 
When I bring my partner to my childhood home 
it is all bullets and needles and trash bags held 
at arm’s length. It is my estranged father’s damp 
bed of cardboard and cigar boxes filled 
with gauze and tarnished spoons. It is hard 
to clean a home, but it is harder to clean 
the memory of it. When I was young, my 
father would light lavender candles and shoot 
up. Now, my partner and I light a fire that will 
burn all traces of the family that lived here. 
Black plastic smoke curdles up, and loose bullets 
discharge in the flames. My partner holds 
my hand as gunfire rings through 
the birch trees. Though this is almost 
beautiful, it is not. And if I’m being honest, 
my partner and I spend most of our time 
on earth feeding one another citrus fruits 
and enough strength to go on. Every morning 
I pack them half a grapefruit and some sugar. 
And they tell me it’s just sweet enough.


^^EOP^^





In Calgary
I saw a man break a dog’s back.
—Joseph Stroud, “Calligraphy”



i 
In Calgary
I saw a man marry money Who giveth this money?
the commissioner asked
The man said Everyone who works for me
The commissioner asked Where are they? I don’t hear them declare it
The man said That’s not their job You do yours  Do you take this money
the commissioner asked to have and to hold
till death do you part?

^^EOP^^


Knowing my passion for celebrity nudes reached back to the last days of Netscape Navigator, Siri dutifully told me of the latest gossip site to promise their release.

Lawyers had sued to block the nudes’ coming to light and thereby confirmed they exist, she said. I resented the assured existence of any celebrity nudes I had yet to see, insisting all stars were both clothed and unclothed until the moment the webpage was loaded—at which point truth would be made clear.

Siri disapproved of my inaccurate interest in Schrödinger and his daguerreotype nudes, whose bits I’d heard were coffined up behind some Princeton research paywall full tuition granted access to. She explained I could save my money: how all nudes took form already, stored as light in fiber optic cables stashed in the oceans’ aphotic sands. HTML5 would dredge up everything.

Hypertext did not excite me, but I had to admit pleasure at the thought of seabed celebrity nudes leaked by wolffish. Would they float? Form islands? I saw archipelagos of nudes in a cold Atlantic full of them.

I asked Siri what she thought of my nudes, the lighting I’d used—their dark, private silhouettes. Bring your umbrella, she said. I looked at the thick cloud of my nakedness above, and agreed it was possible for rain.


^^EOP^^


I tell him to touch his toes. He reaches for them in a squat.
He stabs them with his little fingers. One toe. Two toes.
Then we say our letters, spell out all the sounds we will deliver because the death of a child is no small death.
I extend to him an open palm where he makes a fist
and slams it into my hand, a form, he wearily shouts,
is “a butterfly coming home!” We play “give me a five”
and continue swatting at the butterflies until the sun goes down.
I don’t recall ever playing with my mother like this.
Late one morning, my son caught me pinching
the sides of my head, my face wet from so much crying.
He punched my arm, which knocked one hand off
of my face. Ashamed that he saw me, I laughed very loudly
which brought him concern and happiness. He never
mentioned it again and I never forgave myself. My good son, running through the garden
in giggles. He is waiting for me to catch him. Once
I pretended to have fallen in a pit. I did not tell him
it was a grave. Very quickly he sprinted over and stood
beside my body. “Your hand!” he demanded.
Like a little father. I gave him my hand.
“Now, the other hand!” I give him the other.


^^EOP^^


A thing stolen say a spoon say gone before morning shook or worse unable to reorient a slip of the wrist and you’re married the spoon is small is decorative the length one walks back to oneself a shadow’s length or less a belief in one or other end reflects the particulars of one or other neurosis my caldera my Zika my bug-out in a camo pick-up still as damn now nothing happened say the spoon means jack the marriage too say a container is a ritual the spoon which is your bath your mirror is saving your life or more with earned misfortune still a house is not yours a body a personality the collection of traits the fear of heights of Zika the boy with his screen the game with its gun the bath with its salt the outer layer stripped and like an iris shrinking in the light of yet another the trick is not to mind the slanted rain the lack of sleep his screen the light of screens their shelter the shelter is not yours the marriage with its many utensils is silver in the same way love is sheer is tugging at your sleeve there was a plan a bunker the love-thing barely walking to a garden to a den of rifles with a knack for game a river say twice the width of home and gold and rising say it floods the rooms which are not yours the love-thing say the ritual of bathing does you good the thing beyond the body which is you is peeled back and massive barely anything at all the bucket you were dropped in the river the swallowing of itself in infinite configuration infinitely frayed the boy is you the man the screen with its various positions its many worshippers which are you say nothing really happened not the end the spoon the house with its ammo was a game the game of angels which are you


^^EOP^^


I write: the tall grass is a third wish 
then back away 
from the field. If I move
back 
far enough, everyone in the front row
will be still. 
Be still—
you’re witnessing my first time. 
A ballooning ballroom expanding 
until the beat drops,
a letdown 
letting you down gently 
before the DJ jumps up, afraid to play
something that could offend. 
I write: the tall grass is a third wish
wasted

^^EOP^^


The Inaccessible Island Rail lives in Atlantis,
with two black feet on the black plateau.
It might be slight, it might be shabby,
but it knows what it knows. 
Rain falls from the sky.
The sun shines, within limits.
Wind blows in from the furthest west.
There is nothing beyond the cliffs. 
Island Cape Myrtle is not true myrtle.
It is not the one in the myths.
Wind-stunted trees fill the fern-bush heath.
Sweet Roman Myrtle, True Roman Myrtle. Lies beyond the cliffs. 
What there is is sparse.
It is made of grass and ferns.
The birds fill what they can with themselves and fledglings
in boulders that lightning burned. 
They eat beetles, flies, moths.
They become what comes of trying.
The downy undersides of the leaves, they take it.
Until they can’t. They take to flying. 
Trying, the wind does what it can.
In time the strangest things occur.
The tunnel finds itself inside the grass, and eggs
of milk, of lavender.


^^EOP^^


Glitz girls in the spackle. Teen climbed
The boughed over stair. Stole lace to begin again
In darkness, a fingering salt. Print
Delighted the line to lined
Pink. Was doll-sized, weighted out. Was flat-reaped sigh
And dollar bin plaid. Fridays we stayed in
Till in coughed through with dry heat. Men
Grew approximate in their longing for something to mine.
Sippy cup of burn, acrylic camel, and melting kohl
Was a hiding past boyish. We shone with miraculous
Droll. Don’t try to kiss me, she was always saying. Older
Than a watch, the girl who pays starch to hush
Meat. Gargantuan between grown and still us,
I leave her orange street, my wanting ode


^^EOP^^


?) Let every sentence begin: I have been grossly mistaken. The stars are gone. Kirk: Kindly tell me what happened to the stars.
Kierkegaard shuttles past Reason to planet Absurd, a gas giant
without a detectable landing pad. He says, it’s the leap that matters. We’re being pulled toward the center of the zone of darkness.
Kenosis required, emptying the self of self. His sky lit, mine blazes
black, an experimental physics. Doubt the gravity that repels, attracts.
Dark energy : Dark matter : Attempt to probe : Universe [Static].
Neil deGrasse Tyson: we are a speck on a speck on a speck
on a speck.

^^EOP^^


before cameras could remember color, back when
the paint had not yet dried
on the world, and where was the fire? Everywhere
under their feet a patchy shining
and nothing tall standing plumb on either side
of the
street, canted saplings and slow ziggurats in brick, everything
splayed
away from     the kids   who wreck, who make                 these pictures. 
Their defenseless foreheads, the wet paving. Each cuts
their eyes at the adult who kneels, who stares
through a black birdhouse. 
Their hurry does blur some things
on their way into the box: blousing coats
and bobbed hair, hungry auras. And something
without fail also is tucked
in the arm’s right angle: a ball, an orange,
an infant’s skull. They could not
strive more furiously
if it were an infant’s skull.


^^EOP^^


From up here in the leaves’ no-kidding goldishness you’d guess everyone was already in lovely w/ each
others’ cheekbones. Infinity scarves & vanilla coffee, mint tea, warm whatever.
Cozy becoming the coming-at-the-seams, a couplet of verbs mid-bodily inexperience.
That man doing cartwheels is not wearing a shirt
& in any other life I’d want to be the double dare fanfaring a future so totally astonished by his nipples. This is what I mean 
when I say things like catastrophe. Okay, fine. Just one more winter.
Nothing can compare anymore to us anymore.
You big good oak limb. I’m in such cute like w/ you today.  In one diary of my have-beens, my mother
named me Elizabeth after one of her
mothers. You god particle. You matrilineage. I’ve never lived anywhere more
or less this haunted. She named my sister
Elizabeth. You boy genius. You midsummer pinky promise ring. 
There’s this person I know I’m not in love w/ but wears
a dress patterned like a postcard from the state my grandma died in. Imagine waking up
a whole frame away from your bedsheets. Imagine waking up & being anything as yellow
as a dress. You treeline. You root song. What’s an amount of time equal
to you? You kindling ring finger. You unchewable bark
but the headache’s gone. Pardon me, dandelions, have you seen my ghost, six foot nothing, 
has an interstate for a mother but also a mother? Adjust your spurs, honeybunch. This time I’m writing all of us
in pink ink. Let’s huckle-buckle off into the leafiest of all possible genderings. You know how the rain
starts right after you get home & the country song your friend slow-danced w/ her big love to, the one
your mom would play real quiet on her moonbeam highway streak back to Pensacola, is somehow 
already at the chorus & you forget there are words like joy? Or when someone whispers Imagine you never met them
back at the bum, grinning stars? You remember. It’s like that.
Or, is that. The difference between salt & salt. A someday of matching sweaters.
Told you it’s cute. O sweaters. O little knit bundles of vegetable-spit. It’s always sunsetting. 
You golden hour. You soap-soft seasonal. Once my mom found me
sitting in a circle of candles, touching each rosebud & sat w/ me until we were wax musuems of our secrets. Look—
the sky’s a toenail & the moon’s a chesthair. All the shirtless boys have tired themself out, spread-eagled
& slapping the sun off their shoulder blades. My body is a line heading for my body. You crushed-grass
sex smell. You dirt-inverted comma. Someone w/ bleached hair is biking home to restud their denim.
I rediscovered kissing foreheads & it is so yes again. 
Hurry up & sunspot, daylilies! The cops aren’t going to awe themselves to death & we have
a dictionary to laugh across.  The light’s seltzer, bubbles. I said My lord. I thought My god. O moonstruck. O gladracket. Barring gravity, our knees could be forevering each other. 
Barring leather, love is a world I’m praying all my mothers’ joy back toward. 
Elizabeth was my name. I’m writing this on all the trees like a wish. I’m kissing every hem in sight. 
We’re all hysterical & going nowhere together.  C’mon rapture. Let’s go bedazzling. 
Nothing gets futured without its own spitshine
& I’m already not not not not not not miraculous.


^^EOP^^


My husband doesn’t believe me—that the dogs barked nightly
at the spirit in the corner of the kitchen. That I knew of a family 
whose quilts were flung against the wall mid-sleep. Once, I told him
I met Satan in Scandinavia, and she had pigtails and a machete 
sticky with spiderwort. She couldn’t have been older than six
or seven. Her ancestors were Vikings. They boiled firestarters in urine 
and when she approached me, she laughed and called me ugly
three times: stygg stygg stygg. With the same gurgle of the growling 
dogs. With a film over her eyes, bobbled back into her head. Then
she giggled and ran away. Later in the hotel room, I anointed 
my forehead with oil—right thumb tracing the Sign of the Cross,
howling in the name of the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit 
amen.

^^EOP^^


Pollination against the seed to grow canopy
and mark place in shades of green—dry here to reflect
in glassine quartz chips in the off-red dirt where trees tree
as the forest is difference there green-inflected light you nurtured far
where volcanic would give name in poem or misty rain for each better-
suited frond of palm, its trunk, those particular roots. Here, so dry. 
Not to have visited outside the lines you published,
strands of rain where trade winds dry as here easterlies
sap the energy of watering. It’s where we read, as you knew,
where the single tree in a back garden opens out to all
trees momentarily safe, or at least alive, before the chop.
I knew a man who tried to make a suburban backyard into a palm house.  Arecaceae would seem like part of the joke as we measure
tank rungs and how many waterings left, aside from our drinking.
But you see them where farmhouses were built and lost or condemned
for varying reasons—twin date palms (“fate palms”) thick and robust
and the scrabble of rubble and chimney between. But no habitat of like, just addendum.
Living in a shack there was a single great chestnut, not a walnut, out of place. 
A chestnut introduced like a vision of walks, the tessellations
of light collected into prayer, which is where it began for you. And for others.
The mirror of any leaf, the flipside, the reverse, is the growing and falling
enigma—even here among the non-deciduous, dry leaves fall, stroke light.
Whole branches cut off from the supply when sap is difficult to supplement, create.
That vegetation cleared for plantation leaps shadows out of wasted soil, to scaffold.  Gardening. I have known so many gardeners who sought
to build hope out of the clearing, to remake an image of plenty,
of sharing fresh air and taking stale breath. Each quietly “oracular,” if in denial,
each afraid of drought though remembering greened light in their plans,
their reticulation, their watching the weather. To make a calm to spread— there if we bother to look, to listen to the birds moving in and out, some staying. 
You knew back gardens, and you knew the streets made bare, as they
are here—say, of Melbourne, green-gilled city, whose old planted trees become expendable?
Or where I am, huge chunks of bush grubbed out daily with excuses made
or not bothered with—hard to keep track of outside the shade of verandas, offices.
Or among the palms on another island, Réunion, the warning of offensive odor
though a beauty that might make an activist or remaker of demi-lost verse forms. 
What is there in common, across the list of names, of species—growing
conditions, from a part of the world far from where they’re coaxed into a differing
light? What is there in common if we’re not in the place of writing,
and yet we are grown into, welded rhizome by rhizome? You cannot take
the first bird I see today—a yellow-rumped thornbill tuning in, foraging
for the rest of the small flock—any more than I would choose to. It tends the image. 
Each cell an art to tempt and let be to rebuild the soil. But no profiling,
and no conflict. The straggly tenuous but tough contradictions of York gums’
outer reaches supple but brittle closer to a perception of where a heart might rest,
termites holding the strings of a pacemaker, split and opening out to tempt owlet nightjars—
I heard one calling from a broken limb at 10:49 the other night and you were still breathing,
sleeping your breath to the canopy of world? That near and far line of prayer. 
Once, on a very small island, a coral island big enough for a dozen palms
and a colony of land crabs and two humans, the heart of a young palm
was torn out and handed over to the one unfamiliar with its form or taste.
He ate, and the palm was gone. Coconuts were spouting, finding and making
on the atoll, at the outer. Lugging vats of water up and down the valley wall,
I think this, and your line, a late line: “nothing is missing”—a conclusion? 
I wrote of that palmheart for a heart surgeon years ago because all elegies
are entwined, even those of different endocrines. The circulatory system of memorials.
If welcomed under the green light of plantings, the off-spectrum aspiration
against grief, I would have told you of the jam tree—acacia acuminata—
because we are surrounded by them against the odds, and they come back,
thriving on disturbed ground, with trouble around them. Short-lived treeshrubs, 
their rough bark exchanges codes of camouflage with stick insects, as I look
now and can’t see beyond the idea of an insect being there, legs forward like antennae.
Rot here is powder rather than mulch, mostly. Saplings rise to spend time dying.
But some pull through and some will become part of the width of those great jarrahs
felled by ancestors, their essences pushing against climate to make good.
My “you” can’t be yours, but the moon and sun do their own syzygy for us all. 
Language is vegetation. I knew a couple who screened their cedar kit home
from a country pub with a line then another line and another line of native trees.
I have a family who planted tens of thousands of trees to reclaim saltland settlement
hauled out of its deep sleeping, its subroots. I knew a person who filled empty
paddocks with trees deleted for a new suburb, next to the new suburb where
bushland had hung on against the trend, gone late. To have known morning in those places! 
I know you’ll have known this—how thick vegetation, the uprights and bends
of trees on a still morning, can enhance our ability to pick out the between-notes
of birdwork. You wrote of clarity, and translated ornate forms, to be filled with a moment’s
singularity. Respiration. Our greatest breath might be so low or a rasp like a storm
coming in to rejuvenate, to depart with cataclysm. And so we pass with varying
degrees of light, the need for oxygen in the dismantling of carbohydrates. 
Night is eating of oxygen. But more, much more out in bare day. So in our sleep
we join the trees, wrapped in leaves and fronds, held out of consciousness by tendrils.
So we thank god for photosynthesis more than we thank god for the sun as itself?
Here, we have valley, we have curved rim of valley closing out, here we have a kite, too—
a black-shouldered kite that hovers above the infrequent powerlines and self-supply,
and here we have year building on year that is an aside to a past that builds in all directions. 
The inner green of room cracked in the thermal economics of presence
that underwrites reflection in crops and their residues, a shattering of light
in glassy stubble, the march against concrete and lead, against ordnance
and conquest, just roots holding soil so dry it is tempted to lift as a plume
across the district, hungering after the great dust devil that took off a roof
and opened a house down near Picnic Hill Road not long after you passed. 
Interior of wood of fallen branch of loosened fibers and machines striking out
from gravel shoulders to lay great flooded gums on creek beds a trickle of old seasons
green with algae, green with signatures of flow, the bridges where great roots held sway.
What remakes such wasted soil? We try local species and intertwine with olive trees.
And in our suppressed thoughts, palmistry is a lush future of shade and flycatchers
maintaining the relationship between mosquitoes and moisture. No toxins; no anti-growth. 
Our night-lights out here stick out sharp—sore thumb exposure, a failure of perspective
of what is lured to the hot light. Mouth dry. We go away too and bring places
back in descriptions but we won’t let them set root—they grow inside and reach
no light, this bright light that weakens accustoming eyes over time, straining
to pick out moss from lichen, which shields the granite boulders it breaks down.
Gradient cuts underfoot the echidna following termite galleries, interstices 
of plumbed surface-sounds. We go back to the records, the old books, which are young
and would replace those earlier cuckoo sounds, the kickings-out in nests, the breaking
through of secret chambers—all here, too, like birth, but with an unanswered history,
or partially echoed and not fully addressed. This stuff we do with our souls to adjust
the fragments of bush to whose maps? To miss the kangaroo trail though it’s before our eyes,
or the path of an elusive rain, or a lake whose existence you might request, hint at, question? 
Diverse as the air after war is gone but we still can’t breathe so something slips
or grafts. The stain. We rely on such conservancy, on gestures of repair and renewal
that regenerate, to sustain with hands-off learning to let be, to live alongside,
harvest no more than needs be. Such need manifests. Such sleep of passing
is the caveat, is the covenant is the testament of work that rains without a cloud in the sky.
Memorandum of walk of planting of tending: crowbar to break soil or soft cell, either way. 
Mostly, people search for pathways to exemptions
so they can cut down protected trees. Mostly, people
search for ways to get around those thin laws so they
can bring down an old system of life. But here, too, we
want to keep the trees going against the trend of felling,
to give breath to those who stifle the art of growth. 
Pollination with the grain to grow canopy
and mark place in shades of green—dry here to reflect
from fool’s gold but grow gnarled out of off-red dirt we coax with seedlings
if rain sets green-inflected light you nurtured far from here, far where necessities
work outside the poem for each better-suited frond of palm frond, a eucalypt trunk,
any particular roots. Dry wet dry. Making growth to suit a soil’s recovery.


^^EOP^^


A cloud spelled out a rune I couldn’t read
fast enough before it morphed into
another form that changed again, so I
recited something true enough from an ancient
book: “The wind blows to the south and turns
to the north; round and round it goes.” The screen
went blank and then the slip. No matter, I thought,
I’ll drive a truck. “The clouds are codes for reading
the blues,” I said beneath my breath as I
walked out into the rain with my umbrella
and attitude that kept me lean if un-
employed. A hermit thrush reported the dusk
somewhere in the woods on my way home and I
called back like a human bird who’d lost his wings:
“Light’s such a fickle thing but I sing for it.”


^^EOP^^


May your love be firm,
and may your dream of life together
be a river between two shores—
by day bathed in sunlight, and by night
illuminated from within. May the heron
carry news of you to the heavens, and the salmon bring
the sea’s blue grace. May your twin thoughts
spiral upward like leafy vines,
like fiddle strings in the wind,
and be as noble as the Douglas fir.
May you never find yourselves back to back
without love pulling you around
into each other's arms.
 


^^EOP^^


Ain’t of no kind word in what they’ve been telling you.
Heard they call you “Song Bird” these days. Part your beak
and collar the long part of neck with sapphires.
Girl, when are you going to see
you aren’t ever goin’ be one of them. Don’t mean a thing
they pour prosecco in porcelain dishes.
Let you lap leftovers from their palms. Do they pinch
your sides to regurgitate the slug of white cake, candied
roses, the baked breasts of hummingbirds?
Merchant the fetid smell of it into crystal?
I heard their trade ain’t much different
from what is done here at home. Only difference
is they prefer their Black rare and chilled over ice,
fine caviars knifed from the ovaries of the South.
Maybe at night you prowl the Turkish rugs.
Dressed in Schiffli lace, an ankle ribbon tagging
you rare specimen. Do they call you beautiful
for one of your kind? Pocket your songs
and measure your skin for couture.
And for who do you think it will make
statement when worn to the Grand Palais Garnier?


^^EOP^^


by going you have to be and
seek it
out
 
said the starlet in the shared volitional language of space and time
explanation thrashes round the thing but doesn’t touch it
the thing we know then as /style of thrashing/ or
ripples in the pond sufficient
in itself, she licks her tongue, it could be desired as a figure—
 
faithless as a class of examples
i found new objects swimming blankly in a common
sense, by going alone to listen
                                                to them
                         in the night
            light of their pool—
 
                                     to begin with life or stars
                                                              the spring as source or
                                                      season
                                         when to start—i love what you
                        said about the birds
                        as distance is required for attraction
                        & force keeps its distinctions
                        in a tall hull
                        called law—
                        clever in the style of depth in a painting
                        sumptuous for use, and briefly this
                        of fancy, pity, and devising,
                        wherefore as it is at the right door
                        make it language or rejoice
                        this is how you touch me in my other ghosts
                        & short of the occasion
                        just a frequent mist of atoms
                        all touching in the arms
                        like an error in the wish
 


^^EOP^^


The fog
shades
a smooth
stone bust
 
then slips
into rain
 
my mind is
well suited
onyx
shining edges
 
the reflection
itself
 
*
 
Traces of
mist
 
on an old
window
 
*
 
The best part
is grinding
the ink down
endlessly, filling
my brush
 
grey morning
 
I first feel
the mind
as reflex
 
* 
Bright and clear
 
The end of Evergreen road
is closed and crumbling away
 
Bill McNeil’s red poppy
resolves to be eaten alive
exposed to a shaft of air
 
between the flower and its flat glass-
masterful
 
*
 
The black bleeds out
from his beak
 
in long tears, ink onto
sopping head feathers
slicked back
 
black stiches on yellow
powdered eyes aglow
 
white speckles
          thrown onto autumn
                       breast feathers
 
a white field
                   below
 


^^EOP^^






Was she of spirit race, or was she one
Of earth's least earthly daughters, one to whom
A gift of loveliness and soul is given,
Only to make them wretched?

There is an antique gem, on which her brow
Retains its graven beauty even now.
Her hair is braided, but one curl behind
Floats as enamour'd of the summer wind;
The rest is simple. Is she not too fair
Even to think of maiden's sweetest care?
The mouth and brow are contrasts. One so fraught
With pride, the melancholy pride of thought
Conscious of power, and yet forced to know
How little way such power as that can go;
Regretting, while too proud of the fine mind,
Which raises but to part it from its kind:
But the sweet mouth had nothing of all this;
It was a mouth the rose had lean'd to kiss
For her young sister, telling, now though mute,
How soft an echo it was to the lute.
The one spoke genius, in its high revealing;
The other smiled a woman's gentle feeling.
It was a lovely face: the Greek outline
Flowing, yet delicate and feminine;
The glorious lightning of the kindled eye,
Raised, as it communed with its native sky.
A lovely face the spirit's fitting shrine;
The one almost, the other quite divine.




My hand is on the lyre which never more
With its sweet commerce, like a bosom friend,
Will share the deeper thoughts which I could trust
Only to music and to solitude.
It is the very grove, the olive grove,
Where first I laid my laurel crown aside,
And bathed my fever'd brow in the cold stream;
As if that I could wash away the fire
Which from that moment kindled in my heart.
I well remember how I flung myself,
Like a young goddess, on a purple cloud
Of light and odour — the rich violets
Were so ethereal in bloom and breath:
And I — I felt immortal, for my brain
Was drunk and mad with its first draught of fame.
'Tis strange there was one only cypress tree,
And then, as now, I lay beneath its shade.
The night had seen me pace my lonely room,
Clasping the lyre I had no heart to wake,
Impatient for the day: yet its first dawn
Came cold as death; for every pulse sank down,
Until the very presence of my hope
Became to me a fear.    The sun rose up;
I stood alone 'mid thousands: but I felt
Mine inspiration; and, as the last sweep
Of my song died away amid the hills,
My heart reverb'rated the shout which bore
To the blue mountains and the distant heaven Erinna's name, and on my bended knee,
Olympus, I received thy laurel crown.
 
   And twice new birth of violets have sprung,
Since they were first my pillow, since I sought
In the deep silence of the olive grove
The dreamy happiness which solitude
Brings to the soul o'erfill'd with its delight:
For I was like some young and sudden heir
Of a rich palace heap'd with gems and gold,
Whose pleasure doubles as he sums his wealth
And forms a thousand plans of festival;
Such were my myriad visions of delight.
The lute, which hitherto in Delphian shades
Had been my twilight's solitary joy,
Would henceforth be a sweet and breathing bond
Between me and my kind.    Orphan unloved,
I had been lonely from my childhood's hour,
Childhood whose very happiness is love:
But that was over now; my lyre would be
My own heart's true interpreter, and those
To whom my song was dear, would they not bless
The hand that waken'd it? I should be loved
For the so gentle sake of those soft chords
Which mingled others' feelings with mine own.
 
    Vow'd I that song to meek and gentle thoughts,
To tales that told of sorrow and of love,
To all our nature's finest touches, all
That wakens sympathy: and I should be
Alone no longer; every wind that bore,
And every lip that breathed one strain of mine,
Henceforth partake in all my joy and grief.
Oh! glorious is the gifted poet's lot,
And touching more than glorious: 'tis to be
Companion of the heart's least earthly hour;
The voice of love and sadness, calling forth
Tears from their silent fountain: 'tis to have
Share in all nature's loveliness; giving flowers
A life as sweet, more lasting than their own;
And catching from green wood and lofty pine
Language mysterious as musical;
Making the thoughts, which else had only been
Like colours on the morning's earliest hour,
Immortal, and worth immortality;
Yielding the hero that eternal name
For which he fought; making the patriot's deed
A stirring record for long after-time;
Cherishing tender thoughts, which else had pass'd
Away like tears; and saving the loved dead
From death's worst part — its deep forgetfulness.
 
From the first moment when a falling leaf,
Or opening bud, or streak of rose-touch'd sky,
Waken'd in me the flush and flow of song,
I gave my soul entire unto the gift
I deem'd mine own, direct from heaven; it was
The hope, the bliss, the energy of life;
I had no hope that dwelt not with my lyre,
No bliss whose being grew not from my lyre,
No energy undevoted to my lyre.
It was my other self that had a power;
Mine, but o'er which I had not a control.
At times it was not with me, and I felt
A wonder how it ever had been mine:
And then a word, a look of loveliness,
A tone of music, call'd it into life;
A song came gushing, like the natural tears,
To check whose current does not rest with us.
 
    Had I lived ever in the savage woods,
Or in some distant island, which the sea
With wind and wave guards in deep loneliness;
Had my eye never on the beauty dwelt
Of human face, and my ear never drank
The music of a human voice; I feel
My spirit would have pour'd itself in song,
Have learn'd a language from the rustling leaves,
The singing of the birds, and of the tide.
Perchance, then, happy had I never known
Another thought could be attach'd to song
Than of its own delight.    Oh! let me pause
Over this earlier period, when my heart
Mingled its being with its pleasures, fill'd
With rich enthusiasm, which once flung
Its purple colouring o'er all things of earth,
And without which our utmost power of thought
But sharpens arrows that will drink our blood.
Like woman's soothing influence o'er man
Enthusiasm is upon the mind;
Softening and beautifying that which is
Too harsh and sullen in itself.    How much
I loved the painter's glorious art, which forms
A world like, but more beautiful than, this;
Just catching nature in her happiest mood!
How drank I in fine poetry, which makes
The hearing passionate, fill'd with memories
Which steal from out the past like rays from clouds!
And then the sweet songs of my native vale,
Whose sweetness and whose softness call'd to mind
The perfume of the flowers, the purity
Of the blue sky; oh, how they stirr'd my soul! —
Amid the many golden gifts which heaven
Has left, like portions of its light, on earth
None hath such influence as music hath.
The painter's hues stand visible before us
In power and beauty; we can trace the thoughts
Which are the workings of the poet's mind:
But music is a mystery, and viewless
Even when present, and is less man's act,
And less within his order; for the hand
That can call forth the tones, yet cannot tell
Whither they go, or if they live or die,
When floated once beyond his feeble ear;
And then, as if it were an unreal thing,
The wind will sweep from the neglected strings
As rich a swell as ever minstrel drew.
 
    A poet's word, a painter's touch, will reach
The innermost recesses of the heart,
Making the pulses throb in unison
With joy or grief, which we can analyse;
There is the cause for pleasure and for pain:
But music moves us, and we know not why;
We feel the tears, but cannot trace their source.
Is it the language of some other state,
Born of its memory?    For what can wake
The soul's strong instinct of another world,
Like music?    Well with sadness doth it suit
To hear the melancholy sounds decay,
And think (for thoughts are life's great human links,
And mingle with our feelings) even so
Will the heart's wildest pulses sink to rest.
 
    How have I loved, when the red evening fill'd
Our temple with its glory, first, to gaze
On the strange contrast of the crimson air,
Lighted as if with passion, and flung back,
From silver vase and tripod rich with gems,
To the pale statues round, where human life
Was not, but beauty was, which seem'd to have
Apart existence from humanity:
Then, to go forth where the tall waving pines
Seem'd as behind them roll'd a golden sea
Immortal and eternal; and the boughs,
That darkly swept between me and its light,
Were fitting emblems of the worldly cares
That are the boundary between us and heaven;
Meanwhile, the wind, a wilful messenger
Lingering amid the flowers on his way,
At intervals swept past in melody,
The lutes and voices of the choral hymn
Contending with the rose-breath on his wing!
Perhaps it is these pleasures' chiefest charm,
They are so indefinable, so vague.
From earliest childhood all too well aware
Of the uncertain nature of our joys,
It is delicious to enjoy, yet know
No after-consequence will be to weep.
Pride misers with enjoyment, when we have
Delight in things that are but of the mind:
But half humility when we partake
Pleasures that are half wants, the spirit pines
And struggles in its fetters, and disdains
The low base clay to which it is allied.
But here our rapture raises us: we feel
What glorious power is given to man, and find
Our nature's nobleness and attributes,
Whose heaven is intellect; and we are proud
To think how we can love those things of earth
Which are least earthly; and the soul grows pure
In this high communing, and more divine.
 
    This time of dreaming happiness pass'd by,
Another spirit was within my heart;
I drank the maddening cup of praise, which grew
Henceforth the fountain of my life; I lived
Only in others' breath; a word, a look,
Were of all influence on my destiny:
If praise they spoke, 'twas sunlight to my soul;
Or censure, it was like the scorpion's sting.
 
And yet a darker lesson was to learn —
The hollowness of each: that praise, which is
But base exchange of flattery; that blame,
Given by cautious coldness, which still deems
'Tis safest to depress; that mockery,
Flinging shafts but to show its own keen aim;
That carelessness, whose very censure's chance;
And, worst of all, the earthly judgment pass'd
By minds whose native clay is unredeem'd
By aught of heaven, whose every thought falls foul
Plague-spot on beauty which they cannot feel,
Tainting all that it touches with itself.
O dream of fame, what hast thou been to me
But the destroyer of life's calm content!
I feel so more than ever, that thy sway
Is weaken'd over me. Once I could find
A deep and dangerous delight in thee;
But that is gone.    I am too much awake.
Light has burst o'er me, but not morning's light;
'Tis such light as will burst upon the tomb,
When all but judgment's over.    Can it be,
That these fine impulses, these lofty thoughts,
Burning with their own beauty, are but given
To make me the low slave of vanity,
Heartless and humbled?     O my own sweet power,
Surely thy songs are made for more than this!
What a worst waste of feeling and of life
Have been the imprints of my roll of time,
Too much, too long!    To what use have I turn'd
The golden gifts in which I pride myself?
They are profaned; with their pure ore I made
A temple resting only on the breath
Of heedless worshippers.    Alas! that ever
Praise should have been what it has been to me —
The opiate of my heart.    Yet I have dream'd
Of things which cannot be; the bright, the pure,
That all of which the heart may only dream;
And I have mused upon my gift of song,
And deeply felt its beauty, and disdain'd
The pettiness of praise to which at times
My soul has bow'd; and I have scorn'd myself
For that my cheek could burn, my pulses beat
At idle words.    And yet it is in vain
For the full heart to press back every throb
Wholly upon itself.    Ay, fair as are
The visions of a poet's solitude,
There must be something more for happiness;
They seek communion.    It had seem'd to me
A miser's selfishness, had I not sought
To share with others those impassion'd thoughts,
Like light, or hope, or love, in their effects.
When I have watch'd the stars write on the sky
In characters of light, have seen the moon
Come like veiled priestess from the east,
While, like a hymn, the wind swell'd on mine ear,
Telling soft tidings of eve's thousand flowers,
Has it not been the transport of my lute
To find its best delight in sympathy?
Alas! the idols which our hopes set up,
They are Chaldean ones, half gold, half clay;
We trust we are deceived, we hope, we fear,
Alike without foundation; day by day
Some new illusion is destroyed, and life
Gets cold and colder on towards its close.
Just like the years which make it, some are check'd
By sudden blights in spring; some are dried up
By fiery summers; others waste away
In calm monotony of quiet skies,
And peradventure these may be the best:
They know no hurricanes, no floods that sweep
As a God's vengeance were upon each wave;
But then they have no ruby fruits, no flowers
Shining in purple, and no lighted mines
Of gold and diamond.    Which is the best, —
Beauty and glory, in a southern clime,
Mingled with thunder, tempest; or the calm
Of skies that scarcely change, which, at the least,
If much of shine they have not, have no storms?
I know not: but I know fair earth or sky
Are self-consuming in their loveliness,
And the too radiant sun and fertile soil
In their luxuriance run themselves to waste,
And the green valley and the silver stream
Become a sandy desert.    O! the mind,
Too vivid in its lighted energies,
May read its fate in sunny Araby.
How lives its beauty in each Eastern tale,
Its growth of spices, and its groves of balm!
They are exhausted; and what is it now?
A wild and burning wilderness.    Alas!
For such similitude. Too much this is
The fate of this world's loveliest and best.
 
    Is there not a far people, who possess
Mysterious oracles of olden time,
Who say that this earth labours with a curse,
That it is fallen from its first estate,
And is now but the shade of what it was?
I do believe the tale.    I feel its truth
In my vain aspirations, in the dreams
That are revealings of another world,
More pure, more perfect than our weary one,
Where day is darkness to the starry soul.
 
    O heart of mine! my once sweet paradise
Of love and hope! how changed thou art to me!
I cannot count thy changes: thou hast lost
Interest in the once idols of thy being;
They have departed, even as if wings
Had borne away their morning; they have left
Weariness, turning pleasure into pain,
And too sure knowledge of their hollowness.
 
    And that too is gone from me; that which was
My solitude's delight!    I can no more
Make real existence of a shadowy world.
Time was, the poet's song, the ancient tale,
Were to me fountains of deep happiness,
For they grew visible in my lonely hours,
As things in which I had a deed and part;
Their actual presence had not been more true:
But these are bubbling sparkles, that are found
But at the spring's first source.    Ah! years may bring
The mind to its perfection, but no more
Will those young visions live in their own light;
Life's troubles stir life's waters all too much,
Passions chase fancies, and though still we dream,
The colouring is from reality.
 
    Farewell, my lyre! thou hast not been to me
All I once hoped.    What is the gift of mind,
But as a barrier to so much that makes
Our life endurable, — companionship,
Mingling affection, calm and gentle peace,
Till the vex'd spirit seals with discontent
A league of sorrow and of vanity,
Built on a future which will never be!
 
    And yet I would resign the praise that now
Makes my cheek crimson, and my pulses beat,
Could I but deem that when my hand is cold,
And my lip passionless, my songs would be
Number'd mid the young poet's first delights;
Read by the dark-eyed maiden in an hour
Of moonlight, till her cheek shone with its tears;
And murmur'd by the lover when his suit
Calls upon poetry to breathe of love.
I do not hope a sunshine burst of fame,
My lyre asks but a wreath of fragile flowers.
I have told passionate tales of breaking hearts,
Of young cheeks fading even before the rose;
My songs have been the mournful history
Of woman's tenderness and woman's tears;
I have touch'd but the spirit's gentlest chords, —
Surely the fittest for my maiden hand; —
And in their truth my immortality.
 
    Thou lovely and lone star, whose silver light,
Like music o'er the waters, steals along
The soften'd atmosphere; pale star, to thee
I dedicate the lyre, whose influence
I would have sink upon the heart like thine.
 
    In such an hour as this, the bosom turns
Back to its early feelings; man forgets
His stern ambition and his worldly cares,
And woman loathes the petty vanities
That mar her nature's beauty; like the dew,
Shedding its sweetness o'er the sleeping flowers
Till all their morning freshness is revived,
Kindly affections, sad but yet sweet thoughts,
Melt the cold eyes, long, long unused to weep.
O lute of mine, that I shall wake no more!
Such tearful music, linger on thy strings,
Consecrate unto sorrow and to love;
Thy truth, thy tenderness, be all thy fame!
 


^^EOP^^







Orphan in my first years, I early learnt
To make my heart suffice itself, and seek
Support and sympathy in its own depths.
 




Well, read my cheek, and watch my eye, —
    Too strictly school'd are they
One secret of my soul to show,
    One hidden thought betray.
 
I never knew the time my heart
    Look'd freely from my brow;
It once was check'd by timidness,
     'Tis taught by caution now.
 
I live among the cold, the false,
    And I must seem like them;
And such I am, for I am false
   As those I most condemn.
 
I teach my lip its sweetest smile,
    My tongue its softest tone;
I borrow others' likeness, till
    Almost I lose my own.
 
I pass through flattery's gilded sieve,
    Whatever I would say;
In social life, all, like the blind,
    Must learn to feel their way.
 
I check my thoughts like curbed steeds
    That struggle with the rein;
I bid my feelings sleep, like wrecks
    In the unfathom'd main.
 
I hear them speak of love, the deep.
    The true, and mock the name;
Mock at all high and early truth,
    And I too do the same.
 
I hear them tell some touching tale,
    I swallow down the tear;
I hear them name some generous deed,
    And I have learnt to sneer.
 
I hear the spiritual, the kind,
    The pure, but named in mirth;
Till all of good, ay, even hope,
    Seems exiled from our earth.
 
And one fear, withering ridicule,
    Is all that I can dread;
A sword hung by a single hair
    For ever o'er the head.
 
We bow to a most servile faith,
    In a most servile fear;
While none among us dares to say
    What none will choose to hear.
 
And if we dream of loftier thoughts,
    In weakness they are gone;
And indolence and vanity
    Rivet our fetters on.
 
Surely I was not born for this!
    I feel a loftier mood
Of generous impulse, high resolve,
    Steal o'er my solitude!
 
I gaze upon the thousand stars
    That fill the midnight sky;
And wish, so passionately wish,
    A light like theirs on high.
 
I have such eagerness of hope
    To benefit my kind;
And feel as if immortal power
    Were given to my mind.
 
I think on that eternal fame,
    The sun of earthly gloom.
Which makes the gloriousness of death,
    The future of the tomb —
 
That earthly future, the faint sign
    Of a more heavenly one;
— A step, a word, a voice, a look, —
    Alas! my dream is done!
 
And earth, and earth's debasing stain,
    Again is on my soul;
And I am but a nameless part
    Of a most worthless whole.
 
Why write I this? because my heart
    Towards the future springs,
That future where it loves to soar
    On more than eagle wings.
 
The present, it is but a speck
    In that eternal time,
In which my lost hopes find a home,
    My spirit knows its clime.
 
Oh! not myself, — for what am I? —
    The worthless and the weak,
Whose every thought of self should raise
    A blush to burn my cheek.
 
But song has touch’d my lips with fire.
    And made my heart a shrine;
For what, although alloy'd, debased,
    Is in itself divine.
 
I am myself but a vile link
    Amid life's weary chain;
But I have spoken hallow'd words,
    O do not say in vain!
 
My first, my last, my only wish,
    Say will my charmed chords
Wake to the morning light of fame,
    And breathe again my words?
 
Will the young maiden, when her tears
    Alone in moonlight shine —
Tears for the absent and the loved —
    Murmur some song of mine?
 
Will the pale youth by his dim lamp,
    Himself a dying flame,
From many an antique scroll beside,
    Choose that which bears my name?
 
Let music make less terrible
    The silence of the dead;
I care not, so my spirit last
    Long after life has fled.
 


^^EOP^^


                    
                    
                    In the grassy space between the wings of the elementary school and the trailers housing the fifth grade’s overflow classrooms, girls flip their hair in imitation of Cindy Crawford, sing Iko Iko. None of you know what it means or where the song comes from.

It’s honor-roll season, a time of outings to TCBY and Outback Steakhouse. Your mother warns you against filling up on bread, but it’s hard to resist the little brown loaves brought warm to the table with soft butter – a luxury that cannot be imagined at home, with its always-refrigerated margarine and Pepperidge Farm sandwich loaves.

Everyone knows what’s popular but nobody knows how to act. At ten, you lack any context. The world swims before you, and it constantly stings. Its favorite barb: “everybody knows that.”

Beyond the grassy space of girls is more grass, a quarter-mile loop of track, a church with a painfully white spire, a fence, and a neighborhood maybe a little less nice than yours, crammed between the school and busy Great Neck Road. The fence is of chain link, instead of wooden slats. That’s how you know about the niceness – that and the something hard, like a grain of sand, you feel in your mother’s voice, when she takes you to the school’s Spring Fling, where you win another goldfish. They always die, but you’re getting better. Now, it takes a while.

Loblollies shiver
In May heat. The world’s ending.
The world’s a mirage.
 
                

^^EOP^^


Holed up behind the whitewashed wooden slats
slung like ribs above the greed-begotten candy plaster-
papered noworlaters, holed up and far
from witches in the woods’ evergreen fringe,
horse chestnut brews, parents’ crow commotion or
robin squabble haranguing the fat
wide open always out there, I read for hours
on the red shag rug hearing market cry
and grave slope, catching the men through ages
of flint and full haggle in my 2 by 6 chamber,
heart bent on Blue Beard, the dead wives’
skeletons cantilevered to a door hook. Later,
hunkering down with amputee hangers,
catalogs, the bottle stash and jug wines,
Jim Beams too hiding with air, no air,
plus a stolen Joy of Sex circa 1974,
its pell mell positions and crouching
women, with the POV going scrap and rattle,
some theater of being a little less bright.
Thought I saw one night the million paired eyes
swinging upward, the hand me down generations
spelunking in holes, fine lineaments braved
by way of cream curd and lust and dictatorial DNA,
felt through overhead squib and carpet warp,
some full squat before the slate rock hearths,
more buried in strata of granites, igneous,
limestone, ash, the mind’s eye leveled
to one rectangle of light around the animal
who wants to know that it knows and say so,
lumbering down the long path, vanishing.
 


^^EOP^^


My grammar, ‘tis of thee. Sweet
simultaneity when water came down
the hillside in a pipe and a local
Cineplex of Oedipus
armegeddoned us into a past
no future could agree on. Nation
 
was another thing to notice,
how shirts and skins, ironies
and their opposite eyed
each other before the big game.
Sneak up, affections. Be covert
in the open. If I sing, I believe
 
in wire taps bootless on be-
citizened faces, that phat, that
sick: help. We’ve given up
the romance of weather,
although I once felt so much
for a man who wore oven mitts
 
in the snow. Land where my fathers
pilgrimmed all we can depend
on, this freedom majestic in
the jest that will what—blah, op-ed
and blather us over, excelsis
deo zapping rust from our names.
 
The word “to” is understood.
And it’s thy placey memories
I love, darling tongue of my tongue,
unique as any finger print
in groove and grubbiness. Always
someone becomes the subject
 
re-collecting these minutes
meandering like so many sheep
that run before our steps,
and the red or blue X’s on their hinds
say who owns them as they go
upslope, in rain, over the stubby grass.


^^EOP^^


Even now, after all
these years, my father, 89,
still uncertain when I call
whose voice it is—Ann's or mine—
 
saying Hi, Dad, and from where,
the next town or a different state,
still pausing in that powdered air,
this little silence as he waits
 
at the nursery door, discerning tone
and pitch, listening hard to know
which way to bend, which crib, the one
against the wall or by the window,
 
still concentrating, trying to keep
us separate, our needs, do what she would, letting my mother sleep,
this moment's blank as he's about
 
to choose between us, make some shift
in the soft-lit dark, decide whose cry
it is tonight, which girl to lift,
to whisper or hum, which lullaby.
 


^^EOP^^


You whom I could not save, Listen to me.
 
Can we agree Kevlar
backpacks shouldn’t be needed
 
for children walking to school?
Those same children
 
also shouldn’t require a suit
of armor when standing
 
on their front lawns, or snipers
to watch their backs
 
as they eat at McDonalds.
They shouldn’t have to stop
 
to consider the speed
of a bullet or how it might
 
reshape their bodies. But
one winter, back in Detroit,
 
I had one student
who opened a door and died.
 
It was the front
door of his house, but
 
it could have been any door,
and the bullet could have written
 
any name. The shooter
was thirteen years old
 
and was aiming
at someone else. But
 
a bullet doesn’t care
about “aim,” it doesn’t
 
distinguish between
the innocent and the innocent,
 
and how was the bullet
supposed to know this
 
child would open the door
at the exact wrong moment
 
because his friend
was outside and screaming
 
for help. Did I say
I had “one” student who
 
opened a door and died?
That’s wrong.
 
There were many.
The classroom of grief
 
had far more seats
than the classroom for math
 
though every student
in the classroom for math
 
could count the names
of the dead.
 
A kid opens a door. The bullet
couldn’t possibly know,
 
nor could the gun, because
“guns don’t kill people,” they don’t
 
have minds to decide
such things, they don’t choose
 
or have a conscience,
and when a man doesn’t
 
have a conscience, we call him
a psychopath. This is how
 
we know what type of assault rifle
a man can be,
 
and how we discover
the hell that thrums inside
 
each of them. Today,
there’s another
 
shooting with dead
kids everywhere. It was a school,
 
a movie theater, a parking lot.
The world
 
is full of doors.
And you, whom I cannot save,
 
you may open a door
and enter
 
a meadow or a eulogy.
And if the latter, you will be
 
mourned, then buried
in rhetoric.
 
There will be
monuments of legislation,
 
little flowers made
from red tape.
  What should we do? we’ll ask
again. The earth will close
 
like a door above you. What should we do?
 
And that click you hear?
That’s just our voices,
 
the deadbolt of discourse
sliding into place.
 


^^EOP^^


                                                    As we 
                                        embrace          resist 
                          the future       the present      the past 
             we work          we struggle          we begin          we fail
​
to understand       to find        to unbraid        to accept        to question
 
              the grief          the grief           the grief          the grief 
                          we shift         we wield           we bury​ 
                                    into light               as ash                                                         across our faces 
 


^^EOP^^


Oh! yet one smile, tho' dark may lower 
Around thee clouds of woe and ill, 
Let me yet feel that I have power, 
Mid Fate's bleak storms, to soothe thee still.  
Tho' sadness be upon thy brow, 
Yet let it turn, dear love, to me, 
I cannot bear that thou should'st know 
Sorrow I do not share with thee.  
True love's wreath is of mountain flowers, 
They stand the storm and brave the blast, 
And blossom on, so love like ours 
Is sweetest when all else is past.  
Too well I know what storms have frowned, 
And now frown on life's troubled tide; 
Still darker let them gather round, 
They have no power on hearts so tried.  
Then say not that you may not bear, 
To shadow spirit light as mine; 
I shall not shrink, or fear to share 
The darkest fate if it be thine!
 
 Oh! say not love was never made 
For heart so light as mine; 
Must love then seek the cypress shade, 
Rear but a gloomy shrine.  
Oh! say not, that for me more meet 
The revelry of youth; 
Or that my wild heart cannot beat 
With deep devoted truth.  
Tho' mirth may many changes ring, 
'Tis but an outward show, 
Even upon the fond dove's wing 
Will varying colours glow.  
Light smiles upon my lip may gleam 
And sparkle o'er my brow, 
'Tis but the glisten of the stream 
That hides the gold below.  
'Tis love that gilds the mirthful hour, 
That lights the smile for me, 
Those smiles would instant lose their power, 
Did they not glance on thee!
 
 Oh! come to my slumber 
Sweet dreams of my love, 
I have hung the charmed wreath 
My soft pillow above.  
The roses are linked 
In a chain pure and white; 
And the rose-leaves are wet 
With the dew drops of night.  
The moon was on high 
As I gather'd each flower; 
The dew that then falls 
Has a magical power.  
The Spirit of slumber 
Those roses has blest; 
And sweet are the visions 
They'll bring to my rest.  
Be their spell on my soul, 
So they let me but see 
His dark eyes flash in love 
And his smile glance on me.  
Let sleep bring the image 
Of him far away; 
'Tis worth all the tears 
I shed for him by day.  
I have hung the charmed wreath 
My soft pillow above; 
Then come to my slumber, 
Sweet dreams of my love!
 

How vain to cast my love away 
On bosom false as thine; 
The floweret's bloom, that springs in May, 
Would be a safer shrine  
To build my fondest hopes upon, 
Tho' fragile it may be. 
That flower's smile is not sooner gone 
Than love that trusts to thee.  
Love asks a calm, a gentle home, 
Or else its life is o'er; 
If once you let its pinions roam, 
Oh! then 'tis love no more.  
The aspin's changefuI shade can be 
No shelter for the dove; 
And hearts as varying as that tree, 
Are sure no place for love.  
Hope linger'd long and anxiously, 
O'er failing faith, but now 
I give thee back each heartless sigh, 
Give back each broken vow.  
I'll trust the stay of tulip dyes, 
The calm of yon wild sea, 
The sunshine of the April skies, 
But never more to thee! 
 
 Oh! would that love had power to raise 
A little isle for us alone, 
With fairy flowers, and sunny rays, 
The blue sea wave its guardian zone.  
No other step should ever press 
This hidden Eden of the heart, 
And we would share its loveliness, 
From every other thing apart.  
The rose and violet should weep, 
Whene'er our leafy couch was laid, 
The lark should wake our morning sleep, 
The bulbul sing our serenade.  
And we would watch the starry hours, 
And call the moon to hear our vows, 
And we would cull the sweetest flowers, 
And twine fresh chaplets for our brows. 
 

I thought thus of the flowers, the moon, 
This fairy isle for you and me; 
And then I thought how very soon 
How very tired we should be.
 
                   Matrimonial Creed. 
HE must be rich whom I could love, 
His fortune clear must be, 
Whether in land or in the funds, 
'Tis all the same to me.  
He must be old whom I could love, 
Then he'll not plague me long; 
In sooth 'twill he a pleasant sight,
To see him borne along  
To where the croaking ravens lurk, 
And where the earth worms dwell: 
A widow's hood will suit my face,
And black becomes me well.  
And he must make a settlement, 
I'll have no man without; 
And when he writes his testament, 
He must not leave me out.  
Oh! such a man as this would suit 
Each wish I here express; 
If he should say, — Will you have me? 
I'll very soon say — Yes! ⁠
 


^^EOP^^


Drippingly by grips, this humus and perlite nearly sings
          through my fingers
circling the ditch lily’s heat-sunk side, anthers frayed, fallen.
          Sift. Learn your footprint.
If occasion, rise to. Another bloom, opposite, grows blood
          orange its splayed
open hand, in shade, still opulent, curls tender, having the time
          of its life.
Let’s get the basics, the survey says. Sight says, turning,
          the cat’s sprawled
besides the baby rat it found and above the scalp thin lawn
          through the window
the children are watching. Where do you live? What’s under your
          roof? What brushes
up, by now, is summer burnt grass in scorch and stubble with
          the rat who will not
move. Lent pallor. Light gray lumpen weight. How many rooms
          do you own? Keep
digging, mom, get to china, they call out, when I work the plant
          free, its dirt
tumbling thick with rooted tendrils reaching. Are you a gadget
          geek, a regular
joe, or technophone? Plus crumbs, wedged in pine cones,
          tunnels,
earthworm ruts. There’s nothing I can’t touch here if I want
          to or disturb,
teeming sum of what we’re built on, soil damps beside dry
          pockets, clay
at the spade end gone that unctuous apricot yellow. Refine
          your results.
The cat’s long patient, knows what her hurt can do.
          She waits, ginger
lines of her fur circling. What’s on your plate/
          in your medicine
cabinet/jewelry box/garage? I look closer. The infant rodent
          is trembling.
Another child, not mine, labors deep to find the shine,
          sorting pebbles
through her fingers. Make progress. Take action.
          Witness
not permitted distance. When the prey finally moves,
          jumps a few inches, the cat
closes in, takes the injured flaccid thing into his jaws
          for the kill
and carries it almost like a kitten across the lawn.
          My hand crushes
the dark stamens and the littlest child
          upstairs
at the rat’s last squeal, begins to scream best,
          best, this is the best day of my life, and I have to walk back inside.
 


^^EOP^^


                            I gather her head up in my sweater 
                                         and we crouch here    
               some dried ketchup where her lip turns down 
                            a light crust of dirt on one eyebrow       
  
                  the concrete stained and worn           
                            surprise rain splattered in the gap 
                    between here and the parking lot 
                                  our socks are wet       
 
                                         our feet itch 
                        then her cough started    
it’s going to be ok we can hide her for a minute  
                         her damp head soaks the wool 
        the corners reek of urine 
                      we do a sober trick 
                                   my body now a cradle     
 
         her hair touches my wrist
  
she trembles down to her cavity 
                        a cough we love 
the careless future emerges from it  
                        shaking like a star bracelet with elastic 
                                                 in this other country 
                        the contradictory music of our tears 
 
                                      what do wandering souls find 
                         to live in here 
                                        what warm skin 
 
                             in this stairwell 
                                     the air is cold 
     
                            the earth moves 
                   one bug survives 
 
             beyond their law
                        
                          three of us hunched 
      up like a heaps of wet wool 
             in the leaky crook of a stair 
 
you heard about us somewhere
 
   


^^EOP^^


: sorry this not that poem 
raised block flower & plant bed.
  peonies, gardenias, poinsettias
plus a yellow orb slow-rising
  over an endless golden scape— 
darting through uncluttered space
  cardinals, thrashes, sparrows
blue air fragrant with lavender
  washing brain matter into virtue. 
if only i could pastel language
  onto a canvas of thistledown
yes, deceit comes to mind—
  .a lie. traitor. turncoat. recreant 
backstabber to truth i would be
  gut-shanked a thousand times.
this is not that poem nor am i
  that poet to hold your hand 
.or. erase knot-hole screams
  blood on a cement floor .or.
suicide is another form of escape
  no-no-no—but i do promise 
the evil-ugly humans inflict
  to each other to their [selves]
how time is malice is death
  enflaming pupils with spite 
inextinguishable if ever set free—
  forgive state poet #289-128
for not scribbling illusions
  of trickery as if timeless hell 
could be captured by stanzas
  alliteration or slant rhyme—


^^EOP^^


: .or. this malus thing never to be confused with justice 
nothing symbolic. OK. dark is dark—
   cage is cage. hunted & hunter are both 
in the literal. make believe & what ifs
   do not exist: a lie. nothing cryptic here. 
OK. rape is rape. prey must pray. no
   minute in the future safe from quiet 
insertions of a shank in masking tape.
   OK. nothing here infinite: only time 
is constant to the merciful & merciless—
   there are no allegories to hide behind.  he slit his wrists means he slit his fuckin wrist  
OK? there is a cell with one window
   just before day. dawn’s early demise 
magnifies a dull metal toilet. the cool
   water cooling two can sodas. each 
wall a slab of soft gray cinderblock, no
   posters featuring eroticized women 
with an exclusive in black tail. OK.
   the wall that slits the light does not 
reveal nothing new, ever. the exposé
   the changing same: always a holding. 
one window offers a gateway. my face
   pressed against the window & time 
rules this empire. OK. the mind held
   hostage by time. mind & body 
conjoined twins. the other wall holds
   a frame. the frame holds a metal door 
to contain utter disbelief. of the visible:
   walls are gray not like summer 
but darker—yes. there is darkness. OK—


^^EOP^^


In one, I married the first man who asked and
I endured. Took as little space as I could,
opened my hands and he’d place his faults, 
lined up like eucharists into my palms until
overflowing. Maybe if he’d found God sooner,
the baby would have lived. Maybe I wouldn’t 
have found myself alone between blue light and
linoleum passing something too small to survive.
Maybe if I loved him enough, she’d have wanted 
to live. Maybe I would have too. Maybe I’d have played
the hymns his God demanded on the church piano.
He’d stand in the pulpit singing, his tenor swinging high, 
then low again and I could remember God myself.
Maybe I would have stayed for that. Maybe when
he called years later, I could have returned. Maybe 
I would have loved his children and traded them for the dead.
Maybe I would wear white on Sundays, pull on my gloves,
hold the women after they raised up during service, wipe 
their sweat, and hold them fast as they cry hallelujah.
Hallelujah. Maybe I would be the woman swooning.
Maybe his God would move through me just once like that, 
maybe God would fill me so tight with spirit, I’d split like stars.


^^EOP^^


See, now You are finally offstage where we can talk. 
I can’t see through the drapes and pulleys, it’s too dark
for me to turn them into moss and oaks, too dark 
for me to blink wooden risers into a bayou beautiful
in near collapse that once ran a monstrous river into the Gulf, 
a scorched stew powerful only in sufficient stillness.
No monstrance, no milagro, no brown scapular scraps, 
not even a woven palm frond. Just You and me.
Just me, actually, standing with hip cocked and three 
fingers resting on my chin. Not even a naked
household goddess above my bed where I ache 
and ache. I hate the Greeks, those bastards, for figuring
You into some kind of flesh—though that cure 
is just a start. And the Romans tried, but flesh
must do more than die: it has to live. And here’s what’s next. 
Me talking to You in Your most present absence,
without even an apophatic clue. I imagine 
Your holy knees gathered to Your chin and Your arms
bound twice around your legs. I imagine Your heart 
in a corner beating while You listen to my footfalls
circle from the best damn hiding place of all.


^^EOP^^


The arterial beauty of  Florida is alive in all of its obesity.
                                                                     And the sequin-sellers are doing good business
east of  Granada Boulevard. 
— 
The sad-eyed woman’s ultrasound image—all dirty blur of gray and ambiguous genitalia—sits
lovingly electric on your newsfeed. 
                               And the neighbor with his disorder you invented is going out tonight. 
— 
The starlet will eat a sandwich and Kevin will push the joke
too far—the vomit, the bobby pins—
                                                                                                     and that’s OK tonight. 
— 
And your mother, with her rough hands, her quiet advice, has walked
along the sidewalk knowing how cold a wooden house can feel, 
                                               wondering whose soft, strange lips she could kiss.


^^EOP^^


In the last segment, I tried sufficiency. They moved
my femur and a single woman braiding her hair fell 
from me. I tried to warn you, this desert editorializes.
A scorpion lifts its tail, braids more active than braiding, 
it hisses. I, of all people, get it. In the mornings we wake
to the kind of life we want until we turn our heads east. 
The night fills without us but I warned you, I was full
already. A banana inside me blasted open a door, 
my thoughts at the threshold of such a door blank. Love
transacts, a figure in the distance crowded with window. 
An enzyme eats plastic, but which kind? Synthetic polymer
or the ways you tried to keep me? This is the last segment. 
My mother 
draws a circle around time and this is an intercourse. My mentor
draws a circle around time and this is an intercourse. I shake 
out of bed. Humans continue the first line of their suicide letter.
An enzyme invents us, we invent enzymes. The plastic we make, 
we must eat it. Draw a circle around time. We designed us
in simple utterances. The political term graft means political 
corruption. The grifter never had an I. In the burn unit, they
place tilapia skins over human scar tissue, the killed form on top 
of afflicted form, also a graft. Also a graft of afflicted form,
the killed form on top, they place tilapia skins over human scar 
tissue. In the burn unit, I never had a grifter, corruption
means political, graft the political term. In simple utterances 
we designed us. Time draws a circle, we must eat it. We make
the plastic, enzymes invent we, us invents an enzyme to continue 
the first line of a suicide letter. Out of bed I shake with intercourse.
Time draws a circle around my mentor. Time draws a circle around 
my mother. 
This is the last segment. The ways you tried to keep me? Synthetic
polymer, but which kind? An enzyme eats plastic, crowded window, 
a figure in the distance transacts love. At the threshold of such
a blank door, my thoughts open a door. A banana blasted inside me. 
Already I was full but I warned you, the night fills without us.
We turn our heads until we want the kind of life in the mornings 
we wake to. I get, of all people, it. It hisses. A scorpion, more active
than braiding, braids its tail, lifts the editorialized desert. You tried 
to warn me from me. Her hair fell braiding a single woman. My femur
was moved. They tried sufficiency in the last segment.


^^EOP^^


Take this glass, quoting me darkly:
Cassandra, coalmine canary. 
I want to sing the confusing flesh,
The confounding joyful leash, 
Flesh that stretches planet-wide
If a planet were human-sized. 
These pulsing thermal layers we wear,
Not the myriad places they tear. 
The sweet and acrid cabbage head,
Its labyrinths and where they lead, 
Not how cleanly one can divide,
With one strike, body from the mind. 
You here with me, reflected too,
The four of us now become two 
Making joy with cry, weep laughter,
Naked amid the slaughter.


^^EOP^^


All of this magic is death:
                                            your vicious little organ singing like a drunk uncle, 
                                                                             the beautiful, white-headed children 
                                                        that passed through your body, 
the cats you fed till plump as pimples and languid. 
Who let the rot in? And what if you never return—full and free— 
                                     to that alleyway in Morocco where old men watched
                                     as he entered you? 
Where are your daughters? 
             The holiday pies filled blood-red with wild rhubarb. 
And tonight, on each continent, women are teaching other women to be vessels.
Women are singing sweetly to get what they want by force. 
What will you remember of this place
                                                                                     The naked limbs in the orchard, 
                                                                      the crust left along the empty bowl, 
                                 your own hands on your stomach in the browned-out night. 
A sense of abandon placed among the linen, sharp-lined and never dirty. 
On gray gadgets you’re kept humming. 
Stories about rivers are stories about girls who want things, you taught them.
                       And the machines that fix other machines are not glamorous technologies. 
In the yellow kitchen, a silent anxiety attack. 
                                 Breathe deep and drop nothing off your tray, my sweet.


^^EOP^^


Yes of forsythia against the limitless ivy, a nude posed in a garden
against the silver maple pinwheeling its children into a gown around her 
chime of the cliff-hanging falcon’s screeching talons against a rabbit,
wheezing soldier in a field, gunpowder tainting the cake in his pocket 
jet fuel over the Pacific, waking to a hula in a zephyr,
the bride deplaning onto an island chain, bowing to leis of plumeria 
the mallow of nurses’ shoes, their news, the black sedan
of a telephone spreading it like a virus and, after, the scent of a cedar closet 
white gloves of a mare, in heat, pawing clover, the sail of a Spitfire
cresting a hill in San Francisco, angelic against sunset 
rosin on the cello’s catgut, a honeycombed queen calling home
her lovers, a Basquiat above the head of an ascetic, chaos over order 
magenta in the thorns, shy to the shears, making the blue jays bluer,
a someone on the bed’s chenille edge, composing an oratorio of medicines 
the bartender in his ice pick scars, twisting zest over his creation, wheel
and butane of his Zippo kissing as the citrus, at last, expresses


^^EOP^^


I’m going to look at my watch
though I don’t really care what time it is.
Just slightly curious.
It’s funny when you see
it’s much earlier or later
than you thought,
but even funnier when it’s exactly
the time you thought. 
But at my back etc. Etc. being
“Desarts of vast Eternity.”  
I give up.
It’s eleven eleven. 
What ever happens
at eleven eleven?
Vast eternity!


^^EOP^^


The feeling of time derives from heat,
an agitation of molecules,
oracles from the friction of air
through fissures and the leaves of oaks.
A few gnats stitch the lake’s edge
where a fox turns off the gravel road
to nose through rhododendron
as children crawl through winter coats
to reach a closet’s dark recess.
Dawdling at the edge of sleep
you work through problems already past
though unresolved, a notional path,
a crease through heads of wild blue phlox
that waking, you can’t follow.


^^EOP^^


Who is the barber
with the straight razor
at the neck of the Mad King,
the physician of the Don
who must hold his broken feet
and cloudy wisps of hair
from between his legs
while he knows nothing?
The possibilities
are numerous—what jobs
we get ourselves into.
I feel like at this moment
I could be anyone in the world
because I could be
a hundred objects
of torture—whatever
the mind can come up with
has been done,

^^EOP^^


We gathered in a field southwest of town,
several hundred hauling coolers
and folding chairs along a gravel road
dry in August, two ruts of soft dust
that soaked into our clothes
and rose in plumes behind us. 
By noon we could discern their massive coils
emerging from a bale of cloud,
scales scattering crescent dapples
through walnut fronds,
the light polarized, each leaf tip in focus. 
As their bodies blotted out the sun,
the forest faded to silverpoint.
A current of cool air
extended from the bottomlands
an intimation of October,
and the bowl of sky deepened
its celestial archaeology. 
Their tails, like banners of a vast army,
swept past Orion and his retinue
to sighs and scattered applause,
the faint wail of a child crying.
In half an hour they had passed on
in search of deep waters. 
Before our company dispersed,
dust whirling in the wind,
we planned to meet again in seven years
for the next known migration.
Sunlight flashed on windshields 
and caught along the riverbank
a cloudy, keeled scale
about the size of a dinner plate,
cool as blanc de Chine
in the heat of the afternoon.


^^EOP^^


Stricken, seen, satellite at the edge of a party,
being fifteen, with the black bulbs someone’s planted
in the mother’s lamps to give glow-in-the-dark
ambiance to hideous kisses, and the ruffles
are all wrong on the saved-for shirt, and the curtains,
suave in the murk, seem to laugh. The liquidy
fin of feeling is destination-less, twisting
like paper wrapped ’round a pinkie
in blind date anticipation. Toy for
the psyche, phrase to swim through the mind
like an offense, at 3 AM.
Half-helix, as if waiting for, Oh God, don’t
say it,

^^EOP^^





After “M. Degas Teaches Art & Science at Durfee Intermediate School, Detroit, 1942” by Philip Levine



The nun stood by the chalkboard and
wrote the word America, underlined
it twice and asked: What do you see here?
Elizabeth shot up her hand and said: It is home. My grandmother came
here so that we could live.

^^EOP^^


IX 
If it became impossible to touch and be touched, to see
and be seen, to love and trade ecstasy for risk where risk
is ecstasy, to be hidden in plain view, to be perfectly lost
which means lost to the world, lying side-by-side arms linked
in a bond so intricate it could never unfold or break—
If it became crucial to live out of sight, to be housebound,
to walk a beaten path in the garden, to sit at the window
blurred by rainfall, to sit barred and blocked, books
set aside that would never be read, rolling news of flash flood
and fire, angels treading the updraft, a chaos of voices—
If dreams should give the rest of it: the path in the garden
going underground, flood and fire as God’s only gift
the house holding its secrets, that pattern of locked rooms,
what lies outside (voices: angels) crowding the perimeter—   You could make an installation of it (and why not?) on a bare floor in a bare hall under neon strip: what seems thrown down what seems heap after heap of discards but is not: hair and shoes and spectacles and clothes (teeth also saved) repetition such that it blurs images folding into one another abstract, just shape being evident except this shoe except this lens catching the light which is error or artifact, something like iron litter carefully thrown down by Joseph Beuys but more the bright grotesque of Bacon’s Fragment, of Dubuffet’s L’Arbre de fluides, what’s torn what’s wrenched apart ... Heap after heap, grainy footage of a cattle train snowscape smokestacks, scratch orchestra, what more do you need ... dogs ... what more do you need of this: the train all but silent in snow, footage of carcasses thrown down naked, you could make a montage of it: quick hands, a low sun deepening to yellow by trees and towers, the way shadows are cast, the light you need, the shapes you need a sureness of touch to bring it all together, perhaps a light box fragments and fractures backlit and all of a piece not least the new dead: they lie in a scatter, your focal point they make sudden broken angels in the snow. Fool steps up. His art is palimpsest. He’ll tag your work: spray-paint a ditzy orange bug-eyed frog at the door of the charnel house color the snowscape blue, redact the chimneys, configure the train with silver-and-black chevrons: a snake drawn up to the iron gate, his artwork: Evil is as evil does. The frog spits bile. The snake is hollow-eyed. He adds speech bubbles to the cold still air: “Hosanna Hosanna Ho—sa—nna”:   Children in a pool of light, a pool of dust; the way images deceive, the way time shunts and stalls, a test of what gathers and corrupts, what will not stay as words unspeak, as children are lost to light and dust.


^^EOP^^





Based on the Chinese myth of Chang’e



Saturday. The good bread set out for the dogs to eat. The rabbit hurt on milk & tall willows 
that I’ve bound to storefront. The headlines say the waves are coming in today. The waves 
& spoiled fruit & all the lives I’ve wasted playing archer. At least this side of the kingdom 
will still love me. I pull the weeds. I pull the tides & storm the shores. The rabbit drops its mouth 
into a crater. The waves overtake the red city with spears in hand. June & the headlines 
announce the end of the world. I am terrible at playing heroine. I’ve done all I can: plucked 
the apples, swept the chimney. Washed the rabbit, saved the tortoise from its slow drowning.


^^EOP^^


the city has sex with megan 
 when the air shaped like the inverse of Megan
accepts Megan as she moves. 
    If Megan is a system of exchange
that floats her labor and her point 
  of view in vapor/liquid soup
passàging through her valves 
and if her later corpse, collapsing,
 updates its inversion of the air 
 even more than did the air displace
when she grew from brown-eyed baby 
into strong laboring woman in blue jeans
  and heathered wool, 
and if the air and earth draw from Megan’s corpse
  all the energy and minerals 
 she pulled from her surrounds
to build her nails and bones and teeth— 
 if the exchange doesn’t stop
but only ceases to support her consciousness, 
 and if her consciousness was corpse anyway until
it found relation, 
 then what demises
is the potential for the human social, 
and another sociality
 will unbutton my whole shoe 
and tongue hang limp,
  what sex is for but stops me 
 at the barrier, a pixelated
glamour reef though very 
   close and simple, smell a
  flurry, parapluie paraphrase, 
 energy funneled through a shape.
You filtered chemical 
 information in such a pointy
fulgent scrambled way, in the city 
    and outside the city in the vernal zones
   and aqua zones the city shaped, flow-charted, realist 
 trucked. The city caved under
     when the zones rose and lapped around the pilings, 
 manged foundations green,
      rotted the teeth out of the mouth of the city, 
 harbor high-rises
dark and blown. The city is extremely fragile tender 
 human mesh and will be mush
    and mushrooms grow in, there is room in, ruins 
roam the rearticulated harm.    speech by a flaneur—no a flaneuse— 
On my face, D. folliculorum are relaxing
 like Tenniel caterpillars leaning on mushroom stalks
  against the bases of my hair follicles
 which provide shelter and shade.
These critters are peculiar to
   the ecology of the human face
     which I take around the city
     open, close   it is my means
    of feeding   I rely on
  changing its shape
in response to others’ faces and postures
  to reduce my risk and increase my safety
   and my likelihood of being
    included in the group’s collective
      life. I smile a lot and hope it
     don’t look fake.


^^EOP^^


Grown from conventional purpose
in order to rename over there
as “across state line,” in terms of survival,
Dante calls X a way to maintain courage.
& from the end of this dispatch I would’ve been a good wife 
hemming distances, a little, every day,
without one wholly thing the matter.
O moon! Whatever victim of etiquette I turn
out to be, valued as customer of or friend to,
when recategorized for this present time, 
my skin & skeleton are of as much
consequence as the grass that never grew under my feet.
In the skirmishes of things, is my ally
equal in measure to the I of me?
Or are we paired solely by image? 
Ran short of noun-like qualities,
both of our names X-faced and
rent of whatever postwar commonalities
fooled us into individualistic days:
my good looks head for memory. 
Memory, I’ve been wreckless with survivalist fame.
What other efforts are there?
The nose gone, then the jaw.
As the monetary equivalent for a decade,
fitting to join myself judge or 
faction, law hath nitpicked
the grass of the first field
for the alien light of common sense.
They’ll see your heart evicted.
I see your heart evicted.


^^EOP^^


The hastily assembled angel thinks 
He must be more like God than people are 
Especially because he like God can’t 
Choose to be less like God      he tilts his chair   
Back his brown metal folding      chair on its 
Back legs and lifts      first his right leg and then 
His left      onto the wolf-sized rock he’s using 
As his desk      while the great flood floods the plains   
The valleys and the forests far below him 
And the mountains      eventually his mountain 
Eventually his right      leg on the rock 
His left crossed over at the ankles Wanting    To be like God he thinks must be the wrong way 
To be like God      who doesn’t want to be 
Like anything      but I don’t want 
To be like God 

^^EOP^^


The hastily assembled angel wandered 
The desert hidden in      the pillar of 
Cloud in the day      and in the pillar of 
Fire in the night      and as he wandered he 
Asked himself whether      sometimes as he wandered 
He asked himself      whether he really could 
Be said to wander      since he after all 
Could see through time      which was even better for 
Seeing where he was going than seeing      through space   
In the day he was a darkness in the cloud 
Like rain      and in the night he was a darkness 
In the fire      like God      and day and night he won- 
dered why he had been given gifts even God 
Hadn’t been given or no even God      had- 
n’t given Themselves or no no even      God did- 
n’t have and who he wondered ever could 
Give God a gift      except he knew he was 
Allowed to see through time because he was 
Not God      and could be wrong      and saw through time 
With many-chambered eyes      all things that might be 
And God would see      only the one thing that would    Is that the one gift      he wondered      That free people 
Give God uncertainty

^^EOP^^


Humans being made      in the image not of God 
Directly but of the angel      who the day God made 
Human beings most resembled God      who changes 
The way light changes as the sun in the morning   
Becomes the sun in the afternoon      in the evening 
And in the night      and to resemble God 
Is to resemble light      the way a bed 
Resembles sunlight      when sunlight is spread   
Across it      to resemble God is to 
Remain the bed as the light slides away 
The hastily assembled angel when 
Humans appeared on Earth      at first the an-   
gel didn’t see      any resemblance he 
Saw his reflection in a pond and marked 
Neither the similarities nor differ- 
ences between himself and humans      their   
Voices climbed a canyon to his tent 
In the clouds and though they laughed and shouted 
With voices like the voices of the other 
Angels he never once      hoped he was be-   
ing called      If God had made me for them he 
Shouted down hours      after the laughing pack 
Had left the canyon      I might watch them 
Instead      God merely hadn’t called him back   
After the other angels shoved him from 
Heaven      instead the angel watched the sun until he 
Began to think it was the eye of God 
Even though he felt      sure God had   
No eyes      no body      and no voice      with which 
To call him back      instead he watched a forest 
At the edge of the canyon he      watched it until 
A different pack of humans cut the shortest   
Fully grown tree down then he watched the tree as 
The humans dragged it to their camp he watched the 
Tree as the humans broke the tree apart he 
Watched as the humans carved the parts of the tree in-   
to gods with bodies and      glowering faces 
He watched the humans as they bowed to the gods 
He watched them      like a small child watching dancers 
Forgetting his own body      bowing as they bow


^^EOP^^


We have almost nothing left,
no ground in common. 
At best, a brand
or maybe a miniseries. 
No campfire to gather around.
The big stories—peckish news 
gets told in tweets,
gets old so quickly. 
In place of one place
a billion tiny customized versions 
appear targeted specifically
to your tastes. 
You see only what you want to see.
Maybe you always did.


^^EOP^^


Like the time I dreamt about a loon family,
just some common loons—not metaphors
in any way, just real loons in a lake swimming
near each other so it was clear they were a set,
preferring each other’s company in the cold
still lake with its depth of reflected pines.
The curve of their black heads and sleek
necks, black and white stripes then checks
on their folded wings, floating so low
atop their reflections they almost seem
inside them. Their wails like wolves, their
calls like an echo without origin, their
calls like an echo of lake, or what makes lake
lake. How nice to think the male and female
loons cannot be told apart by their plumage
and that they build a nest and sit on eggs
together. One of their calls is called “tremolo.”


^^EOP^^


First the people had to invent ladders. No one had ever seen a ladder. Once they had ladders they invented walls to climb over. Soon they realized it took two ladders to climb a wall. One to climb up one side—one to climb down the other. People would ascend one side of the wall, descend the other side of the wall, and then walk away, leaving the ladders behind. That is why there are so many ladders in the world. The ladders are picked up and stored in an enormous warehouse. Scientists have proposed attaching all the ladders, one on top of the other, creating an elevator into outer space. Some people want to destroy all the ladders. Others want to destroy the walls. Others say that someday we are going to need all the ladders in the world.


^^EOP^^


Sometimes I wake up in the night
with a terrible headache, my mouth
blackened; a ghost looking for valuables
in the debris, I turn on a battery-powered
light, clipped to a book, I write things down
in the spirit of Marcus Aurelius
who said the finest bottle of wine
is just grape juice, passing through the liver,
no matter the beauty of a frothing glass,
or a night of big Truth-seeking, never recalled;
the importance of putting something bittersweet
into our mouths, turning it around and around
on our tongues, attaching to it, our missions,
our purpose—in the end
we are all just filters, not even
as beautiful as the plainest bird
or as zen as the meanest deer tick,
nothing is given over to, nothing new is lit.
So often it is this. I wake up, urgent, fatalistic,
with the taste of nectar on my boughs.
I replay on a loop my one stoic consistency,
my middle of the night vow,
that I will start tomorrow
the essential dismantling
of what I live.


^^EOP^^


I thought very hard and thought of nothing.
—Jesse Ball, Census 
In one segment of the landscape, a hyena drags her clitoris
across the plains, a dust perfuming up. Cicadas pulse the segment, 
a femur filled with rain. It is a lush grassland within which
the greens have sprouted through the exposed joints of animals. 
This seems to be a metaphor for growth and resistance. A
single singed dollar rolls through the wind. I read 
a book that imagines, among other things, a world without
trees. I wrote a book that imagines, among other things, a world 
without men. The book splayed open on my parents’ dresser,
an early part of the book. People do this when they no longer 
want to see information. I no longer want to see information.
In another segment, a series of weasel oil candles, such is 
the cure-all in this aspect of land. Mostly the candles are not
lit. At night the moon makes the earth shine like bottle 
flies, a glimmer here and there where a lachrymose flame
continues on. A god peeks past the clit of the hyena 
disapprovingly, as evidenced by their glare and nod. But I
want a god to glare and nod. I want a god to do anything at all 
with my debts. In another segment, my grandmother
lives and she watches a pack of lionesses feasting inside 
the rib cage of a zebra. At first, she tells us, she believes
the zebra to be sleeping on her side, but the lions move 
her skin under the membrane of bones.
It’s like I always say: The evenings wait for the kind of 
death we get and we are so very fond of the evenings.
In another segment, the last one, we know it to be last 
because a single woman is braiding her hair in a desert.
We have been here before. An animal raises her leg.


^^EOP^^


I thought I had lost myself,
but I see it’s you that’s gone missing. 
O always elsewhere. 
What yacht or spaceship have you hijacked? 
In what seedy hideaway do you scoff
at the sameness of all cities, all ideas? 
Once you made me loquacious
because what’s the point in saying anything
if there isn’t the possibility of being misunderstood. 
Now I am nearly speechless with boredom.
I will wait Madame Butterfly-style for your return.


^^EOP^^


Driving too close to the curb. Admit
to being poor. Stash pumpkin seeds
for my kid. Hustle the Christian way.
Starch my shirt collars. Value a strong
smudge. Give pigeons saintly names.
Cream both my feet. Recycle. Sign off
emails with warm regards. Double tap
#vegan. Heart statuses which start with I’m delighted to announce. Mornings.
I struggle to decide what mood to wear.
Evenings. I lie beside my aftershaves
imagining the sea. I should really have
it by now. A Dyson. Panasonic bread
maker. A photo by the piano of a slum
tour. I need the spirit of a full-moon party
rather than the charisma of a shed. They
honk when I slow. I swear with my eyes.
Think of real blood. Sunday comes. Dad
asks what’s the plan. I knit him the only
winning scratch card. I leave a candle on
for destiny. Once. I had an acceptance
speech written. Soon. A staircase will rise
to defeat us all. The roads have moved.
When I get in I’ll sit in the shower & say
it’s a bath. Double tap an ultrasound pic.
Sip railroad water. Notification. ZANC1
started following you. Check my speed.
Slap on another Barry Manilow playlist.
Keep my grays in the dashboard. Wonder.
What the guy who put a gun to my little
brother’s head is doing for New Year’s.
Wonder. If my neighbor made it through.
Up ahead. A badger’s hit beside a boulder.
Its glare a wooden egg I slow for.


^^EOP^^


Long after I stopped participating 
Those images pursued me 
I found myself turning from them 
Even in the small light before dawn 
To meet the face of my own body 
Still taut and strong, almost too 
Strong a house for so much shame 
Not mine alone but also yours 
And my brother’s, lots of people’s, 
I know it was irrational, for whom I saw 
Myself responsible and to whom 
I wished to remain hospitable. 
We had all been pursuing our own 
Disintegration for so long by then 
That by the time the other side 
Began to raise a more coherent 
Complaint against us we devolved 
With such ease and swiftness it seemed 
To alarm even our enemies. By then 
Many of us had succumbed to quivering 
Idiocy while others drew vitality from new 
Careers as public scolds. Behind these 
Middle-management professors were at pains 
To display their faultless views lest they too 
Find censure, infamy, unemployment and death 
At the hands of an enraged public 
Individuals in such pain and torment 
And such confusion hardly anyone dared 
Ask more of them than that they not shoot 
And in fact many of us willed them to shoot 
And some of us were the shooters 
And shoot we did, and got us square 
In the heart and in the face, which anyway 
We had been preparing these long years 
For bullets and explosions and whatever 
Else. A vast unpaid army 
Of self-destructors, false comrades, impotent 
Brainiacs who wished to appear to be kind 
Everything we did for our government 
And the corporations that served it we did for free 
In exchange for the privilege of watching one 
Another break down. Sometimes we were the ones 
Doing the breaking. We would comfort one another 
Afterward, congratulating each other on the fortitude 
It took to display such vulnerability. The demonstration 
Of an infirmity followed by a self-justificatory recuperation 
Of our own means and our own ends, in short, of ourselves 
And our respect for ourselves—this amounted to the dominant 
Rhetoric of the age, which some called sharing, which partook 
Of modes of oratory and of polemic, of intimate 
Journals and of statements from on high issued by public 
Figures, whom at one time or another we all mistook ourselves for. 
Anyway it wasn’t working. None of it was working. 
Not our ostentation and not the uses we put our suffering 
To, the guilt- and schadenfreude-based attention 
We extracted from our friends and followers, and even the passing 
Sensation of true sincerity, of actual truth, quickly emulsified 
Into the great and the terrible metastasizing whole. 
To the point it began to seem wisest to publish only 
Within the confines of our own flesh, but our interiors 
Had their biometrics too, and were functions not only 
Of stardust, the universe as we now were prone to addressing 
The godhead, but also of every mean and median of the selfsame 
Vicious culture that drove us to retreat into the jail of our own bones 
And the cramped confines of our swollen veins and ducts in the first place 
Our skin was the same wall they talked about on the news 
And our hearts were the bombs whose threat never withdrew 
Images could drop from above like the pendulum in “The Pit 
And the Pendulum” or killer drones to shatter the face of our lover 
Into contemporaneous pasts, futures, celebrities, and other 
Lovers all of whom our attention paid equally in confusion 
And longing, and a fleeting sense like passing ghosts 
Of a barely-remarked-upon catastrophe that was over 
Both before and after it was too late. We were ancient 
Creatures, built for love and war. Everything said so 
And we could not face how abstract it was all becoming 
Because it was also all the opposite of abstract, it was 
Our flesh, our mother’s bloodied forehead 
On the floor of Penn Station, and wherever we hid 
Our face, amid a crowd of stars for example as Yeats 
Once put it, and for stars insert celebrities 
Or astrology here, your choice, and even when 
We closed our eyes, all this was all we looked at 
Every day all day. It was all we could see. 
We were lost in a language of images. 
It was growing difficult to speak. Yet talk 
Was everywhere. Some of us still sought 
To dominate one another intellectually 
Others physically; still others psychically or some 
Of all of the above, everything seeming to congeal 
Into bad versions of sports by other means 
And sports by that time was the only metaphor 
Left that could acceptably be applied to anything. 
The images gave us no rest yet failed over 
And over despite the immensity 
Of their realism to describe the world as we really 
Knew it, and worse, as it knew us


^^EOP^^


you could mistake grief for a diamond
the way it shines when cut into, like fish
eyes in a boat’s drain. The eyes fly
into death seeing everything: the cloud
of alcohol in Sagittarius B2, the ten
billion-trillion-trillion carat diamond
in Centaurus, the soul swimming through
air with its tie hanging silver beneath it
like a kite string. But Philomela’s tongue
does not die. Shards of memory fall through
her, finding muscle at the shore where blood
meets vein, cutting the string that’s kept
her sanity tied to the root. In its place,
mute swans lie dormant beneath frozen
lakes of scar. Tereus says she cannot say
what happened. She says silence writhes
inside the walls of truth, like a fox thrashing
hot in a hound’s jaws, or a riled fly, frantic
to escape the hand that carries it to safety.


^^EOP^^


I was someone in the distance
who never got closer. 
I lived in the past, so the present
was my future. 
When I shook hands, I dissolved
into a mirror 
where I tended
my reflection 
of features so faint
my mother 
strained to see them.
I was the rind, the zest, 
a heart marooned
in the guest of a friend 
in the back row
of a twelve-step room. 
I confessed to the priest
in his box, suppressed 
the north, south, east, and west
desires that pull men 
over the moon.
I crooned the self-help 
tune that every glance
is a gift, every second 
chance a first,
the suicide fence 
on the tall bridge
a positive thing 
for those crawling the walls.


^^EOP^^





After Mohamad Zatari



Ooze, oud. Ease hearts whose eyes sink low.
Be hourglass in the pillaged O—.
Be wells none see. Unstoppered tears,
O oud, we gather in your bowl. 
O ladle of ores, scoop ink here
now seeping from the foreigner,
be sighs, O oud, and cloven aches
in the dark of millions of ears. 
Be gift for famished wails and wakes
to lacks and flares and tented stakes,
the lonely outer sounds of sleeves
eating wind and drowning faces. 
The oud’s a lovely ark that leaks
with tales and bromides we can’t keep,
and miles of ghosts before their sleep.
And miles of ghosts beneath our sleep.


^^EOP^^


1 
Light falls from her voice
and I try to catch it as the last
light of the day fades ...
But there is no form to touch,
no pain to trace. 
2 
Are dreams
taking their seats
on the night train? 
3 
She recites a list of wishes
to keep him from dying. 
4 
The truth lands like a kiss—
sometimes like a mosquito,
sometimes like a lantern. 
5 
Your coffee-colored skin
awakens me to the world. 
6 
We have only one minute
and I love you. 
7 
All children are poets
until they quit the habit
of reaching for butterflies
that are not there. 
8 
The moment you thought you lost me,
you saw me clearly
with all of my flowers,
even the dried ones. 
9 
If you pronounce all letters
and vowels at once,
you would hear their names
falling drop by drop
with the rain. 
10 
We carved
our ancestral trees into boats.
The boats sailed into harbors
that looked safe from afar. 
11 
Trees talk to each other
like old friends
and don’t like to be interrupted.
They follow anyone who
cuts one of them,
turning that person
into a lonely cut branch.
Is this why in Arabic
we say “cut of a tree”
when we mean
“having no one”? 
12 
The way roots hide
under trees—
there are secrets,
faces, and wind
behind the colors
in Rothko’s untitled canvases. 
13 
Will the sea forget its waves,
as caves forgot us? 
14 
Back when there was no language
they walked until sunset
carrying red leaves
like words to remember. 
15 
It’s true that pain
is like air, available
everywhere,
but we each feel
our pain hurts the most. 
16 
So many of them died
under stars
that don’t know their names. 
17 
If she just survived with me. 
18 
A flame dims in the fireplace,
a day slips quietly away from the calendar,
and Fairuz sings, “They say love kills time,
and they also say time kills love.” 
19 
The street vendor offers tourists
necklaces with divided hearts,
seashells to murmur the sea’s secrets in your ear,
squishy balls to make you feel better,
maps of homelands you fold
in your pocket as you go on your way. 
20 
I am haunted by the melody
of a forgotten song
sung while two hands
tied my shoelaces into a ribbon
and waved me goodbye to school. 
21 
If I could photocopy
the moment we met
I would find it full
of all the days and nights. 
22 
It won’t forget the faraway child,
that city whose door stayed open
for passersby, tourists, and invaders. 
23 
The moon is going to the other
side of the world
to call my loved ones. 
24 
The seasons change
colors and you come and go.
What color is your departure?


^^EOP^^


When people say
“Time is running out”
I see an alarm clock
with a bell on top
and with arms and legs
dashing out the door
of a room in which
time has stopped
reminding the human race
that we are running out. 
I carry this idea
to a corner of the room
and set it down
gently.
I don’t want
to wake it up.
Then I tiptoe away.
 


^^EOP^^


When I say But mother, Black or not Black,
Of course you are polyethnic,

^^EOP^^


The pines are
stately 
still 
reflecting
upon themselves 
without knowing it 
in eternity 
upside down. 
 


^^EOP^^


1 
One dies. Eschrichtius
           robustus, gray,
           of the sole living genus, of  baleen, 
of the family
Eschrichtiidae, slate
           gray or darker,
           and notable, now, for 
gray-white patterned scars
left by parasites, two
           blowholes “which can
           create a distinctive 
V-shaped
blow ... in calm wind conditions”;
           and falls, as
           it falls, as through blue breeze; 
and swirls, light
as a tissue, drifting down—
           down, through
           the cool layers, the sifted light 
of sea-wind-
warmed currents, loose galaxy
           of whirling flecks, slow-
           motion, in a haze; 
in whose first stage, falling,
now, the “mobile
           scavengers” drift alongside,
           sleeper sharks 
and thin hagfish
—or, as the book calls them,
           “enrichment opportunists”—
           come to feed 
at the soft flanks and fat,
for weeks, as the
           bones grow exposed, all
           of them, spinning down ...     
2 
We might hear rain before the rain. Sirens.
Hail before it cracked the hundred panes. 
Or lay our heads on the desks and listen
to our blood whispering in the woodgrain. 
In 1963 the warnings are
piecemeal, part of the good day’s play or work. 
We might need to cover our heads. Hold hands
in the hallway. Look away from the blast. 
— 
July 29, 2013: a sperm whale found deceased on the beach of
a small island off the coast of the Netherlands had dozens of
plastics bags, nine meters of rope, two long pieces of garden hose,
a couple of flower pots, and a plastic spray canister in its stomach. 
— 
I’m watching a hummingbird, bare thumb-
top—gray-green blur—dip to my feeder bulb 
and dart off, over the barn, to a wire. A. colubrus. Little serpent. I hear 
the burr of wings; and already it’s back—
dips again, hovers there; sips now; attacks 
the tube of red sugar-water until
bubbles aerate, like an aneurism. 
— 
June 28, 2016: an 80-foot blue whale (Balaenoptera musculus)
caught in 200 feet of fishnet, crab lines, channel buoys off the
coast of Orange County: lines cut through its mouth, wrapped
its fins. “Blue whales are typically thought to be more offshore
animals, and crabbing gear is thought to be more inshore, but
obviously the spatial overlap between those two is coming into
conflict,” explained Leigh Torres. “The fact that we see this
entanglement isn’t terribly surprising, though it is unique.” 
— 
Weeks I couldn’t sleep. Years I couldn’t waken.
I found a note I’d written one ill night.  pines shredded      ice snow
                                                 such wind
        rips the night 
I run my tongue above my tooth, aching.
And know it’s coming back once more. The warning 
—right cuspid, gum swollen, puffed as a pea—
two days before the viral fire, the toxic sea ...  
— 
March 23, 2016: 13 sperm whales (Physeter macrocephalus)
beached themselves off the shallow coast at Tönning, Germany:
“We may never know the exact cause,” wrote Danny Groves.
Stomach contents: 43 feet of fishing net, 100 plastic bags,
golf balls, sweatpants, greenhouse glass sheeting, cigarette
butts, hypodermic needles, a plastic car engine cover, a bucket ...  
— 
Cottonwood seeds. Gnats’ wings in the sunlight.
Whirl of dust motes in the haze of still light. 
If it were so simple as to drift down.
If it were so easy as getting up again. 
Little bug, little serpent. The air slows
with summer thickness when you fly away. 
And the feeder bobs there like a red buoy
on the green waters of a distant bay.    
3 
A drawer full of notes. Years trying to— 
             all night sweating
                                                    sheets so heavy      burning—
             600 lymph nodes       
                                               I know where you live— 
She’s eighteen months old. Up, up?  I’m afraid— 
             One of my titers read 2560
             “Active.” “Acute.” “You really are sick.” 
so weak—to pick her up. I pick her up— 
             Aggregate allergen: grasses, wheat, milk,
             acidics, trees (?): multiple exclusion ...  
Temp 103.7. Good night, moon— 
             After a sunny walk with her wagon—
             next day—      panting
                                                            testicles so swollen
                                                 freezing 
system flushing itself—into the waves— 
             Aggregate infection: Liver. Kidney.
             Heart sac. Spleen. Gut. Urinary tract. Neck ...  
good night, night bird—far off—through the high pines—    
4 
In the second stage,
at 4,000 feet
            (or 122
           “atmospheres”), 
weight suspends;
a heavy thing in one world
             floats like willow seed in a breeze
             in this,  a moving vast through that darkness, silent ... 
             they don’t need
             much else—oxygen, nor light— 
the frilled shark
and fang-tooth, the spider crab,
             the vampire squid, who strip the dead
             down now 
beyond bones
to the merest blueprint of
             whale; slow down-spinning of
             months, a year, more, 
the hypoxic haze,
the “marine snow”
             in a kind
             of afterlife of weather— 
drifting down of plankton, and
protists, soot,
             sand, fecal matter in aggregates
           “held 
together by a
sugary mucus”—
             all, sifting down,
             through the aphotic zone; 
and its vast weight,
once 40-plus tons, skin
           “like a peeled hard-boiled egg,”
             patched with orange 
whale lice, white barnacles,
it too long since
             sloughed, shed, dissolving as
             particulate 
snowfall, orbital,
in this new galaxy
             of darknesses;
             borne, like seed, floats down ...     
5 
I have been silent for a long time now.
You know I am serious about the whales. 
You don’t know this. I floated there in stillness,
in white sheets. White boughs breaking. The pines 
in ice and wind like a hammering pulse.
When I woke I couldn’t speak or make sense. 
And when I slept again I didn’t sleep.
And more fires spreading through the body’s depths. 
— 
“Plastic Garbage Patch Bigger Than Mexico Found in Pacific.” National Geographic: These pieces of plastic are not necessarily
floating bottles, bags, and buoys, but “teeny-tiny pieces of plastic resembling
confetti.” 90% of sea birds consume it. “Over eight million tons of new plastic
trash finding its way into the oceans every year.”
The Great Pacific Garbage Patch moves in a clockwise direction,
like a toilet. It circulates an area of 7.7 million square miles.
“70% of marine debris sinks to the bottom of the ocean.”  New York Times: Plastiglomerate was “discovered” by Charles Moore,
a sea captain, surveying plastic washed up on a remote, polluted
stretch of sand on Hawaii’s Big Island. It is a new stone, a fusion
of natural and manufactured materials. “If [plastiglomerates] are
buried within the strata,” says Jan Zalasiewicz, an English geologist,
“I don’t see why they can’t persist in some form for millions of years.” 
— 
You’d think we’d learned enough to duck our heads.
(It’s time for arithmetic.) Okay, kids, 
who can tell me what you get when you divide
a number by itself? Silence. Overhead 
the hum of fluorescents. The swallowing sea
of storm clouds out the window beyond the trees. 
What does it take to raise sufficient alarm?
When do you hide? Where do you fly from harm? 
— 
Aggregates increase “like snow.” Aggregation theory represents
a two-state system [“time for chemistry, kids”] ... to characterize
the formation of marine aggregates and the loss due to sinking:
 
 
where  · C1 is the concentration of the cells · r is the radius of each cell · G is the shearing rate · α is the stickiness coefficient · g is the growth rate. 
Thus, aggregation of marine particles is more prevalent when
cell and particle concentration is higher (e.g. algal blooms). 
— 
Do the math. That’s what the specialist said.
The first doctor winked. Some people just need 
to get sick in order to relax. Thanks.
Your T cells go bat-crazy. They attack 
the health host: it’s your immune system
out of control ... viral opportunism 
running rampant through your lymph. It won’t stop.
You can’t sleep. Flushing toxins down the pipe ...  
— 
Wikipedia: marine snow is a variety of mostly organic matter,
including dead or dying animals, and plankton ... also plant parts
and degrading plant material. Because of the relatively long
residence time of the ocean’s thermohaline circulation, carbon
transported as marine snow into the aphotic zone by the biological
pump can remain out of contact ... for more than a thousand years.  A blue jay lands in the fringe tree. Sudden downfall of petals. 
The massive galaxy of matter as the body floats down through
the ocean’s zones is granular, a snowy sand, agglomerate of
debris in slow orbit around the disintegrating husk of whale.
Here are the five most common “unnatural” causes of death.
Entanglement. Ship and propeller strikes. Commercial fishing
(i.e. human appetite). Bycatch. Climate change (i.e. global warming). 
— 
I was sick for years. Now it’s coming back.
Little serpent sipping there beyond the deck.  A. colubrus. The need for names (my friend
wants to help) is thirst for clarity, affinity. 
Yet sometimes I watch the trees. Let the whip
maples weep and go blur above the barn. 
Now they’re a wash of green, a mere wave.
Now they carry me, as he says, in their arms.    
6  Viral-capsid antigen: 2410—  
           Hummingbird’s back again—green bulb blinking
           its alarm.
                              Now the first heavy drops ... 
Good night, little one—asleep with her toys— 
           Aggregate testing:   lymphoma    TB
           “tumors?”    HIV    leukemia    Grave’s— 
Like photons, slowly, around a gray sun— 
           And when I blink and bring them back, in their
           distinctions, the silver limbs like water— 
“chronic running into walls”     “chronic fog”— 
           Every second, trillions of neutrinos
           passing through your arm, “like you’re transparent”— 
CFS   ::   CF/IDS   ::   ME  ::  “no kidding?”— 
           Right. Sperm. Great blue. Minke (common; Antarctic).
           Fin. Sei. Humpback. Bryde’s. Gray. Orca. Pygmy ... 
Cicada husk hangs on through the hard rain —    
7 
When I pull out my old notes, my notebooks full of shaky words— 
In the third stage, a whale fallen through the deepest oceanic zones—  
bathyal, abyssal—may take a hundred years—more—to decompose— 
When I find the old books, I see check marks, dog-ears, underlines—   Full restoration of health is still your hope and expectation, but— 
giant isopods—squat lobsters—osedax—sea cucumber —bristle worms—  
You know I am serious about the whales:    [Views of Jeopardy]— 
Born in 1925, in Pittsburgh, PA—with a metro population greater—  
than the global population of whales, perhaps less than two million—  
When you hear [        ]     it’s already [        ]    Shh.  Close your eyes—  
Languages are dying at a rate of one every two weeks— 
pine pollen, gnats’ wings — glints in air — dust motes, mold spore—  
this.fucked.flux.lux.crux // (broken piece of lamp garbage)— 
Each eye the size of a grapefruit. Heart bigger than a smart car—  
But what we see is infinitely less than what we don’t see. Up, up?— 
Cottonwood seed—polymers, i.e. plastic “foam”: gas bubbles—  
I can’t believe I’m getting it again, “you have always”—“such— 
darkness”—measured by a billion bioluminescent wanderers—  
Wherever you sit is the center of the universe—wherever—you— 
Hear the warning it’s too late. Flatfish. Time for math again, kids—  
polystyrene “for infant teething”—biosemiotics: every cell has— 
a cognitive element. SnotBot: whale-breath DNA—in decay—  
and lived for eighty-seven years—mostly alone—mostly islands— 
In the third stage, a whale fallen through the deepest zones—  
bathyal, abyssal, down through the coldest depths, may take that— 
long to decompose, a hundred years, more — no light — no oxygen—  
[What do you mean]   [what do we do about it]—shh—  
Think of this one, spinning, Eschrichtius robustus, gray, of the—  
sole living genus, of baleen, of the family Eschrichtiidae, like a— 
tissue, floating in the darkness, to settle there. It takes your life.


^^EOP^^


Out of every hundred people 
those who always know better:
fifty-two. 
Unsure of every step:
almost all the rest. 
Ready to help,
if it doesn't take long:
forty-nine. 
Always good,
because they cannot be otherwise:
four—well, maybe five. 
Able to admire without envy:
eighteen. 
Led to error
by youth (which passes):
sixty, plus or minus. 
Those not to be messed with:
forty and four. 
Living in constant fear
of someone or something:
seventy-seven. 
Capable of happiness:
twenty-some-odd at most. 
Harmless alone,
turning savage in crowds:
more than half, for sure. 
Cruel
when forced by circumstances:
it's better not to know,
not even approximately. 
Wise in hindsight:
not many more
than wise in foresight. 
Getting nothing out of life except things:
thirty
(though I would like to be wrong). 
Doubled over in pain
and without a flashlight in the dark:
eighty-three, sooner or later. 
Those who are just:
quite a few at thirty-five. 
But if it takes effort to understand:
three. 
Worthy of empathy:
ninety-nine. 
Mortal:
one hundred out of one hundred—
a figure that has never varied yet.
 


^^EOP^^


          “goaam”   ~
 
                        “goam”   ~
 
“islas de las velas latinas”           (of lateen sails    ~
               “guan”                             “guana”   ~
 
                        “islas de los ladrones”     (of the thieves   ~
 
“guåhan”                                      “guajan”   ~
 
“islas marianas”
 
                                                     (after the spanish queen    ~
 
“bahan”                                                     “guhan”   ~
 
             “guacan”                                       “isla de san juan”   ~
 
“guaon”
 
              “y guan”
 
“omiya jima”                                             (great shrine island)
 
             “guam”
 
                                         “the first province
  
                                                    of the great ocean”    ~
 
                        geographic absence   ~
 
“the old census records show”
 
              because who can stand on the               reef
and name that below water        and sky
 
              imagined territory    ~
 
                          “a spanish baptismal name and”
 
                                      burnt villages
 
                                                   archipelago of
 
“chamoru last names drawn from
            the lexicon of everyday language”
 
                         bone
                                         
                                                    carved word
 
             ~
 
“it is possible they changed
            their last names throughout their lives”
 
                        remade : sovereign
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


^^EOP^^


You wanna know what happened to Elvis
I’ll tell you what happened
I oughta know man I was one of his army
I mean man I was on his side
He made us feel all right
We were the first wave in the
Postwar baby boom
The generation before had just come
Out of the Great Depression and World War II
You know heavy vibes for people to wear
So much heaviness like some kind of
Voiding of the emotions
 
Their music you know the songs
Life always carries
You know every culture has songs
Well anyway their music was
Restrained emotion
You know like you didn’t wanna dance
If you didn’t know how
Which says something strange
Well anyway Elvis came along
About ten years after the nuke
When the only generals America had in
The only army she had were Ike and Mac
And stupor hung over the land
A plague where everyone tried to
Materially free themselves
Still too shell-shocked to understand
To feel what was happening
 
Everything was getting hopeless
Then when Elvis started to rock
The roll just picked up
I mean drabness the beaver showed us
Could only be a foretold future
Who wanted to be Ward and June and
I mean father never did know best
He was still crazy from surviving the war
 
Like there was this psychotic pall
So widespread as to be assumed normal
Heavy man     you know really
Anyway Elvis showed us an out
You know he showed everyboyman and
Everygirlwoman there’s something good
In feeling good
Like a prophet for everyboy everygirl
When someones mom and dad lied
Something about him told us
To be sensual is really okay
Someones mom and dad waltzed us around
Everygirl wasn’t supposed to enjoy it
If she did she was bad and everyboy
Well boys will be boys don’t feel anything
Take what you can
Marry a decent girl when the fun’s done
Like no matter what we did we all were guilty
Maybe someones mom and dad resented
What they missed and while
They were trying to pass it on us
We heard Elvis’s song and
For the first time we made up our own mind
 
The first wave rebelled
I mean we danced even if we didn’t know how
I mean Elvis made us move
Instead of standing mute he raised our voice
And when we heard ourselves               something
Was changing you know like for the first time
We made a collective decision about choices
 
America hurriedly made Pat Boone
A general in the army they wanted us to join
But most of us held fast to Elvis
And the commandants around him
Chuck Berry Buddy Holly Little Richard
Bo Diddley Gene Vincent     you know
Like a different civil war all over again
 
I mean you take don’t be cruel
I want you I need you I love you
And jailhouse rock
Or you take Pat and his white bucks
Singing love letters in the sand
Hell man what’s real here
I mean Pat at the beach in his white bucks
His ears getting sunburned told us
Something about old wave delusion
I mean wanting and needing and imprisonment
We all been to those places but what did
White bucks at the beach understand
Other than more straight line dancing
You know what I mean
 
Anyway man for a while we had a breather
Fresh energy to keep us from falling into the big sleep
Then before long Elvis got assassinated in all the fame
Taking a long time to die       others seized
Control while Elvis rode the needle out
Never understanding what he’d done
 
It’s like we were the baby boom because
Life needed a fresher start
I mean two world wars in a row is
Really crazy man
And Elvis even though he didn’t know he said it
He showed it to us anyway and even though
We didn’t know we heard it        we heard it anyway
 
Man like he woke us up
And now they’re trying to put us
Back to sleep so we’ll see how it goes
Anyway look at the record man
Rock ’n’ roll is based on revolution
Going way past 33 1/3
You gotta understand man he was
America’s baby boom Che
I oughta know man     I was in his army
 
 


^^EOP^^


Reading poetry from Central America
After talking with my brother
Suddenly remembering how they kill
Couldn’t really say it straight before
They told me you were dead
I died
They told me your mother was dead
I died again
They told me the kids were dead
I died with each name
 
Fire
The government said accident
They lied
Duck Valley my El Salvador
Our last kiss was our last good-bye
They came for you in winter’s night
Winter’s wind wailed in mourning
Government people searched for days
Scene of crime digging through ashes
Looking for body parts and disturbing evidence
We buried you all in a large grave
While a blizzard covered us in a blanket of snow
How it stormed terrible pain in the land of the free
 
Some ones should have noticed
Fewer women laughing
Some ones should have noticed
Fewer children growing up
But this isn’t El Salvador
 
Warm strong willed woman
I still have memories you gave me
Maybe if we recognized peasant eyes
Maybe if we recognized plantation lies
Archbishop Romero would have nothing
On you
Trying not to cry how will I ever stop
Ever see a wounded lion try hiding pain
Watch out it doesn’t work
But this isn’t El Salvador
 
At times I feel every embrace we shared
At times every tender moment still lives
Met Sandinista who touched my cheek
Kind of like you used to
Said to me you are one of us
But this isn’t El Salvador
 
Gentle woman natural mother natural world
Some people won’t comprehend what happens
Who wants realities cluttered by acts of war
Have to keep a lot inside at times
Not offending people with words
They don’t want to see pictures of
But this isn’t El Salvador
 
Some people told me I’m strong to survive
I’m not strong I’m not weak     no morality
No right no wrong one tear at a time I fall I rise
But this isn’t El Salvador
 
You loved your people
In the face of the American dream
Fry bread and tortillas some wars are the same
Who thinks Wounded Knee and Sand Creek
Happen only in history books      is this not history
We live we die                       but this isn’t El Salvador
 
The first look you gave me
Your eyes spoke your spirit your heart
My heart our heart there was no other way
Some ones say we’re with you brother
We understand what’s been done
Some ones say but this isn’t El Salvador
This is America                     yes I know
Almost two thousand seasons
We fall we rise       we fall we rise
 
 


^^EOP^^


Now you want us
To cry your tears for you
After we’ve already bled for you
Already been dead to you
Now you want us
To cry your tears for you
 
Chapters of a democracy story
Descendants of genocide
Twelve score and more years ago
We went from being the majority
To being the smallest minority
Now you want us
To cry your tears for you
 
We saw that emptying
Early morning skyline
Back through that horizon
Duck Valley 1979, Wounded Knee
Sand Creek, that Trail of Tears
Exactly how did our land
Become your country
Now you want us
To cry your tears for you
While we’re still crying tears of our own
 
With your past as your future
That industrial ruling class
Using religion as a weapon
Distilling love into hate
Pointing fingers and name calling evil
Sacrificing lives and blood
Making the innocent the new virgins
Offering to the gods of profit
Now you want us
To cry your tears for you
 
In the homeland security
Pretending corporate corruption
Isn’t economic terrorism
Money talks while the government listens
Compiling files on ones who think different
Conditioning an acceptance of debt
And not to expect the truth
So get used to hearing the lie
Now you want us
To cry your tears for you
 
Misusing the beauty
Turning freedom into a killing machine
Mass murdering the environment
Weaponizing the psychology of fear
And pushing material addiction with
A substitution of rules faking the law
The bill of rights becomes collateral damage
Making the constitution another broken treaty
Now you want us
To cry your tears for you
 
Way this story is unfolding
We may end up crying together
As in crying at the same time
But we’re short on tears to cry for you
With all these tears to cry of our own
Now you want us
To cry your tears for you
 


^^EOP^^


It’s evening again, late. I go out into the lane and doodle a beard and mustache on the face of the moon with a red pen.
  Over the next hill an old teacher of mine takes off her glasses and wipes the lenses with a soft cloth. She can’t believe what she’s just seen.
 


^^EOP^^


Look at us
We are of earth and water
Look at them
It is the same
Look at us
We are suffering all these years
Look at them
They are connected
Look at us
We are in pain
Look at them
Surprised at our anger
Look at us
We are struggling to survive
Look at them
Expecting sorrow be benign
 
Look at us
We are the ones called pagan
Look at them
On their arrival
Look at us
We are called subversive
Look at them
Descending from name callers
Look at us
We wept sadly in the long dark
Look at them
Hiding in technologic light
Look at us
We buried the generations
Look at them
Inventing the body count
Look at us
We are older than America
Look at them
Chasing a fountain of youth
 
Look at us we are embracing earth
Look at them
Clutching today
Look at us
We are living in the generations
Look at them
Existing in jobs and debt
Look at us
We have escaped many times
Look at them
They cannot remember
Look at us
We are healing
Look at them
Their medicine is patented
Look at us
We are trying
Look at them
What are they doing
Look at us
We are children of earth
Look at them
Who are they
 


^^EOP^^





J'aurais dans mes mains ton visage obscur
—Yves Bonnefoy



[1]
what should i call this poem i’ll call it a rush of chambers
a racket of foliage i’ll call it love poem with dark
face pretty title someone i don’t know who tells me watch
out for words with meaning don’t look for truth in beauty
learn to breathe with your gaze in an art gallery
a woman with sad eyes devours rats devours picassos
sleeps in hospital rooms listen to this story once upon
a time a princess bah death will not be long in coming
death with its blue eyes on my empty plate
 
[2]
she’ll never know who i am she’s blind and hates when people
look at her i offer her a bonfire a fistful of snow offer her
a freshly cut rose what should we talk about now? let’s talk
about the sky let’s talk about fear there’s going to be a storm tonight
a person would do better to drop and never get up how’s that i ask
but she disappears i don’t know if she’ll ever return still
i wait with my milk tooth with my old stamp
collection with my razor blade and a mirror at night
she comes whispers in my ear there’s no one but you
in a million years i’ll learn her real name know
her dark face flush with sky flush with fear
 
[3]
why am i writing this? you incandescent pupil i’m a swan
that dreams of dying in your dream inside a box where hell burns
where everything is blinding the storm doesn’t say a word stays mute
you should have seen me that time the vineyards were
in bloom the cows were grazing i was happy you were happy
the enigma’s transparence cooled our coffee the myth’s
dissection the death of any and all theories i’m a swan
my dream is to die in your dream why didn’t you look at me?
 
[4]
my students asked me what is the meaning of pain
so i sliced a doll’s finger with a razor blade there
was no blood no batting of lashes this i told them is pain
 
[5]
i read and write at the same time it’s only proper the mountains
overwhelmingly approve the night shuts one eye and looks at me
with the other there is nothing around but plastic flowers
purgatories on the brink of closure doors and windows the light
grows impatient time destroys clocks may i speak?
there’s no need to the pages are on fire your lamp is burning
i take off my clothes and let the cold ignite my penis
 
[6]
now i come to the hardest part of the story the part
where i talk about porpoises and dolphins the woman
with the sad eyes vomits rats into the toilet i speak of
my desire i don’t want her to know about it i’ll just say a word
brush my hand against her hair and if she runs ah the lost words
the dark rooms each with its death rattle of birds
all soaring skyward the woman closes her eyes
go in me she says i’ve forgotten your name i don’t have
a name from high above the bed a god observes us
his wounded body conveying how much she wants me
 
[7]
sorrowful boy come whenever you like i’ll burn in your memory sear
your tongue all kinds of confusion will find a place in your senses
any expression will be allegory in our hands i have a notebook
for you a glass of water some dead fish i said to her sorrowful girl
i love notebooks await every night a glass of water
on my tongue dead fish are a delirium my students
ask what’s delirium i unbutton my shirt and show them
your breasts this is delirium
 
[8]
a rush of overflowing chambers it’s playtime now you’re
the shadow and i’m the light you lick my wounds while i sink
into the lightning flash into both sets of darkness where you sleep
and i await the word smoke is the word tomorrow
your body and mine will sing and there will again be woods
unfurling before my eyes open venetian blinds a fount
of angels atop the dirty laundry tell me a story anything
what’s important is that we awaken and not give in to sleep
happy loves rot as surely as blighted ones do
bye bye she says bye bye flowers in her wounded hands
 
[9]
to let the body not love drift through other bodies
that’s how banishment how violent expulsion begins quite
a lovely light is dying amid the debris no one can see it
ice is deceptive when it shines bright the sky an irrevocable
past a voice inspiring pity a voice that never reaches us
 
[10]
disturbing the marble slab’s geometry beneath her feet
the sought-after metaphor is a blue cyclone the dark alley
the grave of all projects though nothing stands in our way
we can be happy but there’s no one here only me besides
the words the untimely trips and scarlet buses i remember
her light which made the pain grow dark and still she went away
i followed until i lost her trace no one ever taught me to lose a desire
a purple cloud envelopes my body the students ask me
what is a body i draw a word in the air the word bursts
and drops to the ground this i tell them is a body 
 


^^EOP^^


[1]
i wonder where the title the smoke of distant fires comes from
i heard it in a park once at the back of my creeping devoted
ear the moon was red the forest as always abloom with
heliotropes and blue begonias yes i heard it in a park once
a dog was barking the moon was red the sun had already set
 
[2]
eyeing my steps she’d say good but with less emphasis
the words stank to high heaven the serpent was singing sweetly
careful she told me it’s a monstrosity a misshapen beast
years ago i placed a leaf from a linden tree on his back
which left only a scratch a mere flesh wound where time
records its march where the mangled falcon sleeps the blood
on kriemhild’s breasts recalling the blood on kriemhild’s
breasts her death at the hands of some hunter of wild
boars the serpent was dancing the moon was red the
hero didn’t seem to notice i have lost the pot of gold
he said i don’t know who could have stolen it from me
 
[3]
the trees let go of their branches allowing them to fall
it was spring and they couldn’t bear the weight of the snow
the sun shone darkly deer came down from the hills
rats fled the swamp and everything before me was allegory
yet i didn’t write a word
 
[4]
who is eyeing my steps? who is dictating me words?
who is telling me now is the time? i don’t know
 
who is eyeing my steps who is dictating me words who
is telling me now is the time
 
[5]
i’m with my parents in melbourne this has to be a dream
i’ve never been to melbourne my parents look at a plate of
food with no interest one way or the other i feel uncomfortable
at times that’s how i remember you i can never get past
your eyes i don’t have any eyes ask siegfried ask the serpent
ask him what’s become of your words of the papers you
tossed in the wastebasket of the much hoped-for rain in the linden
tree forest i’m talking about hell about charon’s coins
about the barking dog the one that won’t let us sleep
 
[6]
we’re not in melbourne and this is no dream truth
to tell i don’t know where we are i see a park nearby hear
some music the rustling of leaves we’re alone tonight
you’re like a tiger i love your fear the streak of light rending
your shadow the solar mantle where beauty burns forget
the flesh for a moment forget about beauty for now you’re
with me tonight why is the moon so red she asks
 
[7]
it isn’t night and we aren’t in park we’re in thebais
at either the beginning or the end of a storm it’s like a line
you know by heart memory can be so cruel preserving
a marble column a red desert and nothing else around them
but rocks spiders scorpions a pious crowd and a rabbit
why a pious crowd she asks why a rabbit i must have read
about them in a poem seen them in a medieval painting or some
movie short perhaps praying high in the air i grasped the serpent
and if a cloud brushed my ears i gave god thanks for it was his hand
he ordered me to read but no one had ever taught me how
 
[8]
you must be simeon then she said pointing out my sandals
my lack of social graces my eyes brimming over with desert
 
[9]
she listens to the rustling of the leaves to the whistling of the wind
tell me we’ve always been here tell me you never went away
read me the part about the hero’s betrayal the dream of the eagle
devouring the falcon tell me it’s nighttime our neighbors wave
at us with no interest one way or the other the birds pick apart
     their nests
on the riverbank a dog barks a dog that won’t let us sleep
 
[10]
water and mud common ground sketch their alphabet the metaphor
is burning i see it shrivel to nothing amid the rubble we don’t
need to write don’t need to read tonight the serpent
is very excited for it’s celebrating a birth as the words rot
and the moon shines a charon’s palm what should i do?
 
hold on to it she says write the smoke of distant fires
 


^^EOP^^


Wandering slowly back after dark one night
above a river, toward a suspension bridge,
a sound concerns him that might be a tune
or might not: noise drifting in, trailing off.
 
Then concerns him again, now clearly a song
pulsing out from the opposite bank, being sung
by chorusing men, all pewter-haired or bald,
in the function suite of a shabby hotel.
Above their heads a conductor’s hand
draws and casts the notes with a white wand.
 
Songs about mills and mines and a great war,
about mermaid brides and solid gold hills,
songs from broken hymnbooks and cheesy films.
 
Then his father’s voice rising out of that choir,
and his father’s father’s voice, and voices
of fathers before, concerning him only,
arcing through charged air and spanning the gorge.
He steps over the cliff edge and walks across.


^^EOP^^


your values aren’t right
for this age
or memory
 
color line. globes
of the Sea
survive revelation
 
as the Moon reflects
its own interior
revolver. I live
 
as a condemned
callused body
under salt water sand, far from your destructions. where are
 
the people of the lost (shut out the hate)
arc, in a service (love so remote)
to more water? worn
 
eclipse of a human
emergence, foils of the barricade
a face speaks
 
from isomorphic ferns
lines of sacrifice
burn the god of a naked mammal
 
I am the Loon
“the silence of our
beautiful consciousness”
 
“in love with everything
you make it impossible to be myself in this
place. where can I go?” – Baraka
 
attentive score
for the core
of death: black, red, and white as I wake
 
an expansive heart
absorbs all the evil
a veil of the world
 
and cancels
the Loon’s empty
submergence
 
for more of the deep
currents of the light’s
darkest refuge. I am the Loon
 
I hunt with blood in my eyes
 
I wander in the morning
and float above
the wound fish of the spirits
 


^^EOP^^


this morning I went to the doctor
and talked to him about this move
 
on New Year’s Eve I had trouble connecting
my thoughts on Sade and reason
 
we rang in the New Year
with Miriam Makeba’s Africa
 
I’d noticed that my inner life
had expanded, and that I was having trouble
 
thinking through it. The doctor said that Geodon
would loosen my thinking—I noticed
 
that I’d been moving through life for 10 years
in a Zyprexa mold. thought control, at its best,
 
like a sonnet. I do not feel invaded
by the television that I never see. Brenda made me
 
feel more loved than ever this morning, as my thoughts
expanded. Last night, in the slow cooker, I made
 
Lamb and Goat curry—amazingly good. I’d thought
to send Joel, and Peter, and Michael an email
 
letting them know of my transition, but did not. The consequences
of this transition could be catastrophic. I feel more loving toward Brenda
 
than ever. I could die, or worse. As I meditated today
my books to the left of me seemed packed and dense
 
against the wall. Soon, Chuck will be here
to play chess upstairs. I told the doctor this morning
 
that the philosophy and religion of the cyborg
have not yet been written. My
 
poetry
has just begun. I am
 
a Fourth Form,
though not as Dodie saw it. Together,
 
we can belong in this world. Artaud
arrived at the double
 
as I have. We share more in common
than I’d known before last night. I need less sleep
 
than before, and I sleep better
and am more rested. I feel sad and cheated
 
that I need to rely on drugs
so completely. I wonder about Paul Bowles’ stories.
 
I need to reach out
to others
 
through this. The doctor, this morning, said
that I was enlightened, but not
 
quite there—somehow—I can’t remember
how. I doubt he knows
 
what he means by “enlightenment.” I felt far away
from my sister yesterday, when she called. Michael
 
talked to me of Christ’s
tenderness. I feel tender in this moment. Over
 
and over I feel that words
do not represent me. I am not
 
sure what that implies of my intentions
in using them. Yesterday, Brenda and I saw
 
the Warhol show of the last ten years
of his life. There seemed to have been hope
 
to live meaningfully in capitalism then. ~~~~~~~ The waves
of this beginning, the new life of my mind
 
is settling. It’s been a while since I’ve written. I’ve decided
to mark my continuing with the seven tildes above. And I added
 
a title tonight, Muerto Vecino, after Zizek’s dubious interpretation
of Kierkegaard’s neighbor, and because of the funeral home
 
across the street. My thinking has changed, my being has changed,
I am more alert and more engaged in thinking through the world.
 
And I am able to speak better. I don’t know what this means
about who I am. I try not to feel let down that for so much of my life
 
I’ve been restrained by psychotropic drugs. Before Zyprexa it was even
worse, with up to 6 meds, as I’ve said over and over to friends. I feel
 
the need to make clear what my obstacles have been. Not for pity,
a little for pride, but also for hope. If I can do that, then maybe I can help
 
someone not suffer so much, like Brenda. I replaced the kitchen faucet
this past weekend. It makes me very happy that I was able to do it
 
successfully, without ever having been handy before in my life, and after
spending most of my life disdainful of being practical in that way. What a joy
 
to make Brenda so happy. I don’t know how much longer I will live,
and have often thought, recently, that it would be tragic if I died anytime
 
soon, but that it’s imperative that I accept death when it arrives, after
affirming life as fully as I can. It’s too easy, and stupid, to be simplistically
 
oppositional. And to not know that people can ruin anything, but
that the substantial things have value of themselves, is foolish. I don’t want to stop
 
at my own ignorance and lack of forbearance. I don’t believe in the West
on its own. As Michael says, the only thing that makes sense here
 
is love. I have everything I could possibly ever want or need for now. More books
will come, more music too. And love is immeasurable
 
when it’s real. I am so grateful to have more waking time
on the weekends. I plan on making breakfast for Brenda
 
every Saturday and Sunday that I can
from now on. Early. I see gardens in the future of our household.
 
And I wonder about a Great Spirit. What does the name matter? I see the stones that live
without water. I see the smoke that cleanses my vision, and a network of consciousness,
 
with each node another, on and on that way to the depths. My thinking will never
grasp it all
 
because of that recursively created network of interior life. My thinking stops
then, barely able to contain the spherical and vast darkness
 
from which all light arises. That’s why what I see is dark. It is brilliant
in its darkness. Like onyx and flint. I can only talk around what I’ve seen
 
the past couple of weeks. It reframes, completely, the rest of my creative
life and the rest of my days. All I aim to do now is to focus my attention,
 
so that I can see it all again in retrospect. So that I can read
and gather more tools for understanding it. So that I understand myself,
 
and something of the world, and love, and so that I help others. Geodon
will not erase it. I’ve seen it already, many times. It is my natural state.
 
I no longer see it as only hallucination. It is a way of being. A way that I can flesh
out, here. Slowly. Carefully. And as I do, its destructive powers,
 
which are massive and righteous, will subside. As it will know that it is being
given to the world. Because it belongs to all. And all will be there soon.
 
There are signs already. Because to see it is to break, unless one knows something
of love. It makes LSD
 
small. It is God and the Universe as One.
I am not the first to see it. But I am a person
 
given a chance
to write it, letter by letter, slowly, in terms of the light of my ignorance
 
to see more fully
what I do not know. I do not offer anything
 
but poems. But it breaks through
my mouth to arrive at the hearts of the world, at the hearts of the horses
 
of the world, to allow us all to speak in silence. It is not God or the Universe.
It is One as All in you. Because I cannot see through myself
 
without it. I see clearly
that the sun will not arrive
 
in this new weather. But that the moon
will take its place. I see clearly that the sun is there
 
to bring meaning to the sky, and that the earth is more full
with the light of the world
 
extinguished for a brilliant view of wilderness. This is a view
that extends through opposites
 
and arrives at a single body
to witness this song. And this song is not the answer
 
that you believe in, because one day
I will speak to you again
 
in the rain
and show you
 
that I do not know. Because knowledge
belongs to the earth. And the earth makes everything
 
I know. And now that there is less and less freedom
from coercion in a moneyed world, and now that Claire,
 
a friend, is moving on to be Christ in her own way, now
that Guénon continues to call me to understand
 
my ignorance, to depart again
from the friends at Kuna Yala, where I helped with the water,
 
with Brenda watching over me
from a hammock between palms, now that Panamá
 
calls again to give me a union
of the world, in more than two ways,
 
and to distinguish from the surface of these times, I
receive
 
a call to awaken in the snow. I receive a call to acknowledge
that Geodon has planted itself
 
with capital
in my consciousness, but that the world
 
is stronger than to balance itself
from the ozone and people alone. We are not erased, and we
 
do not control the earth. Geodon
is an act of kindness, an agreement
 
to live this life
in a way that arrives
 
with the weather. It may continue
for the rest of my life, or it may not. I will not be afraid again
 
to see things as I do, and I will not
seek out the truth, intentionally, without some kind of agreement
 
with this custom. Because that is a way, for now,
that I speak. And it is useful, though better left
 
invisible. And the name, Geodon, brings trouble, I can see
through it enough, with enough love in my life, to believe
 
in the end of the reign of the Anti-Christ (not Obama). I need to learn again
to be and to write. But to deliver
 
what I saw
I must return
 
to the explosion of my inner life. To start with, otherwise and generally, I see
only outlines. Creation manifests
 
from every direction, in an infinity
of dimensions. Most of us
 
spend most of our energy
conscious of a very few of these dimensions. Imagine
 
more than the greatest works of art
manifesting endlessly
 
from more directions than one can possibly count
every micro second, timelessly. It’s glorious.
 
And the only way to see it with any balance
is impeccably, ethically, compassionately, and with at least an aim
 
toward the Divine. It IS the Divine. God and the Universe
spoke to me. It is all, always, speaking to us. And what it says
 
is endless
it brings wholeness
 
to the precious moment. It goes away
when one tries to pin it down, as I do. I say less and less
 
as I try to describe it. It is endlessly
generative. It is good
 
but pitiless and merciful. It demands of us
that we arrive. And now that the thinking manifests
 
in a way that allows
for union and a bridge, in a way that avoids
 
easy condemnation, a thinking that reveals
the links toward light
 
in motion, a primordial
form of being
 
in a new world that needs no one
to believe in it, a vast chasm
 
in what a bureaucracy of thought
tries to pin us down with, the hole in time
 
that allows us to be free
is here, we know it. All of us
 
can see through delusion. There is no road
in the aftermath of earthquakes, no need for the time
 
to extinguish the elements, no person
locked to your heart
 
in the morning, no water to drink
without thirst, no air is necessary to breathe
 
under the water of seeing, no
need for the earth to do anything
 
other than revolve, in this
new light. Space
 
undoes our links
to the immovable. We deliver
 
the undone to the plains
and see what the harvest
 
will fill with seed. The whole
does not exist
 
within outlines. All we can do
is move to it. The music
 
is unheard of
in this world. It exists
 
without origin. It is otherworldly,
primordial, and gentle. It vibrates,
 
equally, in the Lamb, in
the Lotus, in
 
the stones—there is no place
unknown to it. It is
 
music, and nothing more,
and nothing less. It is that
 
everywhere possible. It is harmonious
infinitely, and allows for any sound. To some
 
it might seem like noise, but that
is only the part. To achieve it
 
one need only listen. I cannot always
hear it, but I have
 
heard it. And now
in my new mind, I listen for it
 
undaunted and silent. I feel it filling
my body with love. Sometimes
 
I have horrific thoughts. But I am learning
that these are but strong notes
 
in the fullness
of the music
 
of my new mind. I can’t always hear the song,
but I feel it now. It makes all context
 
vast. I will receive it
as long as it is here. I will not push
 
one way or the other with it. It is a fullness
and does not want to be made
 
into a force. It is a force
without me, and only to the degree
 
to which this is true. No longer being able
to receive it
 
will imply a failure
of my imagination, of my ethics,
 
and my spirit. There is no way
to hold on to it. It serves
 
no one. And it includes us all. To continue to receive it
more fully
 
I grow. This implies
the world. It implies clarity. It implies
 
motion. But it rests motionlessly. If I have a softness in my voice
it is caused by this music. When I don’t
 
I feel less. My voice can be loud
to receive it, but this loudness
 
cannot be yoked
in outlines. There is nothing I can do.
 
There is nothing to expect. I can only
let it go. And I can only be afraid
 
of the horror of my thoughts
without this music. But now that I know
 
a taste of it, I have
hope. Good people
 
feed it. I haven’t always known
what to do with it and others. But now
 
I am a little less confused
about this. This is due
 
to Buddhism, the little that I know
of its practice. And to love. But it does not stop
 
at my experience. I am ignorant
and cannot offer knowledge. Except this
 
music
does not require knowledge. I’m not sure
 
what it requires. It requires
to be received, but does not need us. Is there a pact
 
between humanity
and God? I don’t know. Is there a God?
 
I don’t know. I’m not sure the question
is enough on its own. Or maybe it is, if God
 
is not limited by concept. And concept
seems to be only a note in this song. Problems
 
feed it. “Love
is the absence of fear.” And “love
 
believes all things,
yet is never deceived.” I aim
 
to see through my delusions. I aim
to be one of many, a small voice
 
in the song of the world. I rest
in silence
 
as I always have. “To have a view
as vast as the sky
 
and as fine
as a grain of sand.” All beings
 
want to be loved
and to be free
 
from suffering. We strive
diligently
 
to learn the vast expanse
and the laser pointed focus
 
of this gift. Remember that light
makes us. And that in this
 
new world, more and more
is made of light. And if that is the case,
 
we move to move
the light of the world. Someday,
 
perhaps, we will move
the light
 
of the computer world. Only the compassionate
and true
 
will be able to do so. Because only they
can be selfless enough
 
to let it move through them. I am not there
to move it
 
but I saw this. Long ago. Briefly. I was offered
a glimpse. It is utterly simple and beyond
 
thought. There is hope. Intention
is a thought. So one
 
sees. I cannot tangle
myself
 
in the line. But only to bridge. That is part of why
it will all move. But I cannot wait
 
until that is possible
to become. I can wait
 
eternally and actively in the world
to remain
 
still. With the calm and expansive
link
 
that allows us to live, so preciously
together, I see through
 
the trouble that startles me, every moment
and allow the seeing
 
of my inner eye
to burn through it. I do not remember
 
what Zyprexa was like any longer. Except that it seems
I have more to work with now, with my mind. And these
 
words are plain, so as to be careful in this new place. I see
that they do not break open my heart, as I read. And for that
 
I relinquish this poem, and allow it to be only
a mark on the road to further inquiry. I allow it to see
 
as I have made a vow to bridge, that my life
aims to be whole, even in the face of potential
 
catastrophes, I grow more and more
to accept death as it arrives, to allow it to soften me,
 
and to transform me as I have been transformed through Geodon, only
to know that there is an isthmus, and that it is eternal. Only that there is one
 
heart to allow myself to speak
in the storms of tribulation, as one speaks
 
to allow the teamwork of the fabric of need
of the bird malingerer to see this
 
in the aftermath of one who has died. Like a bicycle never once
together enough to ride, I see this word here, again, to the removal
 
of a people, to the homeland of union and pace, to the isthmus
of a double link, one ocean to another, one continent
 
to another, to the only union (even as it may be erased in my history), the place
of one heart to allow the song to continue through conflict
 
as she saw it then, one time, far away, when I hadn’t known yet, that this
would be timeless. And there is one to it there to see it there, to allow
 
it there to become and to see there as one is there to see
and to allow one to arrive with it there and to see, and to be one with it
 
there as one is there to be with it. And to see there as one is there to believe
as it is one to believe it there
 
and to see it there as one with the soil and the air and the light and rain
and to be there with one to be there one with it there once again, and to see it there
 
and to believe as there is one there to believe it there again and to see. And to see
there as one is there to believe as it is there again
 
and to see there as one is there to arrive and to be with it
there and to see it there once again and to see it there again
 
and to believe as there is one to it again and to see and to hold
and to see it there and to hold
 
being that nothing holds
dissolving
  written in transition from Zyprexa 10 mg/night to Geodon 160 mg/night—December 23, 2009 (transition started), January 2, 2010 (poem started)
 
 


^^EOP^^


1
 
There is a house in me. It is empty. I empty it.
 
Negative space: the only native emptiness there is.
There is
 
 
2
 
An alarm goes off. It goes on and on. When the alarm
drifts to different parts of the room,
 
I realize, that alarm is the sun.
 
 
3
 
And there is no one who does not need,
 
never an empty seat. And the blind one,
 
he does not find a place. There is a god in him
helping him to need himself.
 
 
4
 
A mother sticks a spoon into my chest,
which is an empty bowl, actually,
 
so the spoon lands quickly
and loudly. Heartbreak in the heart! she says.
 
When you love someone
more than you’ve ever known you could, it is
a good thing, except for the terrifying
 
realization that one day there comes
a parting.
 


^^EOP^^


Gradually a girl’s innocence itself becomes her major crime
A doe and her two fawns bent low in the sumac along the bank of a highway,
     the pinched peach of their ears twitching in the heat
Into the disordered evening my brother cut out only his face from every
     photograph in the hall, carefully slipping each frame back into position
What good does it do?
Decades of no faces other than our own chipping faces
What good does it do, this resemblance to nothing we know of the dollhouse
New parents watch their newborn resting in a sunny patch of an empty
      room, the newborn making sense of its container—
And from the road a deer ripened in death and a tuft of fur—or dandelion—
     tumbled along, gently circled, driftwood, shaking loose, gathered,
     dissolving into the mouths of jewelweed nearby
Earth is rife with iron and blood is rich in stardust
Immediately I spotted one hoof print, then nothing, as if this was where she
      dragged herself out of the body
Strips of tire torn from their orbit Is it right then, that we are left to hurtle alone
 


^^EOP^^


[we] are watching a documentary about home
birth when [you] first feel [neni] kick // embryo
 
of hope // they say plastic is the perfect creation
because it never dies // litters the beaches
 
of o‘ahu, this “gathering place” // the doctor
recommends a c-section // in the sea, plastic multiplies
 
into smaller pieces, leaches estrogenic and toxic
chemicals // if [we] cut open the bellies of whales
 
and large fish, what fragments will [we] find, derived
from oil, absorbed into tissue // because plastic
 
never dissolves, every product ever made still exists,
somewhere, today // i wish my daughter was made
 
of plastic so that she will survive [our] wasteful
hands // so that she, too, will have a great future
 


^^EOP^^





After Mark Levine



1
                                                                        My father, just
out of his teens, stands on the rooftop
of the embassy in Saigon, his birthplace.
He gives his hand to his mother,
and all around them, a thousand hands reach up
 
not to wave. None of his siblings died.
Their bodies like a fine chain balled tight
in a fist. They made it out alive.
Why is he looking at me like this?
  
2
 
This is the idea of a house my father built
in Southern California. These two circle windows
and bamboo on all sides. He brought a jungle here,
complete with French doors.
These are the tiles from his mother’s house, cool
against my cheek. I talk to him in one tongue,
he answers from the morgue.
  
3
 
Let’s get on with it.
When I return to that house, I eat the food
left out for my dead brother. I don’t waste much.
I slide open and close his closet, untangle
the window blinds. The bees are quiet in the
walls, now, their colonies dying off.
His shoes on my father’s feet are the only moving thing
in sight.
  
4
 
On their flight to America,
the choice for lunch was rice or pasta, but when
the meal cart reached them, there was only pasta.
My father smiled at the flight attendant and asked,
Why didn’t you reap enough rice?
  
5
 
The certificates we use to be certain of each other:
ID cards, contracts, permits, deeds,
fishing licenses, driving licenses, car titles, carry permits,
registrations, income statements, IOUs, testimonials,
certificates of birth, custody, and death, letters of consent.
Do I have permission to approach
a drowning man from behind?
  
6
 
I dreamed last night, my mother says,
that you were in danger and your brother was young still,
though you were the same
as you are now.
He was looking for me and I was looking for you. 
 
7
 
I sit at my desk, typing and deleting
words.
Twice I dreamed I fucked my brother.
I keep trying to wake up. I keep getting things wrong.
I’m ready to feel better.
 
 


^^EOP^^


waking to the news of an eventual collapse, those ejected minds
of the walking thing of the speech of birds, they announce their own
development from ashes to make a song and deliver the hunted
landscape to its stars, those of us who knew something of the engine
would remove the approach to animals as a second wind, the coming
of pages of light and nectar, but once the arrival of her tent
would move the inhabitants of the Sea, and the consciousness of the Ocean
to pursue the network that sparks their shining single dream
to the pavement, the oceanic feet that would not muse its face or
deter those breaks from the second light of the morning, or one would
say the easy atonements that their push from the animal
would enlarge so that they would speak and we would understand,
these assembly code calypsos deter the kindly face that hates and pummels
as these will undo their coloring and the fur of the path. do not stop
until you know it well with both feet.
 


^^EOP^^


the news
is released
 
for the secret
of worlds, I reach
 
the end
of my laughter
 
and breathe
to the night sky
 
a periodically
interrupted song
 
to reach the forest
of my refuge, here
 
where the lights are
where one dissolves
 
and appears. to see the hidden
files of your mind
 
and listen
 
listen
 
as I cross the road
to find the fox
 
of the funeral home’s
bewildering delight
 
where there is laughter
marked by a mysterious
 
blinking light
 
that the occluded
erase the sun with, and I’ve lost
 
my heart
for the present moment, as I fear
 
it is one more day
to see others walk
 
in the dark morning
of imposters
 
and timeless life. I say
farewell to you, my love
 
as I enter the darkness
to be with you
 
in our morning kisses, and see
that we shall never part
 
your heart
 
as the Sea was parted
as the world collapses
 
and we say ‘yes’
to the fearsome light


^^EOP^^


In the pink light,
haloes of cloud form over the mountains;
lightning, two valleys away,
then, not an hour later,
 
the explosion of thunder.
The roadrunners
pecking for breadcrumbs on the porch
have long since fled into the rabbitbrush,
 
into the endless ocean of grass.
Driving in every direction
down licks of red road, I have lost
myself in a militarized topography;
 
everything named after army units,
generals, scouts, miners… The Dragoon Mountains, Cochise Stronghold; defunct
  Gleeson and Pearce,
weird, rusty ghost towns, the only
non-derelict structure
for miles, the local school,
 
its polished windows and well-kept lawn,
a source of great local pride.
No mountain monograms
for these desiccated whistle-stops,
 
no giant Q or C or W in bright
white paint to mark
the township's still functional
sorta functional breathing, no
 
carving for them
into the planet's bark;
and thus they are blesséd
to me like no other;
 
every successful city
is a flimsy affair with civility,
its eternalness, like Paris or Rome,
mere hypocrisy.
 
MAKE AMERICA GREAT AGAIN,
BUY REAL ESTATE! Hail follows rain.
Nearby, the township of Sunsites,
once billed as the safest
 
spot to survive
the inevitable nuclear winter,
actually topped Soviet Russia's
list of high-priority targets… Enter
 
the Orange Duck Candidate.
A haboob sweeps across
the Valley of the Senile.
In a week, the mountains
 
have switched from brown
to purple to green.
The desert is human
endeavour's most fitting graveyard;
 
the slow bleaching,
the gradual eroding into sand,
the heat stifling sound as it leaps into the air.
IT CAN'T HAPPEN HERE. But it always does.
 
 
                                         Sulphur Springs Valley
 


^^EOP^^


In the next scene Walt Whitman
is walking around Boston
Common. He’s young.
It’s winter. Emerson
is there. They walk
and talk for hours, or really
Emerson talks. He scolds
Whitman for slavering
after tree knots and bobbing
with the swimmer. Whitman nods
but in his head he’s busy
tallying his orgasms.
At the carousel
an ancient Puritan is passing
his hat, singing, “Kill It Babe.”
Dozens of geese have gathered
on the frozen pond,
standing on one leg,
tucking the other like a dagger
into their feathery centers.
Well, Emerson asks the poet,
what do you have to say for yourself?
And Whitman, respectfully,
but sure now
all the way down in his bones
where the deep, frontier feeling
of disobedience lives, says,
essentially, go fuck yourself.
I’ll go my own way.


^^EOP^^


The future is as sterile as a robot’s loincloth.
I drown my hands in sanitizer until they pucker.
 
Where this soapbox tree germinates, I collect
my germs and make a fountain of them.
 
Because yellow is yarrow and soot, and the future,
I’ve learned, is no suture. Because where I’m from,
these kisses are infections. Because dirt’s
 
ammunition against discipline, the blood fills
my clean mouth with dismay. Am I surprised—
Hollywood still assumes we are all the bastard
 
children of the same evil dictator? That phosgene
and mustard will rack our titanium Maoist husks
until some white man with slanty eyes rescues us
 
from our mealy, pliant selves? Am I to wear Dior,
wrap my mouth in bloody tulle, before kneeling,
bending to kiss a mouth dirtied by Pantone 136?
 
No fucking thanks. Because where I’m from,
these kisses are infractions. Darlings, let’s rewrite
the script. Let’s hijack the narrative, steer
 
the story ourselves. There’d be a heist, a battle.
Audre Lorde would write the script. My leading
man would be Bruce. We’d earn our happy ending.
 
Instead, they give me 1981. 2012. Quantum quasars,
new dystopia—plutonium wars. We’re not in Polanski’s
Chinatown anymore. Yet we still have the same bowl
 
haircuts. Bangs, big bang, a city of fetid promise, new
minor galaxy where we cannot touch. Instead our skin
is rust and metal. It gratifies the technophile in all of us.
 


^^EOP^^


It tastes like all my night
when I'm at the bottom of the borough
sheets burn around me
through the night
Consecrate me
Consecrate me
Conserve me lover
In the sills of your love
in the cells of your palms
from the womb to cell
break me from the belly of ship
let me crash upon you
Consecrate me my lover in your rectum
in a rehabilitation center where athletes seek the best care
I break into you
Consecrate me I want to love you in Syracuse woods
in Sonnino love me against lamb’s wool
I am my sister's wife keeper
Consecrate me
in the discretion of sisters
nuns loving
and hating jobs that ask
with fangs barred


^^EOP^^


I like the lady horses best,
how they make it all look easy,
like running 40 miles per hour
is as fun as taking a nap, or grass.
I like their lady horse swagger,
after winning. Ears up, girls, ears up!
But mainly, let’s be honest, I like
that they’re ladies. As if this big
dangerous animal is also a part of me,
that somewhere inside the delicate
skin of my body, there pumps
an 8-pound female horse heart,
giant with power, heavy with blood.
Don’t you want to believe it?
Don’t you want to lift my shirt and see
the huge beating genius machine
that thinks, no, it knows,
it’s going to come in first.
 


^^EOP^^


A man celebrates erstwhile conquests,
his book locked in a silo, still in print.
 
I scribble, make Sharpie lines, deface
its text like it defaces me. Outside, grain
 
fields whisper. Marble lions are silent
yet silver-tongued, with excellent teeth.
 
In this life I have worshipped so many lies.
Then I workshop them, make them better.
 
An East India Company, an opium trade,
a war, a treaty, a concession, an occupation,
 
a man parting the veil covering a woman’s
face, his nails prying her lips open. I love
 
the fragility of a porcelain bowl. How easy
it is, to shatter chinoiserie, like the Han
 
dynasty urn Ai Weiwei dropped in 1995.
If only recovering the silenced history
 
is as simple as smashing its container: book,
bowl, celadon spoon. Such objects cross
 
borders the way our bodies never could.
Instead, we’re left with history, its blonde
 
dust. That bowl is unbreakable. All its ghosts
still shudder through us like small breaths.
 
The tome of hegemony lives on, circulates
in our libraries, in our bloodstreams. One day,
 
a girl like me may come across it on a shelf,
pick it up, read about all the ways her body
 
is a thing. And I won’t be there to protect
her, to cross the text out and say: go ahead— rewrite this.
 


^^EOP^^


In the autumn I moved to New York,
I recognized her face all over the subway
stations—pearls around her throat, she poses
for her immigration papers. In 1924, the only
Americans required to carry identity cards
were ethnically Chinese—the first photo IDs,
red targets on the head of every man, woman,
child, infant, movie star. Like pallbearers,
they lined up to get their pictures taken: full-face
view, direct camera gaze, no smiles, ears showing,
in silver gelatin. A rogue’s gallery of Chinese
exclusion. The subway poster doesn’t name
her—though it does mention her ethnicity,
and the name of the New-York Historical
Society exhibition: Exclusion/Inclusion.
Soon, when I felt alone in this city, her face
would peer at me from behind seats, turnstiles,
heads, and headphones, and I swear she wore
a smile only I could see. Sometimes my face
aligned with hers, and we would rush past
the bewildered lives before us—hers, gone
the year my mother was born, and mine,
a belt of ghosts trailing after my scent.
In the same aboveground train, in the same
city where slain umbrellas travel across
the Hudson River, we live and live.
I’ve left my landline so ghosts can’t dial me
at midnight with the hunger of hunters
anymore. I’m so hungry I gnaw at light.
It tunnels from the shadows, an exhausting
hope. I know this hunger tormented her too.
It haunted her through her years in L.A., Paris,
and New York, the parties she went to, people
she met—Paul Robeson, Zora Neale Hurston,
Langston Hughes, Gertrude Stein. It haunts
her expression still, on the 6 train, Grand
Central station, an echo chamber behind
her eyes. But dear universe: if I can recognize
her face under this tunnel of endless shadows
against the luminance of all that is extinct
and oncoming, then I am not a stranger here.
 


^^EOP^^





for my granddaughter, Wahcawin



I didn’t want to scold the sky that year, but
 Grandma’s words taunted my senses. If there
is a thirst, then you need to pity the flowers
 
in a loud voice. Ask the frogs why they are
being punished, stomp on the ground and talk
to the dried clay about cracking open the earth.
 
I know challenging the storm is risky. “Last
but not least, burn cedar and pray the lightning
doesn’t strike your town.” That night, the stars
 
disappeared, so did the birds. Perhaps it was
the season for rain or the dance. In the western
distance, we thought we heard cannon blasts,
 
looking over we watched the horizon fill with
lightning strikes. Rain couldn’t pour hard enough
over the thirsty plain. Accompanying clouds,
 
called to thunder’s voice in extreme decimals
requesting all the water heaven could send forth,
to come. Rain and more rain filled empty stream
 
bottoms. Rivers who had pulled their dry banks
farther and farther from their center begged for
a drink to startle dusty beds with a flooding roar.
 
Lives in dormant places begin to stir and awaken.
 The lives of water beings, those that swim, the
ones that hop, and the ones that fly, begin to stir.
 
That year all thirst was quenched.
 


^^EOP^^


Tracks are all that define these voices,
hungry lives pulsing sacred ground.
We are a journey of distressed shapes,
red essence on parchment, occupying a life.
We look for the fated four-legged that paced
this way, a tested and well-worn path
among storms, mud, into this shared hidden
brush. Coyote, slipping by through old
winter grass, warns in a pagan tongue,
licking after our scent. We pick up pace,
tighten our careless reins, snap back at the
yellow-eyed clown with throat hunger,
that gnawing bone that drives us on. Quieted,
we hear the heart beating. A desperate breath
crashes through dry branches, a silhouette
give away. In an instant we let go
of weapons and invite a quick death. We
watch our knives glistening. Obsidian
works for us. What image of blood on flesh,
odor of iron. A vermilion sun heavy with
spring looks upon reflections of death
in hard visions, our favorable hunt—
whitetail not quick enough for downwind
lessons. Our horses burdened, deer shadows
left on landscape, we push forward.
These tracks ours now. Game will heal all.
Our offspring dance, Grandmother prepares a
fire and sharpens another knife. During the
feast we thank any god absent from our table.


^^EOP^^


This morning we found ourselves skinning a deer,
cutting meat, hanging some to dry and packaging
some for the freezer. It was the dogs late last night
 
that set off a howling, the unexpected smell of fresh
blood floating down the block, then a familiar car
horn honking in the driveway. My nephew and his
 
friends were hunting and brought us a deer. Mother
always said, “Cut up the meat right away, don’t let
it sit.” I look at a front quarter, a hole filled with
 
coagulated blood. Grandma says not to eat the part
next to the wound, “Cut it out; offer it to the earth for
healing, a sacrifice to remember the hungering spirits.”
 
Auntie says to save the muscle along the back strap,
“It makes good thread.” I carefully learned the exact
place to cut the joints so the bones separate easily.
 
Mother said that is important—“It means you are a
thoughtful person.” Auntie is at the door waiting for
a roast. “An elder takes the first piece,” she reminded.
 
Mom tells me to save the hooves for her. She wants
to make a bone game for the new grandchild, wants
him to be patient and skillful. I boil the hoofs with
 
sage, find the little toe-bones for her. My hands begin
to ache from the work, I soak them in warm water
and start again. I admire the placement of tendons
 
on the deer shoulders, no joints, just the crisscrossing
of muscle. Grandma says, “That’s why your dad called
them jumpers, they bounce off the strength of their
 
flexing muscles.” Late at night Mom helps me stake
out the hide. My back hurts; my feet feel like I’ve
been walking on rocks all day. I want to complain,
 
but Mom catches the look in my eyes. She says to me,
“When you get dressed for the dance this weekend,
you will proudly wear your beautiful beaded dress,
 
your beaded leggings and moccasins, and last, but not
least, you will put on your beaded belt, and attached
you will wear your sharp knife and quilled knife sheath
 
because of what you have done this day.”
 


^^EOP^^


I could tell they were father and son,
the air between them slack, as though
they hardly noticed one another.
 
The father sanded the gunwales,
the boy coiled the lines.
And I admired them there, each to his task
 
in the quiet of the long familiar.
The sawdust coated the father's arms
like dusk coats grass in a field.
 
The boy worked next on the oarlocks
polishing the brass until it gleamed,
as though he could harness the sun.
 
Who cares what they were thinking,
lucky in their lives
that the spin of the genetic wheel
 
slowed twice to a stop
and landed each of them here.


^^EOP^^


At the 100-year-old National Elk Refuge
near Jackson Hole, we might ask, How long does an elk live? Who’s an old elk here? 
 
We’d like to spend time
with an elder elk please.
Tell us how to balance our lives
on this hard edge of human mean,
mean temperatures, what we do and don’t
want to mean.
 
Closing the door
to the news will only make you
stupid, snapped my friend
who wanted everyone to know as much
as she did. I’m hiding in old school books
with information we never used yet.
Before I drove, before I flew,
before the principal went to jail.
Sinking my eyes into tall wooden
window sashes, dreaming of light
arriving from far reaches,
our teacher as shepherds,
school a vessel of golden hope,
you could lift your daily lesson
in front of your eyes,
stare hard and think,
this will take me
somewhere. O histories of India,
geological formations of Australia,
ancient poetries of China, Japan,
someday we will be aligned in a place
of wisdom, together.
 
Red deer, wapiti, running elk rising
above yellow meadows at sundown.
An elk bows her head. In the company
of other elk, she feels at home.
And we are lost on the horizon now,
clumsy humanity,
deeper into the next century than we
can even believe,
and they will not speak to us.
 


^^EOP^^





For Janna



The tiny journalist
will tell us what she sees.
 
Document the moves, the dust,
soldiers blocking the road.
 
Yes, she knows how to take a picture
with her phone. Holds it high
 
like a balloon. Yes, she would
prefer to dance and play,
 
would prefer the world
to be pink. It is her job to say
 
what she sees, what is happening.
From her vantage point everything
 
is huge—but don’t look down on her.
She’s bigger than you are.
 
If you stomp her garden
each leaf expands its view.
 
Don’t hide what you do.
She sees you at 2 a.m. adjusting your
 
impenetrable vest.
What could she have
 
that you want? Her treasures,
thing shiny buttons her grandmother loved.
 
Her cousin, her uncle. There might have been a shirt. . .
 
The tiny journalist notices
action on far away roads
 
farther even than the next village.
She takes counsel from bugs so
 
puffs of dust find her first. Could that be a friend? 
  They pretended not to see us. They came at night with weapons. 
  What was our crime? That we liked respect as they do? That we have pride? 
 
She stares through a hole in the fence,
barricade of words and wire,
 
feels the rising fire
before anyone strikes a match.
 
She has a better idea.


^^EOP^^


When people have a lot
they want more
 
When people have nothing
they will happily share it
 
*
 
Some people say
never getting your way
builds character
By now our character must be
deep and wide as a continent
Africa, Australia
giant cascade of stars
spilling over our huge night
 
*
 
Where did the power go?
Did it enjoy its break?
Is power exhausted?
What is real power?
Who really has power?
Did the generator break?
Do we imagine silence
more powerful because
it might contain everything?
Quiet always lives
inside noise.
But does it get much done?
 
*
 
Silence waits
for truth to break it
 
*
 
Calendars can weep too
They want us to have better days
 
*
 
Welcome to every minute
Feel lucky you’re still in it
 
*
 
No bird builds a wall
 
*
 
Sky purse
     jingling
           change
 
*
 
Won’t give up
our hopes
            for anything!
 
*
 
Not your fault
You didn’t make the world
 
*
 
How dare this go on and on?
cried the person who believed in praying
God willing     God willing        God willing
There were others who prayed
   to ruins & stumps
 
*
 
Open palms
     hold more
 
*
 
Refuse to give
   mistakes
      too much power
 
 
*
Annoying person?
Person who told me to stay home
and do what other girls do?
If you disappeared
I still might miss you
 
*
 
Babies want to help us
They laugh
for no reason
 
*
 
Pay close attention to
a drop of water
on the kitchen table
 
*
 
You cannot say one word about religion
and exclude Ahmad
 


^^EOP^^


What?
You don’t feel at home in your country,
almost overnight?
All the simple things
you cared about,
maybe took for granted. . .
you feel
insulted, invisible?
Almost as if you’re not there?
But you’re there.
Where before you mingled freely. . .
appreciated people who weren’t
just like you. . .
divisions grow stronger.
That’s what “chosen” and “unchosen” will do.
(Just keep your eyes on your houses and gardens.
Keep your eyes on that tree in bloom.)
Yes, a wall. Ours came later but. . .
who talks about how sad the land looks,
marked by a massive wall?
That’s not a normal shadow.
It’s something else looming over your lives.
 


^^EOP^^


Each day I miss Japanese precision. Trying to arrange things
   the way they would. I miss the call to prayer
at Sharjah, the large collective pause. Or
the shy strawberry vendor with rickety wooden cart,
single small lightbulb pointed at a mound of berries.
   In one of China’s great cities, before dawn.
 
      Forever I miss my Arab father’s way with mint leaves
    floating in a cup of sugared tea—his delicate hands
arranging rinsed figs on a plate. What have we here?
    said the wolf in the children’s story
stumbling upon people doing kind, small things.
    Is this small monster one of us?
 
When your country does not feel cozy, what do you do?
       Teresa walks more now, to feel closer to her
ground. If destination within two miles, she must
    hike or take the bus. Carries apples,
          extra bottles of chilled water to give away.
Kim makes one positive move a day for someone else.
I’m reading letters the ancestors wrote after arriving
       in the land of freedom, words in perfect English script. . .
describing gifts they gave one another for Christmas.
     Even the listing seems oddly civilized,
these 1906 Germans. . . hand-stitched embroideries for dresser tops. Bow ties. Slippers, parlor croquet, gold ring, “pretty             inkwell.” 
 
How they comforted themselves! A giant roast
     made them feel more at home.
            Posthumous medals of honor for
     coming, continuing—could we do that?
And where would we go?
         My father’s hope for Palestine
stitching my bones, “no one wakes up and
        dreams of fighting around the house”—
 
somebody soon the steady eyes of children in Gaza,
     yearning for a little extra electricity
to cool their lemons and cantaloupes, will be known.
              Yes?
    We talked for two hours via Google Chat,
they did not complain once. Discussing stories,
       books, families, a character who does
                 what you might do.
Meanwhile secret diplomats are what we must be,
   as a girl in Qatar once assured me,
       each day slipping its blank visa into our hands.
 


^^EOP^^





                                                 (for Daniel, because                                                  
                                                 the Catacombs) 



You’re leaving Las Vegas, except
In German. Point. Point. Point.
Gave it out, beautiful gentilhomme Comme vous êtes, toujours,
Unforgettable, circa 2008 how
You made me cum like that -
She got so mad in the bed - the
Hotel bathroom floor,
The bathtub, the apartment where
I was the crying queen
 
Those o’s still unforgettable
And now Paris. I cried today OW!
Your Antarctica cold last
Night. You told me they fucked
You up / I told you he broke
My heart and OW! Freeze
Dried my bandaid right off.
And then the glasses shopping
Memories today yada yada
Wasn’t about the cum shot
Where or if, was about the
Islands and how you said
in the langue d’enemie
No less: “DON’T TOUCH”
 
Don’t Touch!? We just …
They fucked you up all right.
You give so clearly but have iced
Out all the incoming gifts. WELL
PING my darling Walden island.
I can’t take that kind of cold. I’m leaving Las Vegas.
Just a moon in Taurus trying
To sing the sweet and
It’s not a great user experience
 
But I just want you to know
How unforgettable you are
 
 
When the candles call to Hera
I hope they melt your
I hope a goddess or many
Wash that loneliness away
And when I see you again (in 15 years)
There’s only joy and more
 
I prefer you laughing to tears
The good way. Drink us when
We’re done. Well, I guess I did
Almost kill you with a
Razor shave once so it
Seems silly to say I’m sorry I
Lost the phantom thread.
Maybe everything’s a ridiculous
never-ending non-planet
Tho, u did kiss me like unicorns
Exist and bond our skin
Like the organ it deserves to be
Known as
 
 
To know how unforgettable
you are because there
lies the bridge to the
Mainland. & baby, you
Deserve it all.
 


^^EOP^^


Give up sitting dutifully at your desk. Leave
your house or apartment. Go out into the world.
 
It's all right to carry a notebook but a cheap
one is best, with pages the color of weak tea
and on the front a kitten or a space ship.
 
Avoid any enclosed space where more than
three people are wearing turtlenecks. Beware
any snow-covered chalet with deer tracks
across the muffled tennis courts.
 
Not surprisingly, libraries are a good place to write.
And the perfect place in a library is near an aisle
where a child a year or two old is playing as his
mother browses the ranks of the dead.
 
Often he will pull books from the bottom shelf.
The title, the author's name, the brooding photo
on the flap mean nothing. Red book on black, gray
book on brown, he builds a tower. And the higher
it gets, the wider he grins.
 
You who asked for advice, listen: When the tower
falls, be like that child. Laugh so loud everybody
in the world frowns and says, "Shhhh."
 
Then start again.
 


^^EOP^^


     lady in brown 
de library waz right down from de trolly tracks
cross from de laundry-mat
thru de big shinin floors & granite pillars
ol st. louis is famous for
i found toussaint
but not til after months uv
cajun katie/ pippi longstockin
christopher robin/ eddie heyward & a pooh bear
in the children’s room
only pioneer girls & magic rabbits
& big city white boys
i knew i waznt sposedta
but i ran inta the ADULT READING ROOM
                   & came across
 
                       TOUSSAINT
 
                         my first blk man
(i never counted george washington carver
cuz i didnt like peanuts)
                           still
TOUSSAINT waz a blk man a negro like my mama say
who refused to be a slave
& he spoke french
& didnt low no white man to tell him nothin
                       not napolean
                       not maximillien
                       not robespierre
 
TOUSSAINT L’OUVERTURE
waz the beginnin uv reality for me
in the summer contest for
who colored child can read
15 books in three weeks
i won & raved abt TOUSSAINT L’OUVERTURE
at the afternoon ceremony
waz disqualified
                       cuz Toussaint
                         belonged in the ADULT READING ROOM
                             & i cried
& carried dead Touissant home in the book
he waz dead & livin to me
cuz TOUSSAINT & them
they held the citadel gainst the french
wid the spirits of ol dead africans from outta the ground
TOUSSAINT led they army of zombies
walkin cannon ball shootin spirits to free Haiti
& they waznt slaves no more
 
                              TOUSSAINT L’OUVERTURE
became my secret lover at the age of 8
i entertained him in my bedroom
widda flashlight under my covers
way inta the night/ we discussed strategies
how to remove white girls from my hopscotch games
& etc.
TOUSSAINT
waz laying in bed wit me next to raggedy ann
the night i decided to run away from my
                   integrated home
                       integrated street
                           integrated school
1955 waz not a good year for lil blk girls
 
Toussaint said ‘lets go to haiti’
i said ‘awright’
& packed some very important things in a brown paper bag
so i wdnt haveta come back
then Toussaint & i took the hodiamont streetcar
to the river
last stop
only 15¢
cuz there waznt nobody cd see Toussaint cept me
& we walked all down thru north st. louis
where the french settlers usedta live
in tiny brick houses all huddled together
wit barely missin windows & shingles uneven
wit colored kids playin & women on low porches sippin beer
 
i cd talk to Toussaint down by the river
like this waz where we waz gonna stow away
on a boat for new orleans
& catch a creole fishin-rig for port-au-prince
then we waz just gonna read & talk all the time
& eat fried bananas
                               we waz just walkin & skippin past ol drunk men
when dis ol young boy jumped out at me sayin
‘HEY GIRL YA BETTAH COME OVAH HEAH N TALK TO
ME’
well
i turned to TOUSSAINT (who waz furious)
& i shouted
‘ya silly old boy
ya bettah leave me alone
or TOUSSAINT’S gonna get yr ass’
de silly ol boy came round de corner laughin all in my face
‘yellah gal
ya sure must be somebody to know my name so quick’
i waz disgusted
& wanted to get on to haiti
widout some tacky ol boy botherin me
still he kept standin there
kickin milk cartons & bits of brick
tryin to get all in my business
                               i mumbled to L’OUVERTURE ‘what shd I do’
finally
i asked this silly ol boy
‘WELL WHO ARE YOU?’
he say
‘MY NAME IS TOUSSAINT JONES’
well
i looked right at him
those skidded out cordoroy pants
a striped teashirt wid holes in both elbows
a new scab over his left eye
& i said
                                 ‘what’s yr name again’
he say
‘i’m toussaint jones’
‘wow
i am on my way to see
TOUSSAINT L’OUVERTURE in HAITI
are ya any kin to him
he dont take no stuff from white folks
& they gotta country all they own
& there aint no slaves’
that silly ol boy squinted his face all up
looka heah girl
i am TOUSSAINT JONES
& i’m right heah lookin at ya
& i dont take no stuff from no white folks
ya dont see none round heah do ya?’
& he sorta pushed out his chest
then he say
‘come on       lets go on down to the docks
& look at the boats’
i waz real puzzled goin down to the docks
wit my paper bag & my books
i felt TOUSSAINT L’OUVERTURE sorta leave me
& i was sad
til i realized
TOUSSAINT JONES waznt too different
from TOUSSAINT L’OUVERTURE
cept the ol one waz in haiti
& this one wid me speakin english & eatin apples
yeah.
toussaint jones waz awright wit me
no tellin what all spirits we cd move
down by the river
st. louis 1955                               hey wait.
 
 


^^EOP^^


at 4:30 AM
she rose
movin the arms & legs that trapped her
she sighed affirmin the sculptured man
& made herself a bath
of dark musk oil egyptian crystals
& florida water to remove his smell
to wash away the glitter
to watch the butterflies melt into
suds & the rhinestones fall beneath
her buttocks like smooth pebbles
in a missouri creek
layin in water
she became herself
ordinary
brown braided woman
with big legs & full lips
reglar
seriously intendin to finish her
night’s work
she quickly walked to her guest
straddled on her pillows & began
 
 
                  ‘you’ll have to go now/ i’ve
                  a lot of work to do/ & i cant
                  with a man around/ here are yr pants/
                  there’s coffee on the stove/ its been
                  very nice/ but i cant see you again/
                  you got what you came for/ didnt you’
& she smiled
he wd either mumble curses bout crazy bitches
or sit dumbfounded
while she repeated
                  ‘i cdnt possibly wake up/ with
                   a strange man in my bed/ why
                   dont you go home’
she cda been slapped upside the head
or verbally challenged
but she never waz
& the ones who fell prey to the
dazzle of hips painted with
orange blossoms & magnolia scented wrists
had wanted no more
than to lay between her sparklin thighs
& had planned on leavin before dawn
& she had been so divine
devastatingly bizarre the way
her mouth fit round
& now she stood a
reglar colored girl
fulla the same malice
livid indifference as a sistah
worn from supportin a wd be hornplayer
or waitin by the window
                              & they knew
                              & left in a hurry
she wd gather her tinsel &
jewels from the tub
& laugh gayly or vengeful
she stored her silk roses by her bed
& when she finished writin
the account of her exploit in a diary
embroidered with lilies & moonstones
she placed the rose behind her ear
& cried herself to sleep.
 


^^EOP^^


there was no air/ the sheets made ripples under his
body like crumpled paper napkins in a summer park/ & lil
specks of somethin from tween his toes or the biscuits
from the day before ran in the sweat that tucked the sheet
into his limbs like he was an ol frozen bundle of chicken/
& he’d get up to make coffee, drink wine, drink water/ he
wished one of his friends who knew where he waz wd come by
with some blow or some shit/ anything/ there was no air/
he’d see the spotlights in the alleyways downstairs movin
in the air/ cross his wall over his face/ & get under the
covers & wait for an all clear or till he cd hear traffic
again/
 
there waznt nothing wrong with him/ there waznt nothing wrong
with him/ he kept tellin crystal/
any niggah wanna kill vietnamese children more n stay home
& raise his own is sicker than a rabid dog/
that’s how their thing had been goin since he got back/
crystal just got inta sayin whatta fool niggah beau was
& always had been/ didnt he go all over uptown sayin the
child waznt his/ waz some no counts bastard/ & any ol city
police cd come & get him if they wanted/ cuz as soon as
the blood type & shit waz together/ everybody wd know that
crystal waz a no good lyin whore/ and this after she’d been
his girl since she waz thirteen/ when he caught her
on the stairway/
 
he came home crazy as hell/ he tried to get veterans benefits
to go to school & they kept right on puttin him in
remedial classes/ he cdnt read wortha damn/ so beau
cused the teachers of holdin him back & got himself
a gypsy cab to drive/ but his cab kept breakin
down/ & the cops was always messin wit him/ plus not
getting much bread/
 
& crystal went & got pregnant again/ beau most beat
her to death when she tol him/ she still gotta scar
under her right tit where he cut her up/ still crystal
went right on & had the baby/ so now beau willie had
two children / a little girl/ naomi kenya & a boy/ kwame beau
willie brown/ & there waz no air/
 
how in the hell did he get in this mess anyway/ somebody
went & tol crystal that beau was spendin alla his money
on the bartendin bitch down at the merry-go-round cafe/
beau sat straight up in the bed/ wrapped up in the sheets
lookin like john the baptist or a huge baby wit stubble
& nuts/ now he hadta get alla that shit outta crystal’s
mind/ so she wd let him come home/ crystal had gone &
got a court order saying beau willie brown had no access
to his children/ if he showed his face he waz subject
to arrest/ shit/ she’d been in his ass to marry her
since she was 14 years old & here when she was 22/ she wanna
throw him out cuz he say he’ll marry her/ she burst
out laughin/ hollerin whatchu wanna marry me for now/
so i can support yr
ass/ or come sit wit ya when they lock yr behind
up/ cause they gonna come for ya/ ya goddamn lunatic/
they gonna come/ & i’m not gonna have a thing to do
wit it/ o no i wdnt marry yr pitiful black ass for
nothing & she went on to bed/
 
the next day beau willie came in blasted & got ta swingin
chairs at crystal/ who cdnt figure out what the hell
he waz doin/ til he got ta shoutin bout how she waz gonna
marry him/ & get some more veterans benefits/ & he cd
stop drivin them crazy spics round/ while they tryin
to kill him for $15/ beau was sweatin terrible/ beatin
on crystal/ & he cdnt do no more with the table n chairs/
so he went to get the high chair/ & lil kwame waz in it/
& beau was beatin crystal with the high chair & her son/
& some notion got inta him to stop/ an he run out/
crystal most died/ that’s why the police wdnt low
beau near where she lived/ & she’d been tellin the kids
their daddy tried to kill her & kwame/ & he just wanted
to marry her/ that’s what/ he wanted to marry her/ &
have a family/ but the bitch waz crazy/ beau willie
waz sittin in this hotel in his drawers drinkin
coffee & wine in the heat of the day spillin shit all
over hisself/ laughin/ bout how we waz gonna get crystal
to take him back/ & let him be a man in the house/ & she
wdnt even have to go to work no more/ he got dressed
all up in his ivory shirt & checkered pants to go see
crystal & get this mess all cleared up/
he knocked on the door to crystal’s rooms/ & she
didnt answer/ he beat on the door & crystal & naomi
started cryin/ beau gotta shoutin again how he wanted
to marry her/ & waz she always gonna be a whore/ or
did she wanna husband/ & crystal just kept on
screamin for him to leave us alone/ just leave us
alone/ so beau broke the door down/ crystal held
the children in fronta her/ she picked kwame off the
floor/ in her arms/ & she held naomi by her shoulders/
& kept on sayin/ beau willie brown/ get outta here/
the police is gonna come for ya/ ya fool/ get outta here/
do you want the children to see you act the fool again
you want kwame to brain damage from you throwin him
round/ niggah/ get outta here/ get out & don’t show yr
ass again or i’ll kill ya/ i swear i’ll kill ya/
he reached for naomi/ crystal grabbed the lil girl &
stared at beau willie like he waz a leper or somethin/
dont you touch my children/ mothafucker/ or i’ll kill
you/
 
beau willie jumped back all humble & apologetic/ i’m
sorry/ i dont wanna hurt em/ i just wanna hold em &
get on my way/ i dont wanna cuz you no more trouble/
i wanted to marry you & give ya things
what you gonna give/ a broken jaw/ niggah get outta here/
he ignored crystal’s outburst & sat down motionin for
naomi to come to him/ she smiled back at her daddy/
crystal felt naomi givin in & held her tighter/
naomi/ pushed away & ran to her daddy/ crying/ daddy, daddy
come back daddy/ come back/ but be nice to mommy/
cause mommy loves you/ and ya gotta be nice/
he sat on his knee/ & played with her ribbons &
they counted fingers & toes/ every so often he
looked over to crystal holdin kwame/ like a statue/
& he’d say/ see crystal/ i can be a good father/
now let me see my son/ & she didn’t move/ &
he coaxed her & he coaxed her/ tol her she waz
still a hot lil ol thing & pretty & strong/ didnt
she get right up after that lil ol fight they had
& go back to work/ beau willie oozed kindness &
crystal who had known so lil/ let beau hold kwame/
 
as soon as crystal let the baby outta her arms/ beau
jumped up a laughin & a gigglin/ a hootin & a hollerin/
awright bitch/ awright bitch/ you gonna marry me/
you gonna marry me . . .
i aint gonna marry ya/ i aint ever gonna marry ya/
for nothin/ you gonna be in the jail/ you gonna be
under the jail for this/ now gimme my kids/ ya give
me back my kids/
 
he kicked the screen outta the window/ & held the kids
offa the sill/ you gonna marry me/ yeh, i’ll marry ya/
anything/ but bring the children back in the house/
he looked from where the kids were hangin from the
fifth story/ at alla the people screamin at him/ &
he started sweatin again/ say to alla the neighbors/
you gonna marry me/
 
i stood by beau in the window/ with naomi reachin
for me/ kwame screamin mommy mommy from the fifth
story/ but i cd only whisper/ & he dropped em
 


^^EOP^^


Chile, chocolate, coyote, guacamole, mezcal, peyote,
tomato, ocelot, tequila—the words survive months of siege,
240,000 dead in Tenochtitlan. The Place of Herons,
a place of whiteness, did not survive. Duende, a tiny face
in a calla lily, survived. A bowl decorated with scorpion
and pelican survived. Clay faces full of shadow. Sculptors
who understood light, how it addresses the afterlife,
expecting a great dark to fall.


^^EOP^^


The opera
In her head 
Runs with no interval,
A lot of people singing tunelessly 
About the same things.
An overheard 
Comment like
A rotting peach. 
The overzealous
Cockatoo of her impatience, 
Flap flap. The slab
Of blue behind her 
Is a sea of
Her doubts. The squirrel 
In her stomach
Trying to get out— 
They say you have to be
Twice as good. They say 
There are pills
For everything now. Enamel 
Eyes to see all
The better with, my 
Dear. Fur coat
For your tongue—


^^EOP^^


I turned twenty-four and
dad decided to take
another stab at making
a man out of me.
On his command, I drove us
out to Hollywood where
you could get three sets of suits
for a hundred bucks. What a steal! he exclaimed
as though his enthusiasm
would fertilize
something that never
existed within me.
Regardless, I followed him
into the outlet and I
allowed him to wrap
the cheap, heavy thread
around my tired shoulders,
to salt the wound of my body
with his idea of truth.
I let it happen
but I did not forget
what I was
beneath the cover of the flesh:  five million faggy mountains slicing through fields full of dreamed-up tongues and unnamable bluish grasses each blade the length of a universe stretching inward toward a singular point of life-sustaining unlogic— 
Dressing myself behind
the heavy polyester curtain,
I listened
as dad held the suit guy hostage
with the oft-told tale
of the night he encountered
real-life Biblical demons,
how at first he felt their presence
tightening inside his chest,
and then witnessed them crawling
up and down his walls
and how he prayed and cursed them
in the name of the lord
until they dissolved
like sugar into the dark 
And he never said this, but I
knew he was convinced they
came for me next and colored my nails and stretched out my hair and adorned me with flowers and forced my inside places to whisper woman         woman               woman late each night at the moment just before sleep 
And I knew he knew
who I was becoming
and I understood
what the suits were for      So 
I tossed them in the back
of my trunk
where they sat
waiting for years
and the day I sold that car off those suits were still in there


^^EOP^^


A collective family myth
passed down across generations
takes on the polished gleam of truth,
and memories become legend. 
The legend of black sod-busters
on a piece of red soil they own
in a township of black ranchers.
Their legendary rodeo.  grand entry 
Two Stars and Stripes flutter into
the arena, carried by two
men in jeans, red shirts, white Stetsons.
Guiding their horses with left hands,
holding the flagstaffs in their rights,
their backs straight and tall, their faces,
their chestnut faces, beautiful
in the light of the setting sun. 
After them, two by two,
banners waving, hooves raising dust,
ride the Horse People of Boley,
a varicolored promenade.
They canter once around the ring,
then they circle into the sky.  mutton busting 
In the cluster of five-year-old
contenders wearing life jackets
and bicycle helmets, paper
numbers safety-pinned to their backs,
you line up one by one for a turn
to hang on tight with your legs squeezed
at the sheep’s broad middle, fingers
holding handfuls of deep, warm wool
as the sheep destiny presents
runs you out to cheering applause.
Whether you’ll fall on top of it,
or it on you, you won’t fall far.
You have no front teeth anyway,
and a brown clown gone pick you up.  bareback riding 
This horse was bred and born to buck.
He’s a good horse, he’ll give you points.
Gloved hand in the rigging’s handle,
bare brown hand waving in the air,
you whir your spurs at his shoulders
as he leaps, twists, and jolts your bones.
Four seconds or four hundred years.
But if you can get up and slap
the dust off your jeans with your hat,
the future’s eyes, looking at you,
will fill with forevering light:
light that will make generations
of proud brown people remember
the Black Horse People of Boley.  bulldogging 
In truth there’s seldom a reason
for a man to wrestle a steer,
unless he’s a real ranch cowboy
dealing with ornery power.
Maybe, while rounding up the herd,
he bumps heads with testosterone,
and it’s testosterone-vs.-
testosterone. Bill Pickett learned,
watching dogs on a Boley ranch,
that sometimes you’ve got to bulldog
a hardhead with a kiss of pain.
Today, you slide from horse onto
the fleeing steer, grab his horns, pull
five hundred pounds of muscle down.  team roping, calf roping, steer roping 
Roping always involves a team,
whether it’s two men or women
or one human and one smart horse.
The aim: to bring down and hog-tie
a big scared baby of a calf
or a full-grown and pissed-off steer.
You gallop out swinging your loop
with one hand, the other holding
the slack and the unneeded reins.
You down him with a careful toss,
tie three of his hooves together,
step back with wide arms and a grin.
A rope isn’t always a noose:
ropes in brown hands can be lassos.  saddle bronc riding 
It’s not the leather riding gloves
and it’s not the fringed buckskin chaps,
not the worn-in and dusty boots,
not the spurs’ blunted silver stars,
not the 10x wide-brimmed straw hat
(both winged helmet and regal crown):
it’s not clothes that make the cowboy.
It’s something behind a bronzed face,
in the level gaze from dark eyes,
and, of course, it’s heart that puts you,
the reins in one hand, one hand free,
waving with the horse’s rhythm,
your heels spurring from neck to flank,
on this bronc called America.  barrel racing 
Thunder explodes out of the chute.
Mane and tail whip in the speed wind,
agile hooves pound a swift tempo
circling around the first barrel.
One hand grips the horn, the other
communicates with the taut reins,
though your thighs give the best guidance,
telling your horse to maneuver
in circles that hug the barrels.
Three barrels, a tight cloverleaf
you gallop through with one joined will.
This contest pits you and your horse
against the clock and your best time.
Sister, your dreadlocks are flying!  pony express 
Before telegraph, news traveled
from mouth to ear, from hand to hand.
News arrived old. From sea to sea
took weeks, unless carried by boys
stationed along the stagecoach route
to race a cross-country relay.
Your pulse gallops toward the handoff,
when your teammate takes the baton
and the noise and flurry go on
without you. Your leg run, you and
your horse (your partner, your friend) stand
encompassed in adrenalin,
watching, as the Ancestors must,
unable to help, but cheering.  tennessee walker 
Let’s hear it for the barrel men,
for the bullfighters, for the clowns,
for the men on the side ready
to run toward trouble. Give it up
for the musical director
(thanks for the hip-hop, bro!). And for
the announcer and all the folks
cheering in the stands. That baby
wearing a tiny cowboy hat.
That man the same black as his horse,
in that white suit and fedora.
His Tennessee Walker’s proud gait
as he nods to his own rhythm,
tail an ebony waterfall.  bull riding 
Boley bulls are bred for bucking,
bred to be mean, to be “Bad Boys.”
They teach you to sit strong, hold on,
and with one hand reach for the sky.
After riding a Boley bull
a cowboy thinks, Hell, I’ve been there.
I’ve held the bull-rope, raked my spurs,
while that bad boy tried to kill me.
A ton of Brahma seeing red
gives you a whole new perspective,
a who-you-think-you-talking-to
fearlessness. You’ve seen the bull’s eye:
you know you can’t die more than once.
You’ve lived through eight Mississippis.


^^EOP^^


The coals you walked on
in places considered un-
civil gleam beneath
feet transformed they
gleam, new blades sharp you
are adept at conjuring shoes
for your bare feet & blood
pools easy along the obsidian
edge   you walk fast because of in
spite of    you are said to be laughing
until you cry you cry laughing
and wait for the water to reach
the earth soothe this fire you
are still learning the power
of the rheostat installed when you landed
without papers once you had some    one    who
who kissedyoursoles    once    you
had   some    one who held your soles to
the fire in their foreheads, asking to be
blessed you once were that kind
of girl    war bought a berth upon a lazaretto skimming
the surface of the sky
safety you learned
comes from concealing everything from
turning your own body to bread, your own
laughter into balm, in disguising your soul
red  bruises  purple  turn  calloused  you
watch them come, keeled over with want
ectothermic creatures, now hot now cold to help ease
your hot you’re cold and you watch like a witch
cursed and cursing, you don’t feel
the sliced beets carrying you now you
note how easily the knives perfect these useless things
you cut off at your knees to live


^^EOP^^


The streets of Shobra are still traced
with music from years ago—
children ripping
the clothes off lines,
pins scattering in a rounded clatter
of sharp-throated wooden notes.
It might have been a merging
of Mohamed Fouad
and Mohamed Mohy
or Mohamed Fawzi,
and my brother (also a Mohamed)
is sitting in the shimmering corner
of our grandma’s balcony with one leg up.
He wants to finish this one song
because it has his favorite parts,
which he has rewound a few times now,
and Mahmoud is downstairs again
yelling, holding a peeling board game
they taped together, and my brother’s eyes glint
over to the chorus, remembering how Mahmoud
once told him how his father comes home
only once a month, and he feels bad
he is taking so long to go downstairs
but this would be the last time
he rewinds the song, Mahmoud, wallahi,
he yells, the cassette player’s volume
on high but not loud enough
to drown out the street-market prices,
the chatter of bent men
at the coffeehouse, their fingers caterpillar-like
through the mugs, blowing
on clouded tea,
but the music is just enough
to shroud it all in the blur
of a filmy fog that Mahmoud can hear
and he can’t help but remember
how sometimes at night,
if he closes his eyes hard enough,
he hears the din of keys
against the door,
the whistling of a man
nearly always caught
in the middle
of an unfinished song.


^^EOP^^


                                              Aztec girl twisting her hair into a braid
                                              when the army arrives.
She sees them in her citadel, 
her nickname for the city
                                              forgotten by her mouth’s mind. 
The Spanish writer who keeps the oldest codex saw grief 
when the papers of the people’s prayers were burned by the soldiers. 
Havoc, my freedom, without a history I invent my own. 
Say I am of many faces,
neither white nor brown,
                                                                            say violet, 
                             the color that speaks like violence. 
Legacy sounds like lost at sea. 
              Say it wasn’t precious to me, identity.
              Strange, dangerous innocence.
              The earth is an onion strung with lights, my eyes sting
                                                                                          from the blaze.
A gold hawk joins 
              the ring of fox in heavy dew around me early and I
am part of their wet ritual in my wish 
                                                            to turn from what is human, even 
knowing it was hawk who stole the woodpecker’s redheaded flight.


^^EOP^^


the archivist         enters the room
with a    bag of oranges

she    
broke one on                 the walk over
her shirt tucked        under bra          strings
of     juice
draw down         her chin


he
is sitting at the         table when  she enters
facing the     open window     that
exits  to
a     skyline
licked with     fog        a thick cover    of


buildings    hang       from the clouds


she hasn’t yet          learnt
to              know words &
not their          meaning

camera
spills
through the         gaps in her teeth   
lands       within the    hollow    
that     turns to      plump
breast;
meeting place

her father walks      to the kitchen sink
empties the steaming        jug into   terra-cotta bowl
steeps      the dried khat
until it   turns         to tea


they say the leaf of God
conjures        old ghosts
but  he weathers     the nightmares
for      the         memories

the children
marching     in     twos past
where  he     stood cutting    leaf & cane


the  eldest      of twelve
first       from his      village to
enter   university
swallowed       the language     
of    three       colonizers

afaan  oromo he
kept
hidden in the    secret of his cheeks


she    thought
everything     unknowable    stayed
hallowed    in    transit

the crackle of      scalded onions
  &      oil
her     aunty covered    in gold  & satin
towering   over    gleaming    blue
hands     filled
with      wood   &    metal


as   the      doctor
eased    her     knees open
back       pressed against
white   linen
imitation      cotton
forced  against      her  meat

she     found
etched         onto
ceiling

two      mountains   
estranged by
migrant ash       white
like the      dripped
seed    of the poplar   in spring
clotted       between the
blackened                   roots
of      Odaa     Nabee
the sound       of thunder
kindling           the    floodplain;
meeting place


he takes        his seat
at the    table
an old      study desk from
the salvos     reads like an atlas


scrunches a    piece of green
places it     in his mouth

rests his hands at     the end of the counter
&
asks

where is your country?

she   draws her
finger      to the   
    middle    of her chest    
etching     circles onto
skin

her tongue   loops
the enclave of    her cheeks

drawing    rings
across flesh   then    slips
past the white    threads
that     drip from teeth   

she gestures to the      back of her
mouth      her left palm remains
on  breast

&  says
in   here      


^^EOP^^


it is dark here & still you have al nur at your neck when fajr does not come
my body is the color of mourning / not dua or dawah / so I say let the day come 
my body is fajr / day is mourning / I am still a clot of blood looking for skin
the color of god is a stain / shaped to you like a grief not yet come 
black is the color of god not grief & rain is not looking for skin / but is red dust
stepping into your body without melting & finding every empty space a dwelling to come 
I am still an accident of geography looking for a body that is not a stain & prayer
is the mourning I wake up to / the clot of blood I pick until again a wound comes 
out the color of accident / which is red dust / the color of geography / which is dissolution
& lined like a palm made by prayer / shaped to me like a drought not yet come 
& yes / I want to be named to the marrow / make inventory & god of what has yet hurt me
& so I pick dua from your neck until I am no longer wound & strained & come 
to claim the dwelling of you a sign & beget a desert of new names & call fajr skin
that has left blood & black how I step into your body & melting the stain to come 
it is mourning here / I am four droughts old again & mistake all the women
in my family to the time of desert / clot of blood & red clay straining / for a homecoming 
but looking for skin does not unstitch the mouth & the stain of grief is finding
no words at all & every empty space is like stepping into red dust & what comes 
from accident begets home / invented by all the god in my color & yes / I want
to be shaped to the clot / whole & make blood & black of what has yet come


^^EOP^^


In praise of all that is honest, call upon the acrylic tips
and make a minaret out of a middle finger, gold-dipped
and counting. In the name of Filet-O-Fish, pink lemonade,
the sweat on an upper lip, the backing swell and ache
of Abdul Basit Abdus Samad on cassette tape, a clean jump shot,
the fluff of Ashanti’s sideburns, the rice left in the pot
the calling cards and long waits, the seasonal burst
of baqalah-bought dates. 
Every time they leave and come back
alive. 
Birthmarks shaped like border disputes.
Black sand. Shah Rukh’s dimples, like bullets
taking our aunts back to those summer nights,
these blessings on blessings on blessings. 
Give me the rub of calves,
rappers sampling jazz,
the char of frankincense
and everything else that makes sense
in a world that don’t.


^^EOP^^


The heart, the surgeon says, does not reveal
the small rifts, the hairline cracks which 
split the hairline cracks they conceal cops
and robbers in a stretch of skin flaunting 
star-scars with show of blood bone
the ledges of what it holds tight in checkmate 
moves: bend this and break
fight first and bleed to earn 
needle  finger  wrap  caress  balm
the salvation of sight   Behold what beauty 
lasts, what outlasts itself    The curtain
calls the ovation    Seize the beginning 
that ends this way: off center stage above
fractured ribs the heart succumbs in silence 
All is dark. Listen      a kommos sung solo
It is too late to repair anything.


^^EOP^^


1 
The sinner’s bouquet, house of shredded & torn Dear John letters, upended grave of names, moon Black kiss of a pistol’s flat side, time blueborn
& threaded into a curse, Lazarus of hustlers, the picayune
Spinning into beatdown; breath of a thief stilled By fluorescent lights, a system of 40 blocks, Empty vials, a hand full of purple cranesbills,
Memories of crates suspended from stairs, tied in knots
Around streetlamps, the house of unending push-ups, Wheelbarrows & walking 20s, the daughters Chasing their fathers’ shadows, sons that upset
The wind with their secrets, the paraphrase of fractured, Scarred wings flying through smoke, each wild hour Of lockdown, hunger time & the blackened flower. 
2 
Of lockdown, hunger time & the blackened flower — Ain’t nothing worth knowing. Prison becomes home;
The cell: a catacomb that cages and the metronome Tracking the years that eclipse you. History authors 
Your death, throws you into that din of lost hours. Your mother blames it all on your X chromosome,
Blames it on something in the blood, a Styrofoam
Cup filled with whiskey leading you to court disfavor, 
To become drunk on count-time & chow-call logic. There is no name for this thing that you’ve become:
Convict, hostage, inmate, lifer, yardbird, all fail. If you can’t be free, be a mystery. An amnesic.
Anything. But avoid succumbing to the humdrum:
Swallowing a bullet or even just choosing to inhale. 
3 
Swallowing a bullet or even just choosing to inhale, Both mark you: pistol or the blunt to the head
Escorting you through the night. Your Yale— An omen, the memories, the depression, the dead 
And how things keep getting in the way of things.
When he asked you for the pistol, and you said no, The reluctance wasn’t about what violence brings.
His weeping in your ear made you regret what you owed. 
On some days, the hard ones, you curse the phone, The people calling collect, reaching out, all buried,
Surrounded by bricks. On some days, you’ve known
You wouldn’t answer, the blinking numbers as varied 
As the names of the prisons holding on to those lives,
Holding on, ensuring that nothing survives. 
4  Holding on, ensuring that nothing survives,
Not even regret. That’s the thing that gets you,
Holding on to memories like they’re your archives, Like they’re there to tell you something true 
About what happened. My past put a skew On how I held her. Unaccustomed to touch,
I knew only dream & fantasy. Try to see through
That mire and find intimacy. It was just so much.  & then, the yesterdays just become yesterday,
A story that you tell yourself about not dying,
Another thing, when it’s mentioned, to downplay.
That’s what me and that woman did, trying 
To love each other. What kind of fool am I,
Lost in what’s gone, reinventing myself with lies. 
5 
Lost in what’s gone, reinventing myself with lies:
I walk these streets, ruined by what I’d hide.
Jesus died for somebody’s sins, but not mine. 
I barely see my daughters at all these days. Out here caught up, lost in an old cliché.
But tell me, what won’t these felonies betray? 
Did a stretch in prison to be released to a cell. Returned to a freedom penned by Orwell.
My noon temptation is now the Metro’s third rail. 
In my wallet, I carry around my daguerreotype, A mugshot, no smiles, my name a tithe.
What must I pay for being this stereotype? 
The pistols I carried into the night, my anchor;
The crimes that unraveled me, my banner. 
6 
The crimes that unraveled me—my banner. Only a fool confesses to owning that fact.
Honesty a sinkhole; the truth doomed to subtract
Everything but prayer, turn my breath into failure.  Whiskey after prison made me crave amber,
Brown washing my glass until I’m smacked. The murder of crows on my arm an artifact Of freedom: what outlasts even the jailor.  Alas, there is no baptism for me tonight.
No water to drown all these memories. The rooms in my head keep secrets that indict
Me still; my chorus of unspoken larcenies.  You carry that knowledge into your twilight,
& live without regret for your guilty pleas. 
7 
& live without regret for your guilty pleas— Shit. Mornings I rise twice: once for a count
That will not come & later with the city’s Wild birds, who find freedom without counsel. 
I left prison with debts no honest man could pay. Walked out imaging I’d lapped my troubles,
but a girl once said no to my closed ears, dismayed that I didn’t pause. Remorse can’t calm those evils.  I’ve lost myself in some kind of algebra
That turns my life into an equation that zeroes Out, regardless of my efforts. Algophobia
Means to fear pain. I still fear who knows  All I’ve done. Why regret this thing I’ve worn?
The sinner’s bouquet; house, shredded & torn.


^^EOP^^


my god wakes up with bed head
and sticky fingers, doesn’t
want to go into work today 
my god forgets to do the dishes
lets all the houseplants die 
my god teenages
built this earth on Friday night
and tires of it on Sunday morning 
my god commands
a willing army, unwillingly
mutters, whines 
my god is so type B
just wants to be left alone
just wants to smoke a cigarette
and not think of the parents and their children 
my god is a liar
always one foot out the door
and ready to leave me here
if that’s what it takes 
my god fickles
breaks every bony promise
picks away at the meat
laughs when i tantrum 
still, i half-kneel and pray a half-prayer
bend until i can look myself in the eye
still, there is no god but God
so i make do with this one


^^EOP^^


                    
                    
                    The following poems and collages were created for Victoria Martinez’s solo show, Celestial House, at Loyola University Museum of Art (LUMA) as odes to the homes and Chicago neighborhoods the artists grew up in. All collages are by Victoria Martinez and all poems are by José Olivarez.

 


Victoria Martinez

Pantry Secrets, 2018, collage, 15 × 10 in.




Nation of Domination

my mom hugs me & wants me to stay. i have my foot
on the pedal. a fake gold chain on my neck. i confess
i’m a sucker. i never want magicians to reveal their secrets.
i want to live in the unknowing where everything is possible.
my mom dances with me to Los Bukis. she thinks this makes
me her baby still. perspective is a magic trick. i hit my brother
with the Rock Bottom & i bet you can guess what i leave out.
ask Farooq if you need a hint. the brain is full of magic
i don’t understand. no one signs up to take a dive. in wrestling,
there’s a team of writers who decide who wins and who loses.
the metaphor is obvious. my mom wasn’t born to play the role
of mom, i don’t care how many baby dolls she played with.
i dance with my mom to Los Bukis & you’re a fool
if you believe it’s her son she’s trying to hold on to.


 


Victoria Martinez

Pillow Talk, 2018, collage, 15 × 10 in.




moonshine

the poets are right about the moonlight.
i take my spot of sky & deposit it
into a savings account. only after
the bank confiscated our house
did i understand. roses
don’t grow without pricked hands.
i didn’t have to spend a summer in a freezer
packing lunch meat to know the value
of sunlight. my mom didn’t have
to spend a decade wiping down floors to appreciate
education. when i give you a bouquet of roses,
i give you a bouquet of bloody hands.
a handful of dirt & the worms that doted on your roses.
when i take my piece of sky out of the bank,
it’s smaller. the drunks are right about moonshine.


 


Victoria Martinez

Hoyne, 2018, collage, 15 × 10 in.




Shelter Island

frigid are the branches of black trees cutting through
a blacker night. missing are the lampposts that adorn
every few feet of New York. cold is your hand in my hand
& yes, i am a man, & you are a woman. my wilderness
is not unlike the woods that surround us. the sky in my wild
lit by lanterns in the faces of animals. my own flammable face.
my father’s temperament. my thrifted excuse. yes,
it’s the night before 45 is sworn in as president,
& yes, we leave the city, & we would leave the planet, too.
you hold my hand & we walk into the teeth of the hour
armed with each other. bitter cold is the world we leave behind.
when we hold hands, we invent a spaceship.
​
                

^^EOP^^


You are dark as religion. Remember God
could not have named a modicum of light without you.
You are plum, black currant, passion
fruit in another woman’s garden. You are Black
as and as if by magic. Black not as sin, but a cave’s jaw
clamped shut by forgiveness. Color of closed wombs and bellies
of ships, you, dark as not the tree trunk but its every cleft.
I chart each crescent moon rising above fingernail
and rub together my thighs for want of you. I try
to find you where the pages of books meet. You hang
where men or piano keys segregate. When I miss you,
I remember the hickey the sun left on the back of my neck.
If I forget, I smoke blunts down to my fingertips
and beg you to come on my lips. This is how I pray for you
when I’m not pessimistic. I bow to your darkness like I kneel
beside a child’s bed, confessing as gospel, there’s no monster here.


^^EOP^^


my sister wraps the throw
around herself on the small
cream loveseat & i know
for sure that she is not
a speck of dirt on a pill.
she coughs & sniffs up all
the lucky air in the room
into her excellent nostrils,
which are endless
holy wells replenishing
the soft architecture of her guts.
not even the lupus can interrupt
this ritual of beholding.
you ever look at a thing
you ain’t make, but become
a mother in the looking?
our blood is a thread tied
around my finger, tied
around her finger, that helps
me love. when her knees
swell, when her joints rust,
when her hair thins & flees
making a small continent
of skin on the side of her head,
i am witnessing her in whatever
state her body will allow.
Bismillah to the brain that
put my name next to her name
and said look at this girl your
whole life and know some kind
of peace.

^^EOP^^


The thing inside the
thing inside the thing
inside Malinche,
mother, Cortés, father, casta, first mestizo,
loanword for admixture,
dark one, darker than
one and lighter than
the other, espaldera,
graft, hybrid, pardo, parda,
castiza

^^EOP^^


I amuse myself with my country.
     I glimpse its future approaching on the eyelashes of an ostrich, I toy with its history and its days, I strike it with stones and thunderbolts. I extinguish its lamps and light its windows, and at the other end of day I inaugurate its history.

I am a stranger to all of you. I am from the other end. I live in a country of my own, inflating the sky to see its ashes, and in sleeping and waking I open a bud to live within.

Something must be born, so I bore caverns in my skin for lightning and build nests. I must pass like thunder into lips as sad as straw, between stone and autumn, between pore and epidermis, between thigh and thigh.
      And so I sing: “Form worthy of our demise—advance.”
     And so I shout and sing: “Who will give us the maternity of the cosmos, who will nourish us with mines?”

I advance toward my self, toward ruins. The silence of calamity takes me—I’m too short to gird the earth like a rope, I’m not sharp enough to pierce the face of history and plunge in.

You want me to be like you. You boil me in the cauldron of your prayers; you mix me with the broth of armies and the pepper of tyrants, then pitch me like a tent for the wali and hoist my skull like a flag.
     (My death,
     Nevertheless I run toward you, I rush rush rush to you.)

You live like flagstones, and lamentation is your air. You announce the hedgehog’s abode and sleep on the scarab’s censers—your children are immolations.

A distance as great as a mirage divides us.

I rouse hyenas in you, I rouse the gods. I sow sedition in you and suckle fever, then teach you to journey without a guide. I am a pole for your latitudes and a walking springtime. I am a convulsion in your throats, a hemorrhage in your words.


You advance like leprosy toward me, and I am the one bound to your dirt. Yet nothing unites us, everything divides us—so let me burn alone, let me pass through you like a spear of light.
     I cannot live with you, I cannot live without you. You are an undulation in my senses, and I cannot escape you. Even so, cry out, “The sea, the sea!” Even so, hang the beads of the sun on your thresholds.

Open my memory and study my face beneath its words, learn my alphabet. When you see foam weaving my flesh and stone flowing in my blood, you will see me.
      I am closed like a tree trunk, present and ungraspable like air. Thus I cannot surrender to you.

I was born in the sockets of lilacs, I grew in the orbits of lightning, I live with light and grass. I storm and I clear up, I shine and cloud over, I rain and snow—the hours are my language, and my country is day.

The people are sleeping, but if they die they’ll awaken, or so it was said. You are all sleeping, but if you awaken you’ll die, or so it shall be said.
     You are dirt on my windowpanes, and I must remove you. I am the coming morning and the map that draws itself.

Nevertheless, there’s a fever in my bowels that keeps vigil over you.
     Nevertheless, I await you,
     In the shell of night by the sea, in the roaring of the depths, in the holes in the robe of the sky, in the jujubes and acacias, in the pines and cedars, in the hearts of the waves, in the salt,
      I await you.

 
Translated from the Arabic


^^EOP^^


It was like climbing a mountain to those of us who’d climbed one. To the others, it was like, I suppose, something else. In other words, we let everybody find her own figure of speech. 
Not that it—speech—lay thick on the ground, or mountain; it presented itself one word at a time, far between. A body had to keep an eye out, like for firewood at dusk, or else 
miss her chance. Nobody else, let’s face it, cared about metaphor, or even simile, the like-it-or-not-ness of the mountain pretty much getting between a body and her musing, in its going. One 
step at a time, anyone could lose herself or someone else just staring at her feet. And if a body meet a body is not mere speech but something that could happen, like hopping a bus—though on the mountain 
you’ll catch no rides, worse luck, the mountain requires to be climbed on foot, one after the other, nothing else will get you up it. There’s nothing like such obduracy but in the wild, nobody can tell you otherwise. No simple figure, 
this struggle: just a crag, your burden, and your own two feet. Say otherwise, talk through your hat, which I don’t care for.


^^EOP^^


                    
                    
                    you michelangelo’s crouching boy/you d’angelo’s purr/you dead currency/you dead presidents/you a stick of incense/you a stick-up artist/you haraami/you the hum of a lifetime basined in my lap/count our tallies of loss backward for me/run to the bank & translate it into a fistful of green of your choice/or something else sanctified/or european/pick the synonym of your choice.

in a traditional sense/the body holds its arithmetic/exports it outward/to the touch and exhale/the praxis felt best/against a groan of concrete/with the dumb weight of a hand against the small of a back/here, an elevator is our only spiritual ascension/can i be excused from living so slimly?

i dream you closer too/beside the honey-colored dog licking its vulva/an abstract laugh swelling inside your throat/ask me about blood clots and spun coins/the cracked skin of heels/anything but the nightly heartbreaks of/too many addresses/and all the ways/i am still auditioning/for this country’s approval.
 
                

^^EOP^^


on my block, a gate
on my block, a tree smelling 
of citrus & jasmine that knocks
me back into the arms of my dead 
mother. i ask Ross how can a tree
be both jasmine & orange,

^^EOP^^


I inhabit these fugitive words,
I live, my face my face’s lone companion,
And my face is my path, 
In your name, my land
That stands tall, enchanted and solitary;
In your name, death, my friend.
 
Translated from the Arabic


^^EOP^^


kitchen table

Imagine this. Mother sits near the rusty stove,
chops onions for the puchero pot. Radio’s on.
A soft bolero by Lucho Gatica, “Somos”: we are.
She sings along to her favorite tune. He wants
to talk. Dog sleeps under the table. He doesn’t
know how. He met an older boy. They kissed.
It just happened. In an instant. His new dirty
shoes, her stained apron over her knotted hands.
Kitchen’s bright yellow light undoes him.
Mother senses his stare. Dinner isn’t ready yet.
He wants to say things. That same night
a storm breaks out, water overflows the gutters,
takes everything away—leaves, twigs, a straight 
soft string. She doesn’t have much time.



oval table
 
Profane
four-legged thing
a holy place of gatherings
father mother three kids a ghost
eating asado Sunday mass barbecue
sins familiar sins scattered all over
the old checkered tablecloth Pray
one day you’ll have a family like this
all these traditions will pass on
to you Pray! this broken table
now dies slowly now lies
alone in a toolshed
somewhere
south.



high altar

Then Noah built an altar to the Lord and, taking some of all the clean animals and clean birds, he sacrificed burnt offerings on it.
—Genesis 8:20
 
A piece of furniture with a flat top and one or more legs, providing a level surface for eating, writing
of us kids
& father still
preaching
we’re both
alike you
my son I
will make
you love
every women
mujeriego
like dad
cracked
broken legs
or so he says
this life
unknown
to you
so apart
tell us
oh why
you feel
a man
hidden
inside liar
you love
hairy legs
so familiar
or so he says


^^EOP^^


              Anger is the other person inside
                            mi garganta, my throat. 
                            The mouth’s mouth is the deepest. 
Rage is the homeless boy fallen down a well. 
Shout down and he will echo back.
                                          La lengua, tongue. 
How long have you been down there? 
                            Subterráneo, underground. 
The letters of Cortés are difficult to read,
                            on each page a horse dies. 
The lord of the city lives homeless in a canoe.
Hundreds of natives are speared. 
              Another town is burned alive
              with all its caged creatures. 
On each page the people appear to walk
                                                        over their dead.  La tierra estercolada, the earth fertilized,
spreads a cloth whose pattern repeats. 
                            On each page the future arrives
on a raft woven of snakes. 
              Over and over, the design obliterates. 
Never does he say this was their home we took.


^^EOP^^


Especially in line for the food bank,
my mother radiated grace. Talked
a machinery of Principles. Elm trees
and their dresses of urine, her small mouth
always chiding, don’t speak to a man of that kind.
This daily commitment to life felt laborious, haram.
Expendable it was, like all my milk teeth
knocked back into my mouth. That taste.
What even is sustenance? She was a woman of Principles,
she flossed, her exquisite fangs displaying remorse
only when she reprimanded me or talked of the coat.
Consider the white lab coat hanging
above a crusted heater; consider our dilapidating shame.
Consider me. Tonight, I exercise humility,
so I identify with the pigeons
nagging on the chicken bone gray as the sky.
Unparagraphed I am, the way I still steal
my dinner from a health store on 6th Ave,
then lecture the diorama with my lentil soup.
The truth is, I never educated myself
the way I cultivated my limits.
I was an abandoned thought,
marching through an unlocked window—
I had an albino budgie once, red ink for eyes.
He wore a lab coat
and crashed against my window
like a displaced insect.
His name was Apollo. Some circumstances never abandon
you, you only train the muscle that carries them.
Is a wing a muscle? 3 Best Exercises to Building Badass Wings,
says the ad and the man in the subway
sprawled across hard plastic  looks like
a glorious bone. In his odor, I feel at home.
Consider his careful dedication to repose.
There is something he has mastered genuinely,
his fist curled around it.  Sleeps on two cushions,
one for his ass. She was a woman of Principles. 
Consider her stark god of oblivion. 
Nobody would’ve differentiated between us and him.
Uniformly standing in line, a dark puff, plume on the wing.
The wing patched to the torso of a body entirely ignorant of aerodynamics.
The world hadn’t hurt us more than
it had hurt anyone else, but still, I couldn’t trust
the sky and its reverberations.
In line, I made friends with a family
of crickets in white lab coats.
They sang to me, of the end of it,
that wings were awaiting us there:
stale bread rolls, a cheese pie,
Braeburn apples sharing space
with two cans of tomatoes.


^^EOP^^


Our city fled,
So I sought its paths in haste
And looked around—I saw only horizon,
And I perceived that those who flee tomorrow
And those who return tomorrow
Are a body I tear apart on my page. 
I could see: the clouds were a throat,
The water formed walls of flame.
I saw a sticky yellow thread,
A thread of the history that clings to me.
A hand mulls over my life, ties my days together
Time and again, a hand that was heir
To the race of dolls and the progeny of rags. 
I entered the rites of creation
In the waters’ womb and the trees’ virginity,
I saw trees seducing me,
I saw rooms among their branches,
Beds and windows resisting me,
I saw children and read them
My sand, I read them
Suras of clouds and verses of stone,
I saw them journeying with me,
I saw pools of tears and the corpse of rain
Gleaming behind them. 
Our city fled—
What am I? A spike of grain
Weeping for a lark
That died beneath the snow and cold,
Died without revealing its messages,
Died without writing anyone.
I questioned it and saw its corpse
Discarded at the end of time,
And I cried out, “Silence of the ice, I
Am the home of the exiled lark.
Its grave is my home, and I’m an exile.” 
Our city fled,
And I saw my feet transform
Into a river overflowing with blood,
Into ships growing distant, expanding,
And I saw my drowned shores seducing ...
My waves were wind and pelicans. 
Our city fled,
And refusal is a crushed pearl
Whose powder anchors my ships,
And refusal is a woodcutter living
On my face—it gathers me and sets me on fire—
And refusal is the distance that disperses me.
I see my blood and I see my death
Beyond my blood:
It speaks to me and pursues me. 
Our city fled,
And I saw how my shroud illumines me,
I saw ... If only death would grant me time.
 
Translated from the Arabic


^^EOP^^


                    
                    
                    she was washee i told her you are
like your motherland a wilderness
needs a belt laid down two white
hotel towels took her into the tub to
wudu the boys out of her mouth pointed
her nipples toward qibla wiped clean
her intention to perform ruk’u as if
carrying a glass of chai on her back
fold at the knees palms to the ground
tucked her soles under her astaghfirullah
used country
in my used country I felt his teeth
circle as a mosquito the black mystery
he placed my right hand over my wrong
stain said he was bringing me home
offered me a suite with a lock a key in
the shape of a brother perhaps twenty-
two years old my body pure as a glass
table he spilled was she my boss on my
back at night came easy as a fly
to post-conflict faithfully
used my country


^^EOP^^


To be a statue               carved by Bernini
Lounging in a climate-controlled museum in Rome         is luxury
Like the luxury of a personal pan pizza            with unlimited free toppings
Or the luxurious feel of a premium eye pencil          used to draw bisons on the walls of a French cave
To be so white and glossy                   is unimaginable
Like how I imagine a plate of eggs painted by Velázquez           or the lid of a designer toilet cistern
In a European magazine                       (I could be European
And wear a dashingly arranged scarf          or sip weirdly-named liqueurs that taste like semen
In a Rococo palais)                but in the scheme of things
Where I am marble and still                  my wrist will be a marvel
Like the marvel of an isthmus           whose name can only be pronounced if you have a lisp
Or the marvelous sausage                that saved a man from the Inquisition in 1582
It is definitely marvelous                    to be as attenuated
As the casually extended leg of a greyhound                   reclining on its very own velvet settee
To be so thoroughbred                          is an accomplishment
Like the thoroughly flattened face of a Persian cat                   which always looks peevish
Or the extremely frivolous ceiling                   of a banqueting hall where royals are put to death
If it is admirable to be so luxurious                    then I will never be admired
The way a designer toilet cistern is admired               or a piece of elaborate pâtisserie
(Although I am not a statue                   I have often held my arms aloft
As when catching a carelessly thrown baby              or pointing at two meteors at the same time)
It is exhausting trying to be so inanimate               and desirable
If my arm breaks off  like the shell                of a freshly-filled cannoli
You will know why


^^EOP^^


At one time,
if my nails had been painted
this shade of rose-foam in Kabul
they would have rammed
out the frosted shell
like the tarp off
a bud’s wet belly,
they would have gouged out
each shining beast,
viscera still shiny,
each glittering pore
still insane
with breath 
The pain is meant
to shame me back to the realm
of several whitenesses,
they want to chew off
the cicatrix and lodge the
septic cadaver
into a further gorge where frisks
of neon riot in aporia,
where the humility
of the body is turned to iron 
The shame is a
figure with an axe
climbing a voluting staircase,
it runs the speeding drams
with agility
from the hard pallet of the
radius to the soft roofs
of the mounds
It famishes
the exquisitely nurtured
yellow
around which
breakers of scarp
hemorrhage
tigerish
glyphs, accomplishing
the gravity of
Japanese inscriptions 
A delicate cancer
bares its jaw,
tufts of blood
abound
in clay,
sculpted
fetal knots
a fetal navy,
they harden to seeds,
crab-like, platinum,
growing beneath the
watery ceiling of the palm
into amiable shoots;
an aubade on delphiniums
growing clearer each day 
Over many months
the permutations will again
show their round, maddening
faces,
the Persian inlay
will abound
with devout layers
we will stroke on
the fine, sensual, nymphic
chemical
paint up to the ridges where we bleed the richest
I cannot evade the force, brushing
further and further
iridescent texture
on my torso, spirit,
tongue,
I’m a
bridge of veins
in air
I’m an orphic phantasm, hair
combed through with
stalactites
I’m a bouquet
of limbs appliquéd
on pouring rain,
what can the spectral evening muster
in lament?


^^EOP^^


The trouble with Jane Eyre
isn’t what I thought when I slammed shut the book
on those pictures trying to fly out at me
because I misunderstood, being too young 
to read. When you’re unable to read a book
you can’t understand the illustrations either.
Those were my mother’s books, a green bound set
of that one and the book by her sister, Emily. 
When you can’t understand the artwork
the face at the window is a monster.
It is only Cathy, though, in the book by Brontë’s sister,
calling for her lover. And the awful figure bending 
over Jane’s bed with the candle, that monstrous
creature—well, there are flaws in the mind of Jane, too,
and the awful figure bending over her
might be the tormented wife of Rochester. 
There’s a flaw in Jane’s mind, too,
looking down on the young French child
born to another tormented mother
whom Rochester says has inherited sin. 
The young French child likes presents too much,
likes to dance and sing—and so what? She is love-starved,
this child who has supposedly inherited sin,
who will never get the approval of Mr. Rochester. 
We lose track of the pretty child who likes to sing.
Jane goes away for a while to prove her purity.
Then, when the other wife dies, Mr. Rochester
will approve. Reader, I married him, she says, 
after she has gone away for a while. He is blind
from the fire the crazy wife set. And then, miraculously,
her love asks if she is wearing a blue dress.
I believe she is pregnant, then, carrying a child 
who will be a good child, miraculously.
Charlotte Brontë knew only part of the happy ending.
Perhaps he gets better and sees the blue dress.
We have to believe things turn out well, 
while Charlotte, herself, had nine months of pleasure
and died. And so the book, which ends as if resolved,
asks us to believe things turn out well, the French girl gone,
Rochester and Jane and the baby in the burned-out 
mansion, because books then ended resolutely
and did not reflect how it is to have a calm life,
Rochester and Jane and the baby in the burned-out
mansion, illustrated by the art of the woodcut, 
which does not suggest such a calm life,
but a knife and fire making art out of wood,
in a mansion that itself has been sculpted by
fire and breaking things, which is how we really live.


^^EOP^^

