
My Mother’s Teeth—died twice, once in 1965, all pulled out from gum disease. Once again on August 3, 2015. The fake teeth sit in a box in the garage. When she died, I touched them, smelled them, thought I heard a whimper. I shoved the teeth into my mouth. But having two sets of teeth only made me hungrier. When my mother died, I saw myself in the mirror, her words in a ring around my mouth, like powder from a donut. Her last words were in English. She asked for a Sprite. I wonder whether her last thought was in Chinese. I wonder what her last thought was. I used to think that a dead person’s words die with them. Now I know that they scatter, looking for meaning to attach to like a scent. My mother used to collect orange blossoms in a small shallow bowl. I pass the tree each spring.  I always knew that grief was something I could smell. But I didn’t know that it’s not actually a noun but a verb. That it moves.


^^EOP^^



 


^^EOP^^


If  I claim this poem presents the tundra
swans we saw at first light, you might,
wrongly, think of  Yeats at Coole. 
Or 9-&-50 other suppositions. In fact,
the blue slate of this lake reflected formerly
some blockchain constellations. Alas 
now for mimesis; a star necklace makes
an atlas, windlass, spyglass, free pass: so
you say. But, come on. I swan, who 
ever took the mark for the squawk,
the squawk for the Ding
                                    an sich? The weird
ding is, the things themselves, swanning 
about, are also mere wavy carboxyl
collusions, un-establishable is-es, noise-marks
hoo-ing, Here! Over here!  Hush up 
your eyes: the swans in their ghost forest,
where long needles inscribed loblolly pines, are vehement enough. Past 
the channel, early savannah shine prisms
on grass heads’ fog. Don’t make
a deal of it. Sun dogs will yap soon. 
Pinions may clatter. Your head may
stop throbbing. Hold fast. Stop who-ing.


^^EOP^^





It is impossible to come up with a fair metric for recompensing slavery ten
generations after slavery’s end.
—Ben Shapiro, Fox News 



What apple, which conquistador
oats? Which ruby red
moat, what filet of bartered goat?
Which glazed carrot caught your nose, 
drew you into the station
w/ blinders on? Horse’s ass.
Quaffed cad. Whatdoya call a
property tax on a revolving 
accessory? What’s a loan
w/o a lessor, B? Which of these
eventualities is not like the other—free
& clear from the shattering / a mast 
of tears makes / when it fractures /
scalpels away / silt / clean off 
a runaway cliff,
before gashing the quarry w/ after-
shot? I’ll take my safety net in breakneck
class action union wage annuity checks 
from Ancestry.com, 23 & Everybody
Who’s Made a Killing Trafficking
in Families & Trees. Run me my knot,
Money. Untie my limbs. Underwrite 
the court costs, plus notary fees
to petition my change of surname.
Now multiply that expense by a modest
interest rate accrued over 154 summers, 
give or take. Or strap weights
to your ankles / go float in a lake.


^^EOP^^





Noun: A uniting or binding element or force.



              The thing about facing your fears head on
is it only really works on TV. As an example, let’s say
              a clawfoot bathtub teeming with arachnids 
is your garden variety anti-fantasy.
              Now, say the sitcom dad in you gets the itch
to do something experiential, something special 
              for your 40th (stay with me), so you willingly
dive into a pool of 10,000 tarantulas, head-
              first. In the Fear Factor version 
of this midlife episode, Ludacris is like
              Man, white people are crazy.
In reality, this sounds like a frightful fucking 
              headache, six ibuprofen & stitches.
Like 80,000 eyeballs all up in your situation,
              if you catch my drift. & I bet, 
the last thing you need is a group of  hairy
              climbers, & their many-legged offspring,
ogling your property. Sniffing up the ol’ oak tree 
              after the acorns you squirreled away
for the fam when the market was healthy.
              Square any beef  between two parties 
& you’ll find money lurking somewhere
              near the root. Of evil & fear,
Aristotle claimed, pain arises 
              from the untoward bracing.
He strikes me as a particularly
              anxious dude. Extreme fear can neither 
fight nor fly

^^EOP^^


It is hard to make this choice
when the room is so small and bright,
and the outside big and deep.
But I have not taught myself
to lie on the earth and feel
how much greater it is than me.
And I can’t help following the sky
with my eyes as it moves past me,
and I can’t help closing my eyes to imagine
the boat that carries me to the middle
of a lake as dark as the gaps between the clouds.
I forget everything I have learned
about how to hold myself
at the last edges of sensation
when not so long ago I held
the small hands of a child
and taught her to play a clapping game,
when I stood before a storm of scalding water
that would have killed me
if I gave it the mistake it looked for.
After all this time, we still must love and eat,
and none of us is alone.
See why I create these places where I am a stone.
In the bed, soft against the side
where I make the dark blanket more beautiful
and the sheet a pale and magnificent drawing,
there is nowhere to wrap the part of myself
that understands the handshake of  joy
in my arms and hold her while she cries.
The sink is running in the next room
and the walls are flashed with what the world does at night.
Too much of us is evident in this hour
and I am sick with a cold fever
that hasn’t broken since I was a girl
who loved how good it was to sleep
on the floor, so near to the silent ground.
Still, the boat, and the dark water
that has its private depth.
It never tries to carry me anywhere.
It makes the wind wait in the trees.


^^EOP^^


   All hands were on deck as we docked
in the nerve church, metaphoric boat
  of soul metamorphic, boat-shaped back
                                                                of
    the oud whose belly we rode in, ety-
mologic boat of soul catastrophic, church
 whose nave we were in. Church cast-
ing color cast a stain on the world. It bore
                                                                 the
   bright light we’d been thru, gone round
and come thru again, metamorphic boat
  of soul metaphoric, of what no one would
                                                                    say ...
    Whatever it was was what soul was, of
which only the asker wanted to know.
   All hands were on deck even so. All had
                                                                gone
 well were it only body nerve church meant,
   well were it only soul it meant, well were
it not a thread of the two, other than either, a
                                                                       thread
    and a third, off to itself. All had gone well
 that way, would’ve gone well were it the way,
  way that it wasn’t, would that it were ... We
                                                                       lay
     held in the oud whose belly was black, all
  hands on deck as we docked, bent neck and
   bent knee de rigueur in the nerve church, co-
nundrum the head it hit. Meat and bone apart
                                                                         from
   meat and bone was the nerve church, soul
unbeknown to itself it also was, a certain some-
  thing not something notwithstanding, asked
                                                                       a-
bout no matter no answer would accrue. All
  hands were on deck proclaiming soul, soul not
 something to be said to be had, soul that was
                                                                       a
   boat and that sat in the boat it was, borne
beknown to itself. All hands were on deck not
 proclaiming soul. The less we boasted the
                                                                     bet-
ter we rode the boat that soul was, the boat that
                                                                           sold
  us thought to be that
boat  
                      •  
 Some were said to have limbo’d below deck,
  the lute’s dark insides a madrigal of sorts, its
back less back than belly. Some were said to
                                                                     have
   bent back while surrounded by singers, bent
back so far their heads were on the floor. The
  backs of their heads were on the floor, it was
                                                                       said,
    brushed it, the back of the head a belly di-
 gesting damage, no way its way a way ... Some
  were said, once on deck, to have jumped, a
shark’s teeth or breathlessness the way, no way,
                                                                        was
 theirs, jumped, some said, or were thrown. We
   knew all this coming into the nerve church, its
nave encyclopedic, no outrage not written down,
                                                                             histo-
   ry a parable of nerve, who
had it     
             ________________ 
   Huff sat at the wheel of the bus calling it a
boat. We were leaving Low Forest again,
 a sea of green he called it, all aboard as he
                                                                  now
called the bus a train. Eleanoir’s blue truck
  it might’ve been, might well have been,
might as well have been, so metamorphic the
                                                                       dock
   whence we embarked ... It was nothing if
not Eleanoir’s dream, the ship we were in, lute
  of the light-lady of night, Eleanoir’s loot, we
                                                                       sur-
   mised. Not since primordial beak met pri-
mordial seed had it so accrued, no mile not
 haunted, no matter what move we made. Our
                                                                            bus
  put-putted a-
long  
                      •  
   A canopy of leaves overhead as we made
our way, the sea of green Huff insisted we
 call it, the bus our boat and all of it the nerve
                                                                        church,
   nothing not inflected by the blood-guzzling
lute whose intestines history was. Wagadu
  lay within sight even so, it or the Eleven Light
City, Eleanoir sitting behind the driver’s seat,
                                                                         whis-
    pering things in Huff’s ear ... Eleanoir and
Huff we’d have never thought but there it was,
 Huff under Eleanoir’s influence, Eleanoir
                                                                 un-
   der his. A boat their bed would be, we
heard him whisper back, his and her wish as
 much ours as theirs, that history give way
                                                                 to
romance, what lit the nerve church. Our bus
  bumped along, vestiges of memory afoot, de-
bris the boat of soul grew laden with, the lute
                                                                       our
  boat also was claiming blood ... The school
     of oud instructed us, taught with drawn strings,
taut cartilage and sinew also known as nerve
 church, our tutorial wherein, we saw, would no
                                                                           time
   soon recess. Eleanoir’s face, which had float-
ed many a boat, now floated Huff’s it came clear
  for us to see, nerve church, whose nave we
docked in, nuptial perhaps, our notional romance
                                                                              call-
   ing history moot, such the way we got by ... 
Such the way we got by proved everyday by soul
 music, Brother B said. Peaches and Herb had
                                                                       come
    on the box. A metaphoric love boat the meta-
morphic boat of soul turned into now. We were
 on our way who knew where, bus, boat, train or
                                                                  truck,
 on our way wherever, soon
come     
                      •  
   We felt the press of consequence inside the
nerve church, the lute’s underbelly the oud,
  the madrig’s underbelly the panther, the deck’s
                                                                           un-
derbelly the hold, metamorphic soul’s under-
belly foreboding. We were far from Low For-
est now, far from Lone Coast, on a train from
                                                                        Bar-
celona to Lyon. Eleanoir slept lying across the
seat across from Itamar and me, her head on
Huff’s lap. Her small feet peeped out beautifully
                                                                            from
under the blanket she lay wrapped up in ... The
train was a boat or it would take us to a boat,
unclear which, the boat of soul that lay docked in the
nerve church, all hands on deck awaiting us, if not,
                                                                                 ac-
cording to some, none other than us. It was night,
nothing visible outside our windows. The commis-
erative dead gauged our quotient of soul, no one able
to say what it was though we rode it, the riding alone
                                                                                    was
clear ... The train ran away with us, took us away,
soul riding us it seemed, warm and humid with the
breath and the breathing of bodies, a blind winding
                                                                                  or
a boat finding its way thru the night. There was
no way to know it but by its effects, Itamar was say-
ing, an array of aromas we took to pertain thereto
                                                                              per-
 vading our
car     
             ________________ 
 Voices fell from the sky, never not
   inflected by the dead on the sea floor,
the dead under leaf, needle and cone in
                                                              Low
     Forest, the dead and how they came
to be that way everywhere ... They spoke
  of this as the bus rattled on, the boat
                                                            cut
thru water, the truck struggled going
    up a mountain, the train cried arkestral,
 soul bumped again and again against
                                                           what
 would not
have it


^^EOP^^


   Eleanoir and Huff served as a marker, their con-
     juncture an imaginal sound no sound could
equal. It was an unkept, unkeepable promise, an
                                                                           un-
   keepable secret as well, the sound of words
on a page. We had gone wordless at the appren-
  tice prez’s antics, albeit much deeper was
                                                                  what
    was hitting the fan. The top was only the
tip, no matter how wide it spread. We worked
  hard remembering that, Nub gone into Nur
                                                                         wide-
eyed where it was going, Nub’s collapse into
    Nur the one-third wanted, a line crossed, cross-
 es burned again ... Words had held forth in the
                                                                          nerve
   church and they held forth now, held forth a-
gain, words on the tips of our tongues and on
  the tips of other tongues, other tongues on the
                                                                             tips
    of our tongues. The imaginal sound no sound
could match kept at us, Nur the noise despite
   which we took our stab at living, hate afoot noth-
ing new. Nub stubs its toe from time to time we
                                                                              knew,
   maybe all the time. “Let’s call it Stub,” Itamar
let out, wording up. We put some music from Zan-
  zibar on the box but took it off, not enough oud.
                                                                                We
    were the school of oud, school of Udhra, the
 fools it took to learn, anything but the monied
  ones. “Con amor todo se puede,” we said, semi-
said, semisang ... We each felt an oud’s back or
                                                                          belly
   against our abdomen, could each feel it verg-
    ing on ribcage theater. Our vehicular ambigu-
ity bothered us not at all. The dead rode with
                                                                       us,
   never not there, just as we, when dead, would
never not be there. The dead’s legendary thirst
  was the imaginal sound no sound could match,
                                                                          syn-
    aesthetic the best we could do trying to speak
 of it, the sound we were driven by. The dead’s
  legendary thirst made us bedouins, lips chapped
no matter the green of Low Forest, the beloved’s
                                                                           lips
    likewise dry ... Otherwise we were silent, true
Pythagoreans, as if we’d been asked about the
  square root of two, sixty-five times two to the
                                                                          sec-
    ond all we’d say about number, be under or
inside more what it was than say. It was song six-
  ty-five times four we were in or were under,
                                                                       bent
    tautological figure, self-reflex, number the
 letter it was. So it was we kissed like we were
  thirsty when we did, incendiary no matter it was,
tongue a jet of flame no matter. We wanted to be
                                                                            fools
   in Stub, where not to be was to prey on others ... 
     Eleanoir and Huff had faded back into the we
we’d be, absorbed, reabsorbed, back to as they’d
  been before, the literalness of number never more
                                                                                irrel-
   evant, a feeling for the none what obtained. They
knew a philosophical readiness riding the curve
  of the belly or back the boat of soul we’d boarded
                                                                              was,
   a feeling for the none no one in Nub, Nur, Stub
wanted to know it was running from. We sought
  what solace there was looking out at the varieties
                                                                               of
 green to be seen in Low For-
est     
             ________________ 
   A feeling for the none seemed to accrue as we
motored on. Mock transit it might’ve been. We
  saw a deer carcass picked at by buzzards on the
                                                                           side
   of the road. “See them as musicians,” Ahdja
remarked, looking out her window, “see them
  as playing the oud, the way their beaks pull at
                                                                          the
   carcass a music we can see but not hear.” We
 indeed did see the none of it, buzzard beaks a
   barrage of plectra, ligament and sinew the strings
plucked and picked. The buzzards were hands and
                                                                              fingers
 whose play grew labored, a divine or demonic
   vehemence made a music we almost heard.
Hawks rendered the sky another Pred Lake, Low
                                                                            For-
   est a kind of heaven e-
ven so  
                      •  
All accruing to the none we knew and bore
   knowing. Was polis only a part of that, we
  wondered, the law of selection an election
                                                                   taken
  away, an outpost on Pred Lake. Elegiac
    roost, elegiac witness, elegy what told us
what time it was, foothold fallen away or
                                                                 taken
   away if not fallen, carcass on the side of
the road ... The putrid music Ahdja made
 us imagine was not the imaginal sound. A
                                                                  rib-
   cage harmonics attended it all, so sad we
laughed in self-defense. An allegorical cast we
  thought it might get, events of which we
                                                                   were
 the terms, the meaning, each an attribute’s
   embodiment albeit none of us could say ex-
actly which. An insensate chill came over
                                                                ev-
   erything, hot, humid day though it was.
    The deer’s ribcage chimed a comedic air,
divine-comedic air. Never had Low Forest
  resounded so ... We bumped along, happy to
                                                                       have
    air to breathe, the green leaves doing their
job, lungs for a time healthy, all of us eventual-
  ly none. Scraps of memory rode what breeze
                                                                       there
   was, chill sonority real but abstract. Scraps
of melody they might have been as well were we
  to hear again, we put Live at the Village Van-
guard Again!

^^EOP^^


My mother warns me not to blow-dry my hair
           too hard, turning it from black to rust, and
I must wear my black hair proudly. Black,
           the color of clothing my grandmother hates,
because young women should always wear red
           or pink, the colors of luck and youth. Black,
the color of wedding dress the reality TV
           starlet circa 2006 wants, but she knows
walking down the aisle in black will break
           her mother’s heart, and fact: red is the color
of wedding dresses in Chinese culture—even
           if the bride wears white for the ceremony,
she’ll change into red for the dinner—hello,
           ten course meal of my dreams that starts 
           with a meat platter of roasted pork, and how
guests go crazy for the abalone and swallow’s
           nest soup with crab meat, and of course there’s
a chicken, a pig, a fish, a duck, and a lobster—
           roll call. And fact: at Chinese funerals, relatives
of the deceased don’t wear black, but white.
           And fact: eight’s the lucky Chinese number,
not seven, and at dim sum, my grandmother
           makes sure she orders eight dishes, not seven,
but nine’s alright too. Eight, like the number of
           legs on a spider—a spider, black, like my hair
that my mother warns me not to blow-dry
           too hard, turning it into rust, and I remember
my sixth-grade science experiment of lighting 
a cigarette, watching how the smoke changed
           the spider’s web spinning. And black, because
it’s hypnotic, like little black dresses on gorgeous
           women, or how I prefer my lingerie in black
over white, but red is probably the best, an ode
           to sexiness—an ode to the color of my culture
and history, and I want to feel like a million
           dollars—be a million dollars. And black, the color
of my late dog, Buzzie, a Skye Terrier, twice as long
           as he was low, my mother once, joking, said he looked
like a giant rat. Or a licorice bunny. Or a furry snake.
           Or a dragon in some iterations of love, majestic in
dreams—how I miss him after these dream visits,
           black, the color of my wet hair in the morning.


^^EOP^^


                    
                    
                    Not broad or gregarious inaccuracy but refined exploratory drift evolved as proto-micro diagnosis. At this plane of sensitivity a dispatch of nerves explore themselves via vigorous angles that subsist as intermingled wave-lengths. For instance, a blue correlation of mirrors that function as impalpable devices empowered by analytical recitation of cellular fire spawned inside of opaque dimensions having nothing in common with utilitarian belief, yet being something that exists beyond registered finding that registers in terms of palpable result. Because the dark remains stored by means of caliginous registration it never beams as a three-dimensional statute that summons itself as an unmoving noun. I am not speaking via grammatical punctuation or the brutality of stationary conquest pattern but as electrical residue claimed as hyper-magnetic insight.
 
                

^^EOP^^


What does it matter that this cold June breaks, another dish
on the kitchen floor, skittering under the table legs. 
So it requires the long strawed broom, the extra stoop.
It will have out. When the sun comes back. When the rain stops.  
But something doesn't fit. Something isn't fitting.
The washing machine jams and hums too loudly. The chickadees
fall from the trees. A swallow is caught in the chimney.
The smallest ram lamb isn't eating. The days pass.  
June is too cold. The spiders threaten to overrun the nest
lodged in the rafters. They can't be eaten fast enough.
The mother, beside herself, has seen this happen only once before,
the eggs draped with gauze.  
No letters come. The small tin flag is down. The house creeps
farther from the road. The grass rises in the rain. The scythes
rust and will not cut. The blades squeak and sigh, nothing
to be done. We close the porch doors, but every night 
they open just a little. We hear it from the bedroom, 
a small creak. no one there. The cold lies down in the meadow
where the sheep are credulous and sturdy and dumb, but
the ram lamb will not eat. His mother has already forgotten him. 
The windows will not stay shut. Even the small nails
we bang in are loose in the morning, and the screens flap
a little in the small cold wind. From under the covers,
I watch you move around the house, fixing the broken things: 
the desk lamp, the toaster, the radio that still will not speak.
The red hens haven't laid in a week. There's nothing we can do. 
Nothing. It could be ten years ago. I could be dreaming.
This could be last winter all over again 
with the wood stacked and the snow rushing from miles away.
Then too, the trees leaned a little funny and the cat
disappeared for days. Nothing would make him come back. 
 


^^EOP^^


Because all energy went into making him breathe
dawn was not noticeable 
though on the beach it was bigger than anywhere
else, awakened stars stowing away in sand, 
low-tide sparkle of a cosmos the sea will take away,
subtraction is basic, the boy's body when movement 
is subtracted becomes less, there is hardly any boy
left, his color drains invisibly; it leaves him 
to arrive nowhere, his chest becomes a sunken basket
for white peaches (out of season) 
through what he's lost, not what he's gained. 
:: 
I loved Jerdy
and if my name's not here,
he won't know it was ever true
love, not that he hasn't been loved
by others 
also not present, subtracted from the picture,
and even if he has been loved by others
perhaps he won't be again 
unless someone falls for a picture;
that has been done (someone I know fell
for a picture of Cindy Song). 
Loving Jerdy now is to love him
in the way that makes most museums mean more
to me, he's not to be touched, ideally 
he's to be observed in silence, perhaps
photographed, probably without flash, 
and if he's not stolen, 
insulting the injury of his having been stolen from,
he can be returned to, sometimes only his outline 
while he's on loan and his permanent space
has a chance to discolor. 
He travels much more this way.
This way, it's not necessary for Jerdy to breathe. 
He hangs.                                    The museum is closed 
on Friday                                     open on Sundays. 
His arms rest                              on nails.                
   
He seems as wide                      as his length. 
Crowds gather.                          On the beach

^^EOP^^


Hearing a low growl in your throat, you'll know that it's started.
It has nothing to ask you. It has only something to say, and
it will speak in your own tongue. 
Locking its arm around you, it will hold you as long as you've ever wanted.
Only this time it will be long enough. It will not let go.
Burying your face in its dark shoulder, you'll smell mud and hair and water. 
You'll taste your mother's sour nipple, your favorite salty cock
and swallow a word you thought you'd spit out once and be done with.
Through half-closed eyes you'll see that its shadow looks like yours, 
a perfect fit. You could weep with gratefulness. It will take you
as you like it best, hard and fast as a slap across your face,
or so sweet and slow you'll scream give it to me give it to me until it does. 
Nothing will ever reach this deep. Nothing will ever clench this hard.
At last (the little girls are clapping, shouting) someone has pulled
the drawstring of your gym bag closed enough and tight. At last 
someone has knotted the lace of your shoe so it won't ever come undone. 
Even as you turn into it, even as you begin to feel yourself stop,
you'll whistle with amazement between your residual teeth oh jesus 
oh sweetheart, oh holy mother, nothing nothing ever felt this good. 


^^EOP^^


My father's oak, three years taller, stands taller now than I. 
Two crows for company.  
One gripping the telephone wire overhead, cries out.
The other, lumbering across the cold dirt like a man in a bar room, answers. 
Blocks away, a cloud of starlings startles and lifts in one great wavering
gesture, from one anonymous tree to another, 
leaves in a deliberate wind, 
and I, standing here, feel for one moment, that the earth does not move. 
The lumbering crow stumbles and flies screeching to the wire near the other.  
The leaves of the oak flutter, tarnished and dumb. 
Speak to me, crows. Teach me to walk like a sailor.
Tell me what this tree superintends. 


^^EOP^^


I. 
She'd start the fires under the bed.
I'd put them out. 
She'd take the broom stick and rape all the little girls.
I'd pull them aside, stroke their cheeks, and comfort them.
—How they would cry. 
Brit would fight the German soldiers.
She'd crouch by the banister waiting for them 
when I was too scared. 
And sometimes, she would push me farther into the back woods than I wanted to go 
But I was glad she did.  
She was mean and she liked it. 
She'd take off her clothes and dance in front of the mirror and she'd say things and she'd swear. 
She'd laugh at the crucifix, turn him upside down and watch him hang.
And she'd unhinge that piece of metal cloth between his legs
and run when she heard somebody coming 
leaving me. 
Mean as she was, I miss her.  
Only twice have I heard her laugh since then. 
Once, lying on my back in a yellow field,
I heard something that sounded like me in the back of my head
but it was Brit, 
and just now, making love with you, it's hard to tell you
but I heard her laugh.   
II. 
It began as a fear. 
There was something, not me, in the room. 
And translated into a dumbfounding
forgetfulness 
that stopped me on the street
puzzling 
over what year it was, what month. 
I began to watch my feet carefully.
Nevertheless, I suffered
accidents. 
The bread knife sliced my thumb
repeatedly 
the water glass shattered on the kitchen floor
and in its breaking there was a low laugh. 
Looking up, I saw no one 
but felt the old cat stretch inside me
feigning indifference.   Marie, I'd hear in a crowd, Marie
the air so thick with ghosts it was hard
breathing.  
One afternoon, the trucks were humming like vacuum cleaners
in the rain.  
It was impossibly lonely,
No one but me there: 
I called out Brit, the city is burning, 
Brit, the soldiers are coming 
and she laughed so sudden and loud I turned
and saw her for one second 
all insolent grace, pretending
she wasn't loving me. 


^^EOP^^


The boys of summer are climbing the building, 
splayed dark against the stone, they are using ropes.
Climbing together, three of them, in T-shirts 
and corduroys, hauling each other up, story
by story, stopping to speak carefully, deciding
direction: who will go first, who will belay, 
who will wait on the ledge they are leaving, climbing
slowly this way, watching each other's sneakers.
Years planning, a few missteps admittedly, 
several mix-ups at bus stations, a few times,
the phone ringing, no one there, but now
the boy are climbing and together, deliberate  
as flies. Below them, the doors open. Grownups
stumble out, dazed from inside the dark, to watch
the boys climbing in the sun, some whistling  
between their teeth, some grumbling a little. 
As women, settling on the grass, spread their skirts,
the boys test their holds, put, each of them, one foot 
on the ledge and bounce on their heels to feel the rope
pull taut and safe, and they don't look down. Some
of the grownups are thinking of calling the police.  
The boys of summer climb, stopping now only
to rest, pressing their faces flat against the stone
to watch each other and wink, wondering 
how they'll hook up to the fourth floor, where they know
there are suddenly windows. The day wanes. It is,
after all, November. The dark comes early. 
Windows, as the expected, open. Hands grab
for their long American legs. The boys, laughing, 
pull up their feet and stand, watching the fingers 
crawl on the sill. Some of these hands they almost
recognize. Finally, there are sirens,
a kind of music. Night falls 
and the boys climb in the searchlights, practicing
for the final ascent. The men directing the beams
caressing them with the incredulity 
boys feel when a fly is caught finally in the fist
after a thousand times trying. The grownups
bundled into lawn chairs, drink coffee.  
The boys hang like spiders and sleep, and all night
the lights caress them as the grownups watch.
At dawn, the boys of summer rise and climb again. 
They are not hungry. They go slower now. There is,
between them, something invisible. Forgetting
the ropes, they stare at each story with the calculated 
glances of serious climbers and they believe
everything they see. They love each other now,
climbing easily, some might say like monkeys, 
they have forgotten the feel of the earth flat
underfoot, climbing like this, into autumn,
their working shoulders impossibly beautiful 
as they squint, shading their eyes with sunburned fists,
the crowd, catching on, muttering story after story,
as the boys climb, by now, almost a fiction, 
too high to be seen clearly. But how they glow 
in their boy's strength and their beauty and their love.
What else would we have them do? They were born for this. 
They know it. The crowd thickening below them
as they scramble finally to the gravelly roof
and stand, stretching they still, for one moment 
before they leap, each of them, or fly, in almost
perfect swan dives, and fall 
like stones, or like boys 
with the thud of sure premonition to the eventual 
pavement, buckling, and man-made, that has been waiting
all this time, for them, with a deep and perfect gravity. 
 


^^EOP^^


With the voice of the fieldmouse
you squeak up to me, 
a sharp
clip,
you bite your way through my shirt to the skin, 
a cloth,
you slide across my mouth
midway through the words
I address to you, shadow,
to give you weight.


^^EOP^^


They multiply, these cities of the heart,
these rooms we lodge our bodies in. 
Brief beds: one California night
I swam between the humpbacked coastal ranges 
and woke Scotch-tinged, wet, newly dreaming
to smokestacks and sharp dawn in Queens. 
Light split the branches of fresh trees.
A stage-set life implied itself from props. 
Now morning— pigeon flocks, construction sites,
a Western freeway's glint, a garden filled 
with verbena, sage, my childhood light—
this midsummer, too, will go so soon. 
O unfinishable homes: You each feel so real so briefly.
I feel you incomplete me, incompletely. 


^^EOP^^


My language is dying the same way  
                  my father did:  
Alone. Night. And there are no storms. Only                     moonlight straining through holes in a tin roof  
And the slight exhalation, lips                     pursed as though to say:  Uwa'm. 


^^EOP^^


Below the skull there is a part of a letter 
shaped like a bone. But the skull is not a skull; 
it is a black dot with white teeth. And the piece 
of the letter under it is not really a bone, 
rather a dark spine. This is not the end of language. 
When it was alive it had a ribcage; 
each rib taken out by small pincers 
the way strands of eyelash are removed 
from eyelids. And the dot used to have eyes— 
white like two grains of salt. But they were dissolved 
by two drops of ink. The way a letter fades  
on the page after many years of reading 
or how it soaks into a fingerprint and forgets itself. 
The way a word tries to breathe inside 
a closed book; the way a letter shivers when 
a page is turned. Because underneath sound 
there is thought. Language, a complete structure 
within the white coffin of paper. If you shake it 
and listen, it will move, rattle like bones on the page. 


^^EOP^^


The start of a new era
Of desperation is starting over.  
Meanwhile you and your bronze friend
Run naked through the yellowed broom sage,
Suspended vaporously above life
Like high pressure systems. A redolent
Cascade of voices from the lawn
As the next new hope something will happen
Ascends the orangerie steps, an endless
Unpunctuated sentence that seems at the time
To illuminate everything, as if a giant
Had stepped between you and the sun,
Sucking the light and punching a hole
In space, revealing infinite vistas
Of anticipation and delay. 
These things have no beginning, or rather
Were set in motion long before we became
Their facsimile, thinking ourselves privileged
To secret information, not sensible
Of how the world contrives with enormous
Duplication of labor to rid itself of us
And perform its little routines
Solo in the galactic swimming pool
That is at last a total stage. It is
The amusing notion life might someday
Not be confusing that coordinates
Our award-winning sentiments these last days
Of summer, preparatory to the paint-by-number
Rush of autumn, the colors balking
Within their lines, which as a kid
Was the hardest part and apparently still is. 
You must do something, though, not caring
What it is, so long as when the day ends,
You're able to claim that this thing
has been accomplished, brought nearer
The perfection toward which it ludicrously 
Aspires, then put aside to be resumed
At a point just over the next rise yonder 
Where suddenly pertinent trees now loom. 


^^EOP^^


Scourging the sea with rods
To punish it for what it has engulfed,
Or running naked with your bronzed friend
Through yellow broom sage:
You can't be sure which remedy will be 
Fatal, or whether the density of the side-effects
Will prevent you from moving backwards
Across the threshold, to read
What the instructions might have said
If anyone had taken time to write them down,
So we could torture the words, make them
Confess their dirty little secret. It's tiered, 
As earth is, with faults perfectly expressing 
A gravitational will that we should stumble
Over them. And all the hints 
Get sponged up at night. Above the land fill—
Stars, glowing zircon strands of dump truck highbeams
Lined up, liquid and radiant, past the last
Open-all-night erotica boutique
Just over the state line of the last state.
Maybe they're the sparks we ignite
Rubbing each other the wrong way, fiery notes
Unwary rhapsodists pluck from the strings
Of incendiary violins. Is that what you think, too?
In truth, I prefer your mistaken identity,
The upside down one I can see at the back of my eyes
Before they flip you into focus, projecting you
Across a space at once so vast and so small
As not to excite even scientific curiosity.
But the light you throw off, out there, 
Is not enough to see you by. The tapered crimps
And ridges, scraped to the wall of the well,
Could be any number of people. Try
To communicate with the dying sometime
And you'll know what I mean. Each one is perfect,
Of its kind. Also, all are alike. Not even they
Can tell you, though, where the similarities end,
Whether it will be any different
For you. All I know is that what you are
To the waxed, limpid air of freak May in December
Or to this room, piled high
With genial household archetypes,
Is a formal relationship only, as the shape
Of an airplane-shaped shrub is
To the living plant it's made of. But to me,
And all I said and did, and all the time
It took me to get here, so much I forgot
The purpose of my visit, but kept in anyway; to me,
As I hold you, and the messy edges
Of our privacy overlap and then withdraw—
Think of me as three persons, and as one, 
But always who I am, ever changing
and complete, in the empire of the air
Or on the street, or with white sails 
Stiff against the wind, 
Whistling far out over the water. 


^^EOP^^


May Whitcomb's children wave from their veranda.
They sling their bicycles against the jhula.
At the door, their saried ayah.                     A bullock-wallah waits with a bullock cart.                   Dressed as pukka sahib, grandfather                   in the shadow of a banyan. 
Along stucco walls in Ahmednagar,
shirtwaisted women pose new babies—
New Englanders born on the Deccan.                    Men cradle guns.                   Around umbrellas, bending coolies,                   tiffins of church-picnic luncheon. 
Beside the stream, mudpies;
near tamarinds, their bungalow.                    New soldiers march beyond the gates.                   The mission quells the Empire's famines. 
(They feel, even then, the shifting:
Gandhi-ji has come from Africa
"and is, it seems, determined to start something," 
writes Great-Grandfather Alden,
noting our World may not be as it's been.)                    May still makes the holiday arrangements.                   The day of Fancy Dress, her cook prepares                   stuffed chicken for American Thanksgiving. 
Small Mary reads her books on Autumn,
and poses as "fallen leaf," while William
is "Red Indian Savage," feather in his cap.                    "And really," May writes, "is a perfect heathen."                   They receive hard cranberries                   from a parish off Cape Cod.                    Summon once again their pilgrim God.
Pray for succor in their wilderness. 


^^EOP^^


The table, lamp, and chair
strain against the ordinary light
that props up the window
spilling needles on the carpet,
shade recomposing on the sill. 
Mother wraps her fear into a towel
and shrinks upon her bed,
denying to the potent afternoon
the touch of quick emotions.
The engines of the house are still. 
The stillness is a bullet in her brain.
Upon the stake the ivy curls
like infant Jesus bloody on the grass.
The countertops are polished bright
and blue-veined as the mirrors. 
Clouds stroke the sky into autumn
while Mother sleeps and hates
the life that hurt her into sleep—
bound to one so much not herself,
she is his body's inarticulate host. 
She feels the pillow crease her cheek,
uncertain in the ache of waking.
No gloss of love dispels
the image of those angels she attends,
bow-tied detectives who take her away.


^^EOP^^





for Seema Kirmani



Nothing told us it would work out
This way, that nothing
Stays put in the drawer of itself. 
Down by the watering can
A squirrel is belief, whatever
He is thinking. And again, and at 
The water's edge, and for a long time
After summer vacation
Pieces of the wreck stabbed the shore
Whose revenue of loss engorged
The ribboned cone of a shell
And played the ear its thousand phrases. 
But the foreseeable future ended
And we are falling backwards 
Into the view from here that is too bashful
To be looked at or taken from a pocket
Ingenious as the heart's restive
Knowledge of the back of your head.
Where were we when a slab of morning
Overturned the previous day's verdict
Now placed in the evidence against us? 
I'm still thinking, the kite that that 
Vertebra of clouds is the tail of, 
Lifting me up like a number
Carried to the top of a column of figures
Sheerly by the logic of it
As a last-gasp oompah note drains
The afternoon of resourcefulness
And fear. The cloned minutes pass,
Each resembling the original 
In everything except
Not having been predicated on prior 
Misgivings, merely beguiled
Out of the need of space to put
Some distance between it
And the people who remained behind
After departing. Theirs is the sum
To be added up, once the 
Indecipherable messages delivered today
Become the sign of how much 
Waits to be said, in buildings
That are torn down and built again
And condemned, then raised by night.
And every flaw is equalized. 


^^EOP^^





for Seema Kirmani



You know me as the lighthousekeeper
Knows the weather, at night, on all sides.
Sometimes the summer sky is a hollow, dark
Socket and I feel as empty as my clothes
When I'm not in them. To feel fresh,
Like blood from a cut, is best, and to look
Up at the stars coming out, like tears 
Coming out of a face, is also best.
Thus each of our gestures amounts 
To a critique of the whole concept of action.
Not one of the spasms of sunlight
Splayed across the bed is undeserving 
Of my attention. We are attached,
Painfully, to the individual histories
Of these things, which count on us,
Like children, to do right by them.  
I should like to become better acquainted
With the facts of your biography, even
The uninteresting chapters where you just
Lie around all day, smoking cigarettes
And thumbing through magazines. The others,
Those in which love or lack of love
Coils your sympathies to a point of flame,
Like sun through a magnifying glass,
Consume themselves in their own intensity
And seem never to have happened. 
Humans cannot bear too much unreality:
The interlude of splendor, when everything
Was on the verge of falling into place
And yielding up, at last, its superabundance
Of pleasure undiluted by pain or pain
From which no particle of pleasure was absent,
Must and should give way to afternoons
Like these, washed out as an old signature,
The negative of dazzling. The voluptuousness
Of the act is in the waiting and the not knowing 
And the wanting and yet not wanting to know
The outcome and the hope that the outcome
This time will be that there will be no outcome
But that time will accommodate itself
To a kind of infinite delay in which
You are moving forward and not standing still,
Yet never approaching or catching sight of,
Through waves of distance, whatever's there. 
If our dreams are unattainable, that is all
The more reason to keep on dreaming,
As there can be no question of the fully achieved
Life or the flawless consummation of anything. 
And there can be no doubt that the only 
Immortality is in not dying and not in what
I write or do, though I wish you could be there
Forever, listening and accepting, as though
None of it were really silly or wrongheaded, 
But somehow beautiful, like the story I heard
Once of someone drifting out of a safe harbor,
Stunned by a million lights, on the Star Ferry. 


^^EOP^^


I.   I, Etheldred Taylor, of sound mind and body
in the presence of God almighty amen
do deed three things: 
                                     Books Negroes Land.

^^EOP^^


Twenty-five hundred tins of tuna,
no can opener. 
Powdered milk that loosened unfamiliar
stomachs speeding death. 
Three thousand Bibles dropped into
Mujahudden children. 
One thousand blankets and sweaters,
sent to tropical hot zone. 
Crates of suturing thread and no needles.
Thousands of candles and no matches.  
Tubes of toothpaste and no toothbrushes.
Boxes of high heeled shoes. 
 


^^EOP^^


'Because I am mad about women
I am mad about the hills,'
Said that wild old wicked man
Who travels where God wills.
'Not to die on the straw at home,
Those hands to close the eyes,
That is all I ask, my dear,
From the old man in the skies.
                                Daybreak and a candle-end. 
'Kind are all your words, my dear,
Do not the rest withhold.
Who can know the year, my dear,
When an old man's blood grows cold?
I have what no young man can have
Because he loves too much.
Words I have that can pierce the heart,
But what can he do but touch?'                                 Daybreak and a candle-end. 
Then said she to that wild old man,
his stout stick under his hand,
'Love to give or to withhold
Is not at my command.
I gave it all to an older man:
That old man in the skies.
Hands that are busy with His beads
can never close those eyes.'                                 Daybreak and a candle-end. 
'Go your ways, O go your ways,
I choose another mark,
Girls down on the seashore
Who understand the dark;
Bawdy talk for the fishermen;
A dance for the fisher-lads;
When dark hangs upon the water
They turn down their beds.                                 Daybreak and a candle-end. 
'A young man in the dark am I,
But a wild old man in the light,
That can make a cat laugh, or
Can touch by mother wit
Things hid in their marrow-bones
From time long passed away,
Hid from all those warty lads
That by their bodies lay.                                 Daybreak and a candle-end. 
'All men live in suffering,
I know as few can know,
Whether they take the upper road
Or stay content on the low,
Rower bent in his row-boat
Or weaver bent at his loom,
Horseman erect upon horseback
Or child hid in the womb.                                 Daybreak and a candle-end. 
'That some stream of lightning
From the old man in the skies
Can burn out that suffering
No right-taught man denies.
But a coarse old man am I,
I choose the second-best,
I forget it all a while
Upon a woman's breast.'                                 Daybreak and a candle-end.
 


^^EOP^^





for Robert Dash



A permanent occasion
Knotted into the clouds: pink, then blue,
Like a baby holding its breath, or colorless 
As the gush and pop of conversations
Under water. You feel handed from clasp to clasp,
A concert carried off by the applause. 
Other times half of you is torn
At the perforated line and mailed away.
You want to say, "Today, the smithereens 
Must fend for themselves,"
And know the ever-skating decimal's joy,
To count on thin ice 
Growing thinner by degrees, taking its own
Sweet time and taking us with it,
To navigate magnetic zones in which 
Intense ecstatic figures touch, like worlds,
But don't collide, it being their devotion
To depend on you to name for each 
A proper sphere. "Today, I turn to silence;
Let the language do the talking."
X the Unknown and his laughable, lovable crew,  
The tumbling balconies of one-of-us-is-a-robot-
And-it's-not-me waves
(Spanking a beach so empty 
If you weren't around to trip me
Would I really fall?) and days
When the wind is a bridge across our power 
To enumerate, to dig, to plant, to hold
And to communicate the twill-and-tweed-
Covered field's coldness 
Toward our game of enticing it indoors,
As if we could erect a rival gate to the departure
Whose uniform destination can't surprise, 
Is blind, speaks not, 
When on those white and sudden afternoons
I take your eyes, and see the sun set twice. 


^^EOP^^


every night
an ancient priest
gives me advice
and in the morning
I’m all alone
with nothing
a universe
I don’t want
to bother you
or to upend
the universe
but your realtors
are getting
a divorce 
the dark
is the dark
the wind
the sound
of the ocean
all relative
to the sensitivity
of a tiny
chain of bones
leading up
to or away from
your eardrum 
like, you say this playlist is
really good 

^^EOP^^


Is shut out on a balcony above the street.
He is a prisoner among us, crying
The awful boredom of observation, the unending
Hours of afternoon empty to a creature
Of smell and chase. His poor eyes see shadows
Pass below; they are unsatisfactory.
Voices come from nowhere. They do not hear him.
Why does he live? He tries to howl but sound
Flattens in a bred-thin throat. Whoever owns him
Consigns him to nothing when they go away. 
Across the street, I hear the constant sound of nothing
Lashing him. He gives up, then gives up 
Giving up, and cries again. Desire
Won't let him alone: to be with the world
Beyond him, to move among things and creatures,
To be where we are passing and meeting. But he is not
One of us; it is not his world. He wears a collar
And prances unnaturally along a fence, pressing
The edge, walking upright begging, and is refused,
Put out, tied up, and kept. 


^^EOP^^


Tonight I am riddled by this thick skull 
this white bowling ball zipped in the sad-sack carrying case of my face,
this overwound bone jack-in-the-box,
this Orlando's zero, Oaxacan offering: cabeza locada, calayera azucarada, clavo jodido, cenote of Mnemosyne,
this sticky sweet guilt hive, piedra blanca del rio oscuro,
this small-town medical mania dispensary, prescribed cranium pill,
this electric blue tom-tom drum ticking like an Acme bomb, hypnotized explosive device, pensive general, scalp-strapped warrior, soldier with a loaded God complex,
this Hotchkiss-obliterated headdress, Gatling-lit labyrinth,
this memory grenade, death epithet, death epitaph, mound of momento mori,
this twenty-two-part talisman wearing a skirt of breasts, giant ball of masa,
this god patella in the long leg of my torso, zoo of canines and Blake's tygers,
this red-skinned apple, lamp illuminated by teeth, gang of grin, spitwad of scheme,
the jawbone of an ass, smiling sliver of smite, David's rock striking the 

^^EOP^^


A kiss. Train ride home from a late dinner,
City Hall and document signing. Wasn't cold
but we cuddled in an empty car, legal.
Last month a couple of guys left a gay bar
and were beaten with poles on the way
to their car. No one called them faggot
so no hate crime's documented. A beat down
is what some pray for, a pulse left to count.
We knew we weren't protected. We knew
our rings were party favors, gold to steal
the shine from. We couldn't protect us, 
knew the law wouldn't know how. Still, his
beard across my brow, the burn of his cologne.
When the train stopped, the people came on. 


^^EOP^^


           [In a Silent Way]
It had been watching you sleep in dreams of excrement
and hard voices. The government gifted it with mute,
unregulated hands. It came to you, father, before 
I was born, my bones bound in the cup of your absence.
Your skin was peeled in a dominion of wolves. 
           [Illegal Business]
When it came it came wearing familial faces.
House after house, noses took in this new air.
A brother OD'd, a father, a mother, an uncle, a sister —
House after house cataracted with snow-veiled skulls.
On the corner, police officers licked their white fingers.  
          [Will O' the Wisp]
I was four when I committed your face
to memory. I made into reason what was
once rumor. Diaspora, meaning this time
what father-source had left me pliant had
returned so that I could return and turn to it. 
          [Dead Presidents II]
Poverty gave reason to hustle. A dealer's
frozen wrists, weighted by stones, flipped
through green pages of an anemic bible
that catalogued white men who once jeweled their own
properties in varicose coffles toward cotton coffins.  
          [Black Comedy]
Father, you were summarized by your veins' laughter. 
Last time I saw you your face was cratered
with breathless mouths collaborating with dust.
Behold the white horse, hoof over oof
dispersing the circus of our communal horror. 
          [Ten Crack Commandments]
It's offensive, our most brilliant forced to pray
to getting paid, forced to spray or get sprayed.
It got so bad folks was scraping and sniffing
the ash off their knees. Cities full of prophets
that could only see as far as their own decease. 
          [Inamorata]
Whom did you love most: Lady Caine, Mama Coca,
White Lady, Girlfriend, Lady Snow, Pearl,
Aunt Nora, Angie, Carrie Nation, Percia, Mujer,
Corrinne, Gift-of-the-Sun-God, Snow White, Her? 
          [Dope]
Cain't be capitalism. No suh! No suh! u u u u u u u
Must be the Devil! Cain't be white supremacy! No suh!
Couldn'ta been the Iran-ContraaffairandReaganlooking
underTOWmisslesforhostageswhileCIAbreaksloaves
ofcokealloverthisGodfearinland no suh! u u u u u owowoo! 
          [Sorcerer]
Father, I have sewn my eyes to an allegiance
with worms. I am still incredulous of light.
The city of my teeth has softened its curses. 
If you arrived elemental, shapeless and aquiver, 
I'd fashion you a suit from my hollow's frame. 
          [C.R.E.A.M]
How much for the faux Bearden of a Lexus collaged
over a crack house, addicts clawing the air like trees?
When weight moves like poltergeists a triple beam
gets its wings, but not all caine is able. 
          [On the Corner]
The moon unbraids a man's hair. His Solo Cup
of Jack Daniels catches light, shakes to the bass
rattle of speakers stacked on the porch like die.
His woman leans on his shoulder. When he kisses
her forehead he leaves a bouquet of stars. 
          [Street Dreams]
Her blunt unrolled itself on the floor. Its entrails rose
and configured like a burning church in reverse. 
Then her grandpa's voice: Baby, this ain't no place
of worship

^^EOP^^


By the time I started writing,
I had just come in
From the back patio,
Where I had seen
The moon's reflection
In the water feature. I laughed
To myself, wondered
How the water caught
The moon, which seemed 
Pitched at too queer
An angle. & what
Was being featured?
I once wrote,
"Nothing is too anything,"
I'm thinking tonight that
I'm right.
But I'm not sad.
Just saddened. I
Breathe. I circulate.
My body would like to tell you
How much it can't 
Stand to tell you
What it wants to tell you.
Here's a sample: Teeth. Stomach.
Skin. Application.
Yard. Wood trim.
Gutters. Teeth.
Teeth stomach teeth.
I spend all of my time
Creating novel ways
To distract myself
From the need to
Distract myself.
One minute goes like this:
You don't want to know.
That's the hardest part,
Conveying how just being
Just feels.
My latest concern
Is our son. Seeing him
Alone
Pinned against
The wall at Willowwind
By some apparitional collector
Of lost souls, the kid who
Was the first to locate an
Afterlife for Sacha. It sounded,
From his lips,
Like melodrama. We all see
Some kind of light & we
Tunnel toward it & how did this
Even happen? I wept
Later that night.
I know it's just a moment among
The millions, & there is
James & he is always
Thinking about.
Stereo-death, little Telemachus,
Defending a ghost most
Of his life, his mother
Obsessed with
Subtle refractions of light. 
(She's a Rayist at heart).
I'm not saying you're
Unraveling a weave
Every night. I think
That's what I do
These evenings, 
Typing pixels
Unto oblivion.
Sitting Lotus
On a massive lily pad
On a pond
Somewhere in fifth century 
China.
Dentist. Acid reflux. Dentist.
Stillpoint . . .
I hold the chakra
Position as long
As possible.
I imagine
All my obsessions
Abstracting into a color,
Sometimes
A version of blue,
Sometimes
I can't work it out,
I have such
An impoverished 
Color palette
To work with, so I get
Caught up
In this, my inability to see
Color in any interesting way,
& then
The whole thing falls
Apart & I am back
In here, where
The walls are pink
& the pixels
Laugh like dropsied clowns.
Some kind of plague
Takes hold.
Some kind of plague riots
In the grid I can't keep 
Track my teeth need immediate
Attention do I look fat
In this shirt where
Is my focus? Stillpoint. Hellish
Laughter rings through my ears
Teeth, teeth, migraine,
A reprieve, I can
Go to sleep
For a moment once I
Stomach dentist root canal
Like the worst kind of comedy
You expect to laugh
But the laugh
Never comes.
As it were, the moon
Did that, this glint
Stomach still point do you
& will I ever be
More than the sum
Of my regressions
Which compile
Like maggots 
Of data
Eating through
A server in Reston, Virginia
Where teeth annul &
Stomachs inhere
& I think I am inventing 
In ultimate
Infinity
A category of 
Sadness
As I punch
These keys
& I hope you have
A really
Wonderful reading


^^EOP^^


As we stood
In the unreflective
Pall of the canvas
Neatly pocketed by broken
Plates, light
Swallowed by
The sickly sweet strokes
Of crap paint
Clumsily
Slapped across it,
I picked up Sacha
& asked 
Him 
If it might be
A bit much,
The painting's title? but 
He already had designs
On the Brancusi
He had glimpsed  
In the Des Moines Art Center
Catalogue, which he then pawed
On the floor of the 
Entrance room—
So plush were the couches
I fell asleep 
Reclining into one.
Woke in a fright,
Turned off the lights!
Walked into a courtyard
Terrifically cold—the water-
Fall tending my dreams
Froze midstream, 
Reflecting brilliant
Fresnel light!
The artist
I follow from year
To year, sometimes
Years pass
But I find him
Launching another
Lantern down the river
Frozen to river-
Bottom
& so I
Whispered into 
Sacha's delicate 
Ear—are we able
To meet these 
Monuments as is?
What if, say, you had happened
Upon a David Salle painting
(Rarer these days)?
What if your stepmother
Was in the same art class
In high school as Salle, 
Doodled the same
Inane nothing-of-notes,
Desperate for a way
Out, not just of this class
But of this gap
Between herself &
What she might
Want to become.
David Salle, don't 
Sweat the small
Devils detailing
Your
Lamborghini Countach
(Sounds so garish, 
To talk this way
About the '80s, I mean
That model was like
The Ford Escort
Of the Jet Set)
& then David Salle 
Went on to snort
The entire decade
Into his rectum. She
Demurred
Rightly, the pain
Ticked into my
Stepmother &
Soon enough her spine
Began off-gassing
A barbiturate haze
Five miles in every
Direction.
This feeling we all
Know each other
From some past life
Spent holding hands
Walking over the precipice
Into the volcanic bowels
Of Hell, this otherness,
Fixed into a buried
Set of neurons native
To homo sapiens sapiens, 
Has surfaced surfaced
With a fury,
Furious with spouts
Of pepper spray
Spraying
The frozen air
Waiting for history's
Next victim to occupy,
Occupies the space
In front of it.
The snow,
I wrote,
To paraphrase
Myself, to interpret or
Delay
My words, to rework,
Remix, mash up, 
Redifine, defile, 
Lift, smash, plagiarize,
Borrow, beg, steal,
Augment, as homage I
Distill my words
Into a bitter rye,
Drink it to bottoms
Up!
I looked out,
I had my protagonist
Look out of a wintry
Window, each snowflake
Like a soldier whipping
A horse yoked
To a chariot,
This Greece,
This Rome,
This vatic
Impulse to stay
Connected swirling
All round, said
In passing,
My soul swooned
Slowly
As I heard
The snow
Falling faintly,
Through
The universe
& faintly falling,
Like the descent
Of its last end.
So you
Tell me
How your
Radical formalism
Saves lives
Exactly?
What I've got on view
Out my office window
Is luxurious paradisiacal
Snow stirring in me
A soul-destroying
Desire to snort some
Adderall,
After all.
This could be your
Legacy, Sacha,
This art
You have been
Forced to feed on
For eons.
               I
               Sink into the
               Couch in my office,
               Fall asleep
               Watching Stalker,
               Slowly fall
               To the bottom
               Of the never-ending
               Well,
               This tonic,
               Murmur—
               Something about making
               Sure all the locks were
               Locked.
               I don't know
If I checked them.
So I check them
Repeatedly.
This bedroom farce
A ray of sun
Fazing across
The televised haze
Of some future
My son takes out
A second, maybe
Third mortgage on,
He plugs into the din—
His cryo-mortal coil.
I can't wait
Until he goes loco
Slurping snow cones, 
Lisps with asps
In ancient Egypt. 
The overdub
Is imperfect, a few frames
Late, so when
Sacha looks at
"The Death of Fashion"
Hanging against this 
Well-lit wall &
Says, "This looks like
Garbage," the only word
That matches his mouth
Is the end of everything.
No one goes out
Like this


^^EOP^^


My lips are clay, for centuries unkissed.
I thought middle age would not pass so quickly.
Time is cruel. I look in the mirror. 
Now the word cruel scares me. 
My ambition was once
to write the starlit poems of our age,
our final words, which in any case
are just graffiti from here on out,
yesteryear straight through to the afterlife
(though wasn't the middle part
supposed to be longer?). 
I wanted words to contain consciousness, 
so I was a child until I was old. 


^^EOP^^


I've described it as
"A silence as white
As hospital clouds."
I've tended to think
Of it as akin to
Occupying space,
Which is not like
Taking up space,
Which implies volition.
As you know,
I sat on a bench
In the mall, while
My friends were passing
Time in class.
High & thus utterly
Imprecise. Moments
Before I sat on the bench,
I had leafed through
The several copies of
The latest issue of Details
At the magazine kiosk
Because Dale had tipped
Us that there was an insert
In it that you could rip
From its perforation
& redeem anywhere 
For a free pack of
True cigarettes.
I unperfed six of them
& redeemed them
Immediately. I con-
Sidered this a non-
Trivial event. I
Destroyed this task.
How many ways
Can I tell you I
Killed time? You'd
Cringe to hear even
One story, its
Trace still
Tracking down
My spine,
Even now, twenty
Years later, like
Still doves. 


^^EOP^^


I live on the flank of Vesuvius, in Pompeii.
Each day the sky fills with leaflets,
smokelets, prayers to powers
aglitter whether storming or still
(the old ones mica,
the new ones who-cares-what). 
Everyone knows there's more than one
kind of consciousness. Everyone knows
that in the snow-globe of Vesuvius,
the "snow" is really ash—
each time, the volcano buries the town. 
Would you meet me in a world like that?
If not there, where?


^^EOP^^


How dare you!
How dare you pull this mantle from your sloven
sleeve and think it worthy enough to cover my boy.
How dare you judge when you also wallow in this mud.
Society has turned its power over to you,
relinquishing its rule, turned it over
to the man in the mask, whose face never changes,
always distorts, who does not live where I live, 
but commands the corners, who does not have to await
the nightmares, the street chants, the bullets,
the early-morning calls, but looks over at us
and demeans, calls us animals, not worthy
of his presence, and I have to say: How dare you!
My son deserves a future and a job. He deserves
contemplation. I can't turn away as you.
Yet you govern us? Hear my son's talk.
Hear his plea within his pronouncement, 
his cry between the breach of his hard words. 
My son speaks in two voices, one of a boy, 
the other of a man. One is breaking through,
the other just hangs. Listen, you who can turn away, 
who can make such a choice; you who have sons
of your own, but do not hear them!
My son has a face too dark, features too foreign,
a tongue to tangled, yet he reveals, he truths, 
he sings your demented rage, but he sings.
You have nothing to rage because it is outside of you. 
He is inside of me. His horror is mine. I see what
he sees. And if my son dreams, if he plays, if he smirks
in the mist of moon-glow, there I will be, smiling
through the blackened, cluttered and snarling pathway
toward your wilted heart. 


^^EOP^^


It's Upstate New York in the 1950s,
land of amusements,
natural wonders like Ausable Chasm
and High Falls Gorge,
and tourist traps, kiddie parks
like Land of Makebelieve,
a castle with a dungeon, and train cars
just wide enough for one kid.
You can still see pink turrets through the trees,
and under the eaves the paper lanterns of wasps. 
At 1,000 Animals you could drive a cart
pulled by an ostrich, or pose for a Polaroid
with a boa at the Serpentarium,
then feed him a mouse. Or watch
boys in a pit milk snakes for venom. 
Nothing's left but Santa's Workshop,
June through August. Frontier Town's gone.
The antique stagecoach
jounced on a flatbed out of town. 
When I can't sleep or am trying to stay
awake in the car, I slip back
into the traffic of children roaming
the child-sized streets, floating
past their parents on the carousel.
I hand-feed the deer.  
I walk in and out of the fake jail, 
and climb the castle's stucco tower. 
I don't stay too long.
I don't want to end up
trapped in a place where 
childhood never ends.


^^EOP^^


Old friends are a steady spring rain,
or late summer sunshine edging into fall,
or frosted leaves along a snowy path—
a voice for all seasons saying, I know you.
The older I grow, the more I fear I'll lose my old friends,
as if too many years have scrolled by
since the day we sprang forth, seeking each other.
 
Old friend, I knew you before we met.
I saw you at the window of my soul—
I heard you in the steady millstone of my heart
grinding grain for our daily bread.
You are sedimentary, rock-solid cousin earth,
where I stand firmly, astonished by your grace and truth.
And gratitude comes to me and says:
 
"Tell me anything and I will listen.
Ask me anything, and I will answer you."


^^EOP^^


Walking the river back home at the end
of May, locust in bloom, an oriole flitting
through dusky crowns, and the early night sky
going peach, day's late glow the color of that fruit's
flesh, dribbling down over everything, christening
my sons, the two of them walking before me
after a day of fishing, one of them placing a hand
on the other's shoulder, pointing toward a planet
that's just appeared, or the swift movement
of that yellow and black bird disappearing
into the growing dark, and now the light, pink
as a crabapple's flower, and my legs tired
from wading the higher water, and the rocks
that keep turning over, nearly spilling me
into the river, but still thankful for now
when I have enough strength to stay
a few yards behind them, loving this time
of day that shows me the breadth
of their backs, their lean, strong legs
striding, how we all go on in this cold water,
heading home to the sound of the last few
trout splashing, as mayflies float
through the shadowed riffles.


^^EOP^^


Tonight I want to return to Elizabeth,
New Jersey, where Stephen Crane lies
under a stone, and my father,
after twenty years of skimping wages, finally 
opened his own dry-goods store. 
I worked there after school, on weekends,
but it didn't take a genius to see
from the sad look of the place—
dim light, threadbare "goods"—where it was headed.
In all the time I spent in that smog-sucking town
of wan bargain hunters and hangdog merchants,
I never knew of, let alone visited,
Crane's grave. Then, I was more enamored of
that other Crane, Hart (lovely name!),
whose grave is in the belly of the South Atlantic. 
Besides, I couldn't imagine any reason why
anyone would want to stop off, never mind
die, in Elizabeth, New Jersey. It seemed
nobody there cared about, much less
knew, the color of the sky. 

^^EOP^^


A jumper knitted throughout, a sweater's overcoming mimesis
                                                                                                                      Less 
"Chapter 1 has been suspended in a warehouse / of textiles for 1000th of a second"—at
         once a sentence and a sentence in poetics.
                                                                                         Lesser 
at once a linguistic event and a linguistic event styled after installation.
                                                                                                                                      Least 
Impossible work finds hypothetical situations.                                                                                          Good 
Situations impersonating a book, speech acts walking across stage                                                                                                                       Better 
situations impersonating a boot, speech acts walking across a stag.                                                                                                                        Best 
Suspended in a warehouse, a literacy campaign                                                                                          Loudest 
suspended in a disused textile factory, textiles and a second literacy campaign          after cultural evisceration.
                                                        Louder. 
A woman removing her jumper (sweater) in a textile factory                                                                                                                      Loud 
removes a jumper (sweater), then another pulled inside out, says aloud, 
         "And now, for the retrograde inversion."

^^EOP^^


A path formatted. A chapter.
                                                      "There cannot be a chapter formatted differently," 
she said, "like a sore thumb."
                                            "A chapter formatted differently from these is not a sore thumb," 
I said, "but an opposable thumb, an opposable thumb with its own instrumentality."
                                                                                                                                                        A train 
". . hear that train strumming . . ."
                                                                 "without the doubt of a shadow" 
Agora shadowless and "shadowless"
                                                                   path. 
Which?
                 "In recent years he has researched the share" 
a path formatted across a wave.
                                                           There cannot be a wave formatted otherwise 
she said, like a wheel. 
                                            A wave in syntax such as that is no sore wheel, 
I said, but a solemn wheel (no one-sided wheel, I said, a level) with its own instrumentality.                                                                                                                                                          A door 
"folded like a sheet of paper . . ."
                                                          "You were the most beautiful of them all." 
"Now I begin to paint shadows in."
                                                             Out-of-print— 
which?
              In recent years he has researched the interval 
which?               In recent years he has researched the inconvenience 
a path formatted across hot water.

^^EOP^^


as if it were a scene made up by my need
for a city, viaducts July-sweating sweat not 
mine as the city is no longer mine, was never,
but it holds me near to its metallic, junkyard
pasture and junkie song so hollow it's a hall 
I dare not walk through, this tragic place
wherefrom the people with my face fall. 
Wherefrom fall all the architectures I am
I say are my people's people and my people
whose houses tremble as thunderous bass passes. 
The blacktopped roads sop up heat for double
Dutch feet to greet, rope slapped down
by a child's hand. I used to know her name. 
It is only a dream of trees, their propeller seeds
blown west through batches of weeds crocheted
yellow-green with dandelions and cigarette butts 
once erect from a mouth stressed over rent due,
dried spit the tincture of wait and liquor stores.  
Often I am permitted to return to this city
as if it were a gift for which I forgot the means
to augur into clarity, always wrapped in cool violence, 
neighbors' frowns cauterized into cul-de-sacs,
omen outcasting what lives to give relief. 


^^EOP^^


When my nineteen-year-old son turns on the kitchen tap
and leans down over the sink and tilts his head sideways
to drink directly from the stream of cool water,
I think of my older brother, now almost ten years gone,
who used to do the same thing at that age;
 
And when he lifts his head back up and, satisfied,
wipes the water dripping from his cheek
with his shirtsleeve, it's the same casual gesture
my brother used to make; and I don't tell him
to use a glass, the way our father told my brother,
 
because I like remembering my brother
when he was young, decades before anything
went wrong, and I like the way my son
becomes a little more my brother for a moment
through this small habit born of a simple need,
 
which, natural and unprompted, ties them together
across the bounds of death, and across time . . .
as if the clear stream flowed between two worlds
and entered this one through the kitchen faucet,
my son and brother drinking the same water.


^^EOP^^


Here's a small gray woman
in an enormous beaver coat
 
standing at the end of the curb
of a street in Brooklyn, her strapped heel
 
about to be lowered to asphalt.
 
I'm strolling beside her carrying a sack,
 
the sidewalk shaded by cranked out awnings:
butchers, bakeries, shoe repair shops
 
the smell of rotting eggs,
 
as we climb up to her sixth floor apartment
with its plastic slip-covered chairs,
 
the long chain for a toilet flusher,
pocks in the plaster ceiling.
 
She is my Romanian grandmother
who speaks little English,
 
but taught me to crochet,
 
now lost among the broken headstones
of the old gated Jewish cemetery
 
we passed by that day
after buying our milk and our bread.


^^EOP^^


The Easter hats usually exploited gardens
and even when I took mine off, artificial bluebells
were braided into hair 
just as they were (white lie)
when Deirdre's son dropped petals
into his mother's casket: one landed
as useless improvement of her mouth,  
Years before, Deirdre and I ducked out of service
went to Little Italy's Murray Hill and slurped
things marinara with our decaf to support her crush
on Hill Street Blues' Ed Marinaro who played Coffey                  who wasn't quite the palest thing in her life                 considering what breathed down our necks                 the most inhospitable air they had                  but we anticipated bad breath,                 we had assumed a garlicky existence 
because miracles we then believed in made vampirism
just as plausible. No flowers on the checked-top table 
wilted because of atmosphere. From a distance
the beret we saw on a stranger was telling us
walking wounded 
and images from former Persian and Ottoman empires
say the same thing, distance failing to be what it was. 
We learned Tigris and Euphrates
to help us learn the flowering of existence. 
We learned fertile crescent
and we are somehow still amazed 
by the fertility of experience: fully-swaddled
babies shaken like perverse maracas     to silence 
instead of make the music of rupture persistent:
light bulbs bandaged then fractured under wraps
and again and again those instruments 
for crude concerts that parents applauded
with crackle that amplified the filaments' pitiful fizzle:  
We didn't have to go much further to love Batman,
Spiderman, Zorro, the Lone Ranger, all masked men
illicitly patronizing convenience 
stores 
as I do for the implication that merchandise
has been skewed for the expediency of customers: 
heads shrunken 
and wrapped in price tags, Styrofoam, satin,
and certificates of authenticity. Real  
old-school prissy passengers 
in ling-finned convertibles wore nets on their heads
that when wind-whipped became fully bagged 
as nets changed position, flimsy umpires appeared
stricken, the net a prototype of shrink-wrap 
on these Sunday drives. 


^^EOP^^


the black people left, and took with them their furious             hurricanes and their fire-breathing rap songs melting the polar ice caps. they left behind the mining jobs,            but took that nasty black lung disease and the insurance regulations that loop around everything concerning            health and care, giant holes of text that all the coverage falls through. the brown people left, and took with            them the pesticides collecting like a sheen on the skins of fruit. they went packing, and packed off with them            went all the miserable low-paying gigs, the pre-dawn commutes, the children with expensive special needs            and the hard-up public schools that tried to meet them. the brown people left, railroaded into carting off those            tests that keep your average bright young student outside the leagues of ivy-lined classrooms, and also hauled off            their concentrated campuses, their great expectations, their invasive technology, and the outrageous pay gap between            a company’s c.e.o. and its not-quite-full-time workers. they took their fragile endangered pandas and species extinction            and got the hell outta dodge. the black people left and took hiv/aids, the rest of their plagues, and all that deviant            sexuality with them. they took their beat-down matriarchies and endless teen pregnancies, too. those monster-sized            extended families, the brown people took those. the brown people boxed up their turbans and suspicious sheet-like            coverings, their terrifying gun violence, cluster bombs, and drones, and took the whole bloody mess with them,            they took war and religious brow-beating tucked under their robes. they took theocracy and their cruel, unusual            punishments right back where they came from. finally, the white people left, as serenely unburdened as when           they arrived, sailing off from plymouth rock with nothing in their hands but a recipe for cranberry sauce, a bit            of corn seed, and the dream of a better life. there were only certain kinds of people here, after the exodus, left            to wander the underdeveloped wilderness in search of buffalo, tobacco, and potable water, following old            migratory patterns that would have been better left alone.


^^EOP^^


Only a beige slat of sun
above the horizon, like a shade
pulled not quite down. Otherwise,
clouds. Sea rippled here and
there. Birds reluctant to fly.
The mind wants a shaft of sun to
stir the grey porridge of clouds,
an osprey to stitch sea to sky
with its barred wings, some dramatic
music: a symphony, perhaps
a Chinese gong.
 
But the mind always
wants more than it has—
one more bright day of sun,
one more clear night in bed
with the moon; one more hour
to get the words right; one
more chance for the heart in hiding
to emerge from its thicket
in dried grasses—as if this quiet day
with its tentative light weren't enough,
as if joy weren't strewn all around.


^^EOP^^


Maybe night is about to come
calling, but right now
the sun is still high in the sky.
It's half-past October, the woods
are on fire, blue skies stretch
all the way to heaven. Of course,
we know that winter is coming, its thin
winding sheets and its hard narrow bed.
But right now, the season's fermented
to fullness, so slip into something
light, like your skeleton; while these old
bones are still working, my darling,
let's dance.


^^EOP^^


A bowl of rose water dreams itself empty
on the radiator: It's December and we can
hardly afford the heat, our milk money
crinkling hungry over the cold counter
of our convenience store, the very last
of our cash for creamer, for pleasantries,
for cheap tea and cigarettes, for the barely-
there scent of roses burning softly. We trade
our hungers for hearth, for the clank and hiss
of warmth. Small fires, these, but even we,
in our clamorous poverty, demand pleasure:
steal sugar, our neighbor's flowers, and never,
ever are caught thankless in better weather.


^^EOP^^


The sky a pure river of dawn
and the red goose wakes, the
breeze weaving, interweaving
leaves newly turned.
In the valley a song,
with no one to sing it,
some voice of the past
or the future. The red goose
sets her wings and answering
some promise she's made
to the WILD, enters that river
of sky, neck stretched
toward heaven, maybe beyond,
tail nothing but a carnelian
nubbin fading to sunglow.
And you, stunned to a silence
the size of the world.


^^EOP^^


My mother holds the wriggling mouse
in her gloved hand
thumb poised above its vertebrae 
My father in his white coat behind her
whispers the right places to break 
She shakes her head—No, no 
Mercy is the small name
we give an animal not ourselves 
I knew she had it in her, my mother
holding me all those years ago
in the chair as my father cut my hair—  So you don’t look like a girl  
Against the back of my skull
he made a fist & pulled 
Like a magician & his assistant
they did the act together—Transformation
Dismemberment & Shove Her in a Hat! 
The girl vanished under the black scrim
& a boy was lifted by the neck 
That cowlick—
it was the only thing wild about me 
In my twenties I grew my hair out
& slathered perm salt to break
the disulfide bonds 
I stroked my curls, each strand
a helix hissing secrets 
I thought if I looked foreign enough
no one could claim me 
not even shame
which, as all things
must grow from the root


^^EOP^^


In Hebrew, the word women is the word men
with the first letter dropped. Not just any letter
but the first first letter, the aleph of the aleph-bet:  אנשים       anashim—men
נשים           nashim—women

^^EOP^^


This morning, a light
so full, so complete
we might ask why 
the god of sun
is also god of plague,
why the god of healing 
also god of archery.
The children under trees—
unaware their hearts 
have become targets
red and inflamed
as the eyes of men in thrones— 
find sticks in the grass
to fashion into guns. Some brandish
a branch-saber. They are sniping 
the golden light
with squinting faces.
And everywhere 
they do not look,
fences and more fences.
There are no arrows 
to point the way
as they scythe
through a woods or dart 
between cars in parking lots.
The miles of fence-links grow
more & more impassable 
even as the children try
to follow the voices
calling them now, at first 
with tenderness and then
with fierce intensity.


^^EOP^^





After sam sax



Sometimes I pronounce aubade: obeyed
for the way this particular desire stumbles
the tongue. Hunger’s vocabulary is a fickle 
thing. How many lovers have said that
they adore me, but meant instead they saw
in me a door? A thing to be entered. Language 
shifts an image like the light. To lash can mean
both beat & bind. I’m lashed against the bed
by dawn’s red blaze. The whole room welted 
tidy by the sky between the blinds. To cuff
can also mean to hold or harm, each word
doubled—body & a body’s shadow. I want 
& all at once I flicker beneath you. I beg you
to bruise me & so exchange faggot for fruit.
O, how gentle lust alters a body, conjugates 
prey into prayer. The history of handcuffs
is old as myth if memory serves. The legend
goes, Greek hero invented them to steal 
prophecy from the mouth of a shapeshifter
god & the story gathered blood from there.
The root of the word religion is a Latin verb 
meaning to bind. As in, the worshipper is bound
to their god. Two hands paired in steel or prayer.
When I say obey, I mean we have chosen 
the softer side of every verb, dulled the sharp
edge of a memory, sea glass against the tongue.
For the first time, when the handcuffs’ steel 
lips unkiss my wrists as morning stains every
surface a fading bruise, I am already free
as the first breath after confession.


^^EOP^^


In watery nets
the convent of childhood
was reborn to me. 
Where are you,
white stair?
I descended you
among the locust trees
and the earth
had no trenches. 
Now on distant paths
a companion staggers,
carrying a dead man.
On his face
his eyelids fall
like lifeless violets. 
Where are you
white stair?
A scream
slips from me:
the ground is gone. 
Flames of perfumed smoke
along the way
no longer give shelter
in this rain.
Translated from the Italian


^^EOP^^


Someone standing at the mouth had
the idea to enter. To go further 
than light or language could
go. As they followed
the idea, light and language followed 
like two wolves—panting, hearing themselves
panting. A shapeless scent
in the damp air ...  Keep going, the idea said. 
Someone kept going. Deeper and deeper, they saw
others had been there. Others had left 
objects that couldn’t have found their way
there alone. Ocher-stained shells. Bird bones. Grounded
hematite. On the walls, 
as if stepping into history, someone saw
their purpose: cows. Bulls. Bison. Deer. Horses—
some pregnant, some slaughtered. 
The wild-
life seemed wild and alive, moving 
when someone moved, casting their shadows
on the shadows stretching
in every direction. Keep going, 
the idea said again. Go ... 
Someone continued. They followed the idea so far inside that
outside was another idea.


^^EOP^^


They the product they pack, 
     chronic culprit in love with bullets 
          plucked like stars.  
They the glance at each other 
      crossing the street, the way they know 
          their fathers will never come back.  
     Profanity, yes. Illiterate, ill-nourished,
          
          most of them, most definitely. In addition 
           the brilliant genesis of Odysseus.  
They small ghosts
     
     like pale plates of water abandoned 
          under the brush. It might as well 
          be a jar of snares          mosquitoes 
              damn mosquitoes to get rid of, 
              draining the blood for eggs.  
They
                                     the memory of a stowaway 
                                     hitting the ground again 
                                     and again.


^^EOP^^


Howl something
you want heard, 
guaranteed
you’ll be hunted. 
Howl something
sweet and it won’t
matter either. 
Someone will start
a murder club built
for your friends, 
holding contests
for the most killed. 
They’ll shoot, yell,
smoke you out of
your own company, 
take a sharp right
when they could’ve
made a left turn, 
leaving the cold
meats of a movement
quelling in the sun. 
Gunned-up hides,
dogs barking backward. 
Our growls only get
more bountiful from
here, honey. 
A gust through a forest
of lowered eternities. 
When a baby comes,
they’re born on behalf
of the lost.


^^EOP^^





^^EOP^^


One morning a charred ink line
            in the botanist’s notebook: 
after the invasion, a garden planted in Cairo.
            The French army recording the distance 
between beast and cotton seed.
            Napoleon had wings, flew as Mercury above the pyramids 
a sprig of blue inventing atmosphere.
            The text speaks it and so it becomes 
image and imagine and the people beneath;
            pool of statives beating                 know known know known.  
One morning my birth is an ink line
            in the language of plantations. 
I grow to watch the memory assemble me:
            a fiction of poppies and idolatry, 
gradient in supernumerary fervor,
            bloody at the footnote. There is a door that betweens 
me and then, the authors say the door is always open,
            the ghosts say the door is not for us.


^^EOP^^


I am the flower of
who knows what buried log
that to be alive
creates children
up from the dark
womb of the earth— 
I am an icy flower—
estranged
from every human mercy or prayer
and the air around me
is empty—
breathless—
shaded
by mournful cypresses— 
O who will give to the flower
to its painful corolla
the final strength
to bury the self?
Translated from the Italian


^^EOP^^


Beauty again
presents itself 
as if
for the first time. 
It begins, “When I
look up,” 
and goes on,
“the wet eucalyptus 
is tossing, twinkling
like the sea.” 
It puts words in our mouths.
Similes. 
Displaced,
it returns. 
It can appear
in human form, 
but is most often
elsewhere. 
Those paired
circles of light 
winking
from a shady branch.


^^EOP^^


It wasn’t him
but what he did
that lived on 
inside me.
I had to
learn that. 
I had to
cleave  action
from figure, 
the verb  do
from the noun  doll.
I had to 
imagine
the double ll
not as two walls 
closing in,
two bodies
side by side 
in a twin bed,
two mirrors
facing 
each other,
two tally marks
for the first and second 
time I was ...
but a road
through 
Hell—this
near contraction
of  he and  will— 
where the difference
punctuation makes
could be missed.


^^EOP^^


In school, we read a ridiculous story by Aesop,
one not involving wise or foolish animals or insects, but one in which a god allocates emotions
to the parts of the body. Intellect to the mind, Love
to the heart, etc. etc., until only the asshole is left,
to which the god assigns Shame. Understandably, Shame is unhappy
with the accommodations, but it’s too late. Shame
curses, “If Eros should ever seek to occupy that place,
I will leave the body for good.” This is why
homosexuals have no shame, according to Aesop,
or one of his Victorian translators. According to me, this is why
there is no moral order
to my sexual imagination, and why, praising my looks and hair
and white flesh as I lie with you, then falling
silent for days at a time, you really are the master of my pain.


^^EOP^^


Early days after mourning her father
                                          it sat in its purple-stained case
above the baby in his cradle
            looking more like an amputated horn
                                          or a bladeless dagger
                                          than a ritual mark of manhood 
so small in her long-fingered hand              so graceless
It stuck on without fuss
                                            a glue of fermented grain
that dried clear       even soothed the skin 
She started wearing it nightly            alone with the baby
and for his part the tiny prince loved
                    to reach up and swat at it
                           giggling and rolling his eyes to follow 
And so at least when she’d worked up the nerve
to wear it into the throne room
                           the infant in her arms
                                              thought nothing of it
She claimed his calm
as her first sign of divine right
Advisors couldn’t argue
with the future king
                                   this baby who could separate
                                             the two beings in the body
one without a beard
who cuddled, coddled, and cooed
              and one with the gold-banded cylinder on the chin
who clutched him close to her chest
where he dozed
                          against the growl behind her sternum
              the rocking
of her shoulders
                            as she flung one arm wide a finger
and a parallel chin                    pointing where the workers
carved her likeness
                   with long eyelashes                small breasts
            no hint of glue on high cheeks or jaw


^^EOP^^





Prague, 2018



if the heart of the bell breaks
catastrophe will strike: that is the legend 
last time, a flood;
next, who can know but the bell, its cloven meat
quiet crack of bronze anticipating its own demise
drowned in the clang-like fist & metal murmur 
what other creature keeps its heart inside its head full
of the hour’s secrets & tender prayers? 
I do not doubt the stories—
how bells say & say even after
they have been lost
in the rubble or at sea 
say & say how they paced
into hiding, or grieved their knell siblings
melted for war’s hungry rounds,
how they stilled their blood
in the chill of state restraint,
that longest & most silent hour
of the body’s yearning, say:
a silver bell is really a thumbscrew, no
heart at all, say: touch me,
I am no longer a bell if I do not ring 
how bells say & say
perfectly tuned by centuries, their
hammered & quarreling overtures
haunting ringent ears
calling the forgotten, calling me, I’m called 
to pray in the clamor, holy brazen speech
carapaced in its stony tower, devout lick of metal
to the ferrous brim, its chime sway waking my deadest earth 
to pray which is to taste you ring you
loud to greet you a thousand times
offer my heart to your mouth & bellow the walls—
anything that reminds me how small we are: 
to be swallowed by the boom of fullest sound,
the agony & wonder of wanting the Beloved’s more
crisp break of a mere day off the year’s chanted yearnings,
intonations that we will never last
longer than a breath in the face of the infinite 
to want to be pealed by the hour, to say & say
to invite the lightning by this thunderlust,
lure the cry of livening a shatter
near to feel the crack of the ampersand
organ in the vesper’s dusky light 
to know the catastrophe to come
but nonetheless
ring & ring & ring & ring


^^EOP^^


                    
                    
                         In the month of cleaning family plots, I learned football among graves. All summer, fangs were plentiful. I fed only on fruit and acorns next to a nest built in a discarded doll marking the 50-yard line.
     From snakes licking my ears, sounds of trees, and whispers from the dead, I learned to read plays by how the opposing team huddled.
     On the field, I gave the appearance of lightning, a wardrobe of open wounds. Magical goon who knew a love that outlasted bottles of tequila and all the Cure albums. It, too, was true.
 
                

^^EOP^^





After Monica Youn



I had a form. 
The form said  Name of  victim. 
The form named me. 
The form was a form of naming. 
Naming gave me form. 
The form said  Time of  incident. 
Time could be measured. 
The Incident could be defined. 
Both had a form. 
Both were a form of naming. 
The form said Age. 
Age could be measured by Time. 
Age could be defined by the Incident. 
The Incident occurred on the night before my twenty-first birthday. 
The Time was night as night became night. 
The Incident occurred in my room at the Time. 
The Time occurred to me after the Incident. 
The form said  Race or ethnicity. 
Both were constructed. 
Both marked me. 
Both had a form. 
Both were a form of naming. 
Naming was marking. 
I marked the form.  (Asian. Bottom. 4  Now.) 
I constructed myself.  (Looking 4 Fun. No Strings Attached.) 
I was unremarkable. 
The form said Sex. 
The form listed my options. 
I had no option. 
I went along with the Sex. 
The Sex had a Name.  (I  won’t say the Name.) 
Both marked me. 
The form said  Affiliation. 
Everything started out fine. 
The form said Residence. 
I unlocked the door. 
I misread Affiliation as Affliction. 
The Name entered. 
I misread Residence as Residual. 
The Name kissed me. 
The form said  Alcohol or drugs used at the time of incident. 
I was having a good time. 
The form said  Relationship with the assailant prior to incident. 
I did the thing I was good at. 
The form said  Type of coercion or force involved. 
The Name hit me. 
The form said  Please specify. 
The Name choked me. 
The form said  Ability to consent was inhibited by. 
The Name pressed a white towel against my face. 
The form said  Please specify. 
The towel smelled like sugar.  Please specify. 
An ice cream truck drove by.  (Please.) 
I heard the song.


^^EOP^^


                    
                    
                         The wagon and mule, Time and Eternity, stop to change places. Their lean and slope-back shadow, my reservation. The moon moves like infested flour. At the river, bloody victories meet bloody massacres. They tell each other about their dead.
     Grandmothers eat buffalo instead of hamburger. After supper, guitar chords bite through gravestone. Then the one grandfather interrupts, walking  off with his own skull as a lantern into the polar night. Snowshoe hare cleans the ears of the sleeping and leaves prophetic dreams.
     It is quiet. One can hear the hair of the dead grow. The woods, itself, dressed in frozen children’s clothes. Few of the living disguise themselves as pawned beadwork.
 
                

^^EOP^^





^^EOP^^


the city not yet shielded in ice     the harbor not yet
frozen enough     to walk across     trees without leaves
prismatic    the thing no one 
thought would happen     happened     in a vast hall
I watch the walled city made rubble
prophecy     everyone ignores        
women     who’d rather plunge knives
into their breasts     than be raped by the Greeks
the supertitles in clipped language 
American English     it is a dress rehearsal     daylight
outside     impossible to banish
the day’s news from my mind     Cassandre 
ascends the bulwarks     squints     the famed skyline
of her city in wreckage
a heap of dirty wood     dislodged stones 
her soprano bombards the dark
no one believes the woman     then
94 choristers are singing in horror 
Cassandre kills herself
the women follow
Énée (it is his story 
now) flees the burning city
through the wings
as everyone scrolls through their phones 
when the final three acts premiered
the curtain rose on an ancient time
the work scarcely stageable 
impossible music     enormous orchestra
two full-scale ballets     an empire     holding on
in France     theaters built 
along the widened streets     stripped of their shadows
while the dancers gyrated      mimicking
the animal     love 
of the handsome refugee
and the noble Queen Didon
Énée seeks shelter     water to drink     a body to put his lust in 
she is a stopping point
Didon drunk     she is helpless     she begs
the ships waiting 
in the harbor     with their hundred oarsmen
the curved bow
enormous white sails      caught 
in the stillness      the wind’s power     Didon
in a royal blue pant suit
Hillary had conceded     the hour before 
and so it was Hillary’s
rage I saw     in Didon’s     her great American mezzo
pushed     to the limits


^^EOP^^


Today, green ’96 Subaru, corner of Washington & Alden—six blocks from my house—a boy punches his car horn & screams wordless from the window as if to test my fight or flight & which side of that blade I’ll topple from. I keep a list of details & locations in the back of my head. Red Honda Civic, twelve blocks. Black Grand Cherokee, half-mile. Yesterday, six drunks followed me into the subway shouting slurs. Tall blond with tribal tattoos—babyface almost-beautiful if not for the hunger—his voice the loudest, echoing against the damp cement & tile: What the fuck is that thing?  Last week, a block away from Pride, a street preacher frothed at the jowls & stuffed my hands with pamphlets describing me hell-bound, a shirtless man masturbated across from me on the red line, a commuter in pinstripes & oxfords kicked my cane from beneath my feet while passing through the fare gates. Each time, I felt lucky. It could be worse. [I know the difference between assault & battery—one violence & another—is proximity to measurable harm. This law itself another kind of violence, weapon smelted from a certain bloodline’s  fear.] The week before, a stranger spat on my feet on my way to work, another stalked me through the station yelling Chick dick, chick dick, chick dick, repeating it almost as if it were a prayer. Today, I slide the dead bolt shut behind me—exhale a breath I don’t remember holding. Tomorrow, who knows? Forgive me. I cannot find the poem in all of this, but I can’t bear to let it go unspoken. I want to make this violence a stranger in my mouth. I want to make it something worth remembering.


^^EOP^^


I was Little Albert.
Nine months old in the famous film.
In a white cotton nightie, on a lab
table sitting upright
facing a camera.
Remember me? Sure.
You do. 
First, you saw that I was a “curious” baby.
You saw that I blinked and stared
with all the intensity of an infant-brain
eager to suck into its galaxy of neurons
all of the world. You saw that
I was you. 
You saw that I was a “fearless” baby.
You saw that I was not frightened
of a burning newspaper held before me
at an alarmingly close range.
Though indeed my rapt infant face
expressed the classic wariness of our species. 
Next, you saw that I was not frightened
of a frisky monkey darting close about me
on a leash. You saw
that I was not frightened
by a large dog brought close to me
nor by a quivering rabbit, nor
a small white rat—
nor even a Santa Claus mask
worn by a menacing male figure
clad in white, shoved close
to my infant face. 
You saw that I was attracted to the small white rat.
You saw that I reached out to touch the small white rat.
And as I reached for the small white rat
behind my head came an explosion of noise—
the shock of it sent me sprawling, cringing,
face contorted in terror, mouth
a perfect O of anguish, howling—
as the experimenter John Watson struck
a metal pipe with a hammer.
What a shock!—how terror
rushed through me. How
desperately I crawled
to escape almost toppling
off the edge of the table—
except adult hands restrained me. Children naturally fear loud noises.
Children naturally fear surprises.
Children naturally fear the unknown.
Children can be taught to fear the known.

^^EOP^^





Fiberglass reinforced resin, Luciano Garbati, 2008



1 
I do not want to speak about the beginning
                   of this story. Were my scalp a wreath or crown
of mouths, still, I would not open.
                   But you already know the myth: Rape
that made the body punishment for itself.  2 
Instead begin with the body—itself a kind
                   of ending. A new mythology, the severance
of two heads. Where her thighs meet, no
                   gash, sex mouthed into injury, no coiled
viper against her groin. Instead, a pale gap
                   in stone’s imagination—a dream my body
swallows. Each pill a small cut,
                   a slow beheading.  3 
My mother says her first crime was beauty,
                   that my father’s was how he imagined himself
a god. Call me bloodcurse, fair hair shriveled
                   & sprouting teeth, stain across the temple
floor. Do not make me tell this story
                   without a forked tongue. Before me
there was a mother & a god—I mean
                   a man—& a choice. Imagine, her body a home.
Call my father burglar, my birth a breaking
                   & entering

^^EOP^^





מקווה



     There is a cistern
          on the synagogue’s roof
     and a drain pipe in the wall
leading to a small basement pool.
There are two witnesses, a rabbi
    and one not-yet-Jew. 
       They are all women.
                  No one feigns modesty.
The convert waits
       naked and trimmed,
              no minerals on the skin,
     shadow down the drain.
              There is no magic in plain water. 
All the exile of the world
             comes from the back of the tongue.
      Give a palate enough dirt
                       and it will soil on its own.
    The choke of someone unused
                 to eating dirt
                     is quieter than it should be. 
        However loud, there is no one around.
                         Maybe there is an ancestor to listen.
     Certainly somewhere is a child
     who would not recognize this building
           unless it were on fire.
Learning to read from engravings
             on blackened stones,
what would you do
    when presented a book? 
Do not mistake the rabbi
      for the one who condemns.
  Damnation is often
                             a personal choice.
          Witnesses turn toward the empty pool,
the convert curls her toes. 
     She may think this drowning
is all that’s left
          but there is no magic
   in plain water.
        This is a ritual
                        not a spell.
                 The words
                    are less important: 
          “Ghetto was first our island.
         When we entered the ocean,
                    whether to bathe
                      or to drown,
   we always knew which shore
      we’d wash up on. 
“We taught our children
    to tuck stars under their shirts.
         Our god let the slaves die
    in the desert 
              and we called it mercy.
         We only fell in love
     with those who knew
        how to run.” 
She doesn’t look up,
         doesn’t nod,
               takes the smooth steps
         into the pool
           and pauses to breathe 
                before pulling her hair under
       and lifting her feet
         so it’s water only
                           all around.


^^EOP^^





After David Hammons



A shine to the bark, silver leaves aflicker
and the wound that made the basketball hoop:
a bicycle’s metal wheel gouged in the tree,
the trunk’s burred lip that clamps it. 
Whose childhood monument is this?
In the foreground of whose childhood home,
its blind-drawn windows? Where is the adolescent
of the grass and weeds, after school? The adolescent 
of the fluid leap and jump shot? Of the glissando
stride and lay-up? The plosive woop woop cries sent up
when the body satisfies the calculating eye?
O the tree ashimmer in hypotheticals’ blooms— 
where’s the undissuaded youth who sought
a scarce grace here? Who sought to make bank?
The shoulder and arm and wrist on repeat
even as day went thoroughly dark 
who refused to come inside until they exhausted
the audience of their mind? O extraordinary dunk, O hard slam, shudder the immovable tree.
Where is the glimmer of a sign 
one might one day rise among the ordinals
to be ranked  first, first, first? Wouldn’t
it be possible? Because if not, if not, if not.


^^EOP^^


I would not have thought I would have needed to say this.

Once upon a time, there was an English mole. I say mole, I mean vole, or guilty black hole. Not so much a mole as a disaffected young teacher, or a sheaf of important papers, or a strategy session in the wine bar with Giles, or a traffic jam. Or a lie as big as a bus.

A mole as in a foal, as in a dinner, when it’s wanted. A mole as a drink, when it’s needed. A mole as in a queue, for food? A mole of practical use, or pragmatic scruples and sharp manners. A mole what uses myth, like money, to store, in order, to never have to think of it. Mole as in wealth, as in forgetfulness. Mole as in memory, memory as confidence.

Or the idea of an island which grew its own people.

Or up to no good. No doubt.

I say Mole, I mean Arthur. I mean Uther, Oswald, George.

Love of country was her name.

I have no love for this country, was her name.

She almost certainly said she didn’t understand anything, names nor countries.

She could see, and was hungry.

I’d like to see you spit on your face, she said.

He could not reconcile the deep appreciation, the lusty, unquenchable affection she felt for the landscape of this country with the political history and present of the place which he found so revolting. This mole was caught between this love and this inability to love, and felt they must reach around and become one. They must be the same thing. They smelt the same, if the mole was being honest. I say mole, I mean populace oblivious to propaganda, self-interest or personal gain, an animal made of millions, released from the dark tunnels of capitalism’s dying gasps. A mythical beast. A joke.

Regret was her lightline. She would not ask, do I ask what my actions are asking for right now? For she was historical, in the tunnels, lightless with her line, a paw with a sore, holding a cage, with a budgie. Yellow in the dark. Animals too, moles digging coals, downing tools, hearing singing as warning, and not listening. The mole as the last night, not last night, and getting upset that the hole wasn’t looking at the mole, in the dark, when she couldn’t see his face but he could see hers. The mole had to look at where he thought her eyes were.

Revolting is a strong word.

I say mole, I mean National Trust, national freedom pass for the national bus, a proper hoo-ha, a national fuss.

I say mole, I mean Sharpe, Sean Bean as Sharpe, I mean people are dying while you go full-bore Cockerhoop. I mean it wasn’t like that when I was around, when I was younger. I mean a certain kind of touch, of look. I mean a freedom pass. I mean blindness to the estate. I mean, have you been in prisons, lately? They don’t really. I mean you aren’t talking of who fixes what you’re using?

I mean an acre of English ground, a sugarcoated Dacre homeward bound.

I say mole I mean Yarl’s Wood and all who work there who will never get to any heaven English or heathen.

I say mole. I mean a deliberate lie. I mean an act of aggression against the thing that sustains the world, ad infinitum. A Möbius strip of endless U-turns.

You say mole, you mean if you make people think they’re thinking, they’ll turn for you. Turn over, their backs to the ground. So much back to the ground it undergrounds. U-turns under the earth. You say mole but the term is not applied to all talpids; e.g., desmans and shrew moles differ from the common definition of “mole.”

He happened upon a postcard from her grandmother, and climbed into a gray watercolor and pencil forest, and felt in there, in the late-life, lonely work of a man gone to war and come back godly, a certain sort of English sanity. Faith. Totally mad, but beautifully truthful. She smelt it closer and heard it, ridiculous scripture. Three is the magic number. I say mole, I mean that rare thing, a true eccentric with a genuinely good heart. Kindness. Grace. I say mole but I mean pilgrim.

He happens upon a feeling of pride and says out loud, I am where I am supposed to be. I am creating foreign englands to leave my own. I am creating land from sea. A mole as in earth on water, to dig, to live on it and make it better. He says you can read this anywhere, anywhere you want to read.

A mole as in a memory, emailed. As is decent, constant, cancer or rain same complaint. As in deference, unpretentiousness. As in you wouldn’t want to see the old peoples voting history. As in when he was young, if you were to say one more thing to him, one more loose from your mouth, then he would’ve burst you, like a mole in a digger, and washed in your ashes and no one would’ve cared. Eccentric as in soldier, war as in mole.

He realized he must eat it. All of it. The poisonous and the palatable. She was hungry, and only by eating a great many things would she start to understand this love that could encompass shame, and was no longer made of country lanes, trees, flowers and small fellow-mammals. I say mole I mean server. I mean brochure. I mean pixels. Not a mole, more of a wood, more of a community, more of a teenager alone in a room staring at a screen, more a meeting in a Little Chef, more a surveyor, or an elaborate scam coded into the way a digital advert works, or a pipe, or not a pipe.

More of a nation, outside of papers, an anti-net where still no one will bat a lash. He is national enough to say, out loud, I am where it is. As in, a bit smaller, but still, impressive historically hmm? A skin disease as in moles are crawling all over me. A mole as in a confession, without any Catholics present. As in I need someone to hold me down. I’m pulling out my hair mole. As in I’d love you, but you’d tell everyone. You’d tell them of my brass. Of my salt in the earth, which poisons moles.

A mole is a spy, is a green-leather seat in a chamber of bullshit.

A mole is a sleep like baby logs. An apologies, a baby moles is a mole, we mean. The auld moldwarp. The new male moles are called “boars,” females are called “sows.” A group of moles is called a “labour.”

If you look closely you’ll see the mole is charitable. I say mole I mean sure start. I mean good bloke doing his thing keeping his head down. I mean wonderful pretentious twat.

Closely looked I was born riffraff, and I’ve grown old as the stuff. That’s what shouldn’t be allowed. You hear that. Let that be forbidden in the future. Man is born in order to think. Who is them? I don’t understand this thing. If I’m happy, mole is unhappy. If mole is happy, man is unhappy. Except he imagines he’ll be able to wriggle out of it.

Less a mole than an intimate examination of the sore bit inside a person’s eyelid. I say mole, but I mean any child, any parent, any person in a position of responsibility or utter carelessness. I mean prisoner. I mean patient. I mean the architect of a lie and he or she who believes the falsity and suffers while the deceiver profits. Mole as in poor and getting poorer, the little animal who is rich, and gets richer. Mole mole, caught in a hole. One mole, two moles, three moles, four, try to shut us out, there’s a mole in the door.

The mole folds into a shadow, of course, because he’s underfoot, where shadows start.

“For treatment of warts and cysts on the throat for a man take a she-mole, & for a woman a he-mole & setting by a good fire let the party put the moles head in his mouth & biting it, sucke the blood out of the moles mouth as lively as it can for treatment of warts and cysts on the throat.”

Prester John. Hermes Trismegistus. The Golden Legend. Whatever.

Angels with eyes like abscesses. But that’s the only thing. The only noticeable visual impairment. All else is not noticeable, so I assume, looking over my shoulder, symmetrical.

Mole as in English fact. As in how we keep changing, how we’ve always been like this.

Mole as in you’ll thank me in the end.

Lie Mole.

Lay Mole.

History mole.

King mole’s vicious campaign against himself.

Regret is not his guide line, backward through his history. Disease has never been a respecter of historical odds.

I say mole I mean news. I think you have a fairly good sense of who the mole is.

You’d say them.

I mean us.


^^EOP^^





Central America is a region of great importance to the United States. And it is so close: San Salvador is closer to Houston, Texas than Houston is to Washington, DC.
—Ronald Reagan
País mío no existes.
—Roque Dalton



1 
I’m not sorry, not at all,
for the highway I’ve taken,
rapacious, moldering,
hollow husk of a highway.
My destination deemed
perfect, where everybody
collides, so says the law,
whether I’m a criminal
or not, the math doesn’t add up
to exchange a few nothings
for a heaven I’ve never seen,
always heard of, right?
No maps nor numbers,
no possible word written
or spoken to keep you
from thinking I’m putting
a dent in your narrow
pockets. This is how
I do it, while the bald
mountains arch their backs,
darkness coming in fast,
something to chew
while my body rots.  2 
You come in like the Spanish flu
ravaging the blossoms’ water supply. 
Our rejection out of old rage begins
as if a mayflower found itself 
unanchored, a searing crucible
with no return. The story you claim 
disturbing and enchanting,
such a rotten thing. May you find 
your whole way back
through the black dogs of gunfire, 
harken back to the sounds
of your native flowers. Chances are 
if you fall, you’ll disappear
or pass. Yet like a hawk 
I will coin myself vigilant, dig you out
before your weeds, blackening, 
spawn your way of life. Our bodies
settled here first.  3 
If there’s no body left, there’s no crime,
no court case, so bury the filthy bastard.
Don’t fuss about it. It’s just a quick blow,
down he goes. You see the brains 
unclogged like leafed rainwater
in the gutters. My bag. My haunt of flies.
Thinking of nothing will make nothing
happen, so nothing will
do precisely. Nothing.  4 
Here by the northern peak, they cut
the chine of another country, blue
pre-dawn, darkened highway, and then nothing
or everything like roadkill. 
Another checkpoint, and whatever
they carry speaks of cadavers—
all those vanishings
by whatever means necessary— 
not our Eden, crushed forest
of mangled trees and brush
brushed aside, not you asleep
as if beneath the fields.  5 
The sun foaming with too much hissing
mirrors the indifference of scrub,
mountain gut, scorching haze
as they snake through thorns,
vanish through trees and, on the rocks,
settle like dust.
                       With light sleep,
with music and argot unheard,
merely behaving on instinct, they
puncture their countries, not knowing
what it means, and why would they,
after all they were taught to eat
everything, including the roaches.  6 
I must tell you the truth,
sometimes I want nothing more
than the continent capsized; north
down there, south the top of the head,
between you & me not a line,
no scrape of rust clogging
the mind. Who’s to say? Me,
the dark design
                       of a collarbone.
Of a country and without a country. 
You, total gratification
for the ants congregating
down the carcass. 
                        How small
the countries of our bodies. 
A polygon
as old as you started this. 
It’s hard to grasp the God-awful hunger
of those who don’t see it, don’t need it,
rather bury it, the body
as the greatest instrument.  7 
A match light like a bold,
faded gold leaf falling
in a painting. There
in the back streets
failing once again to form
a lucid thought. That’s
the only way to carry out
before you tread, watch
the landscape change.
How else is it possible
to obliterate one’s country.
Not completely, just enough
to feel dead or almost
in the flesh. How once
you rose on the other side
only to hear a shout babble
a language you didn’t know;
words you knew lost their worth.
The roof of your mouth ossified,
tongue only the space it used
to take. At ease with dark.
At ease with your reflection
blurred in public restrooms.
That’s the only way to go.
No grasp of what it is like
to leave without wanting
to come back, to leave
without all you know, all you are,
as if the doctor has cut a wedge
out of the brain. It’s getting here
that makes it difficult to ignore,
the flicker of a thought
discarded like a cigarette.  8 
You heard this before,
country of volcanoes
and lakes, country of
I break your ass, I pry
you open with rocks,
out of ravines, out of
tangled hills of my mind,
without a guide on all
fours I walk. Illegitimate
country of legs and arms,
in a way a rosary I have
nothing to say, nothing
to add, except I’m ashamed
I lost it. Country of piece-
of-shit Coca-Cola, torso
and head, I piece you
like a forsaken blanket,
over the shoulder, how
does one forget such
weight, how does leaving
mean much more than
returning. I want to say
a voice well-crafted
and resurrected said
you don’t exist. I think
I know what he meant.
Country that is no
country, crevice so far
and so close to—
here is the thing. Maybe
I’ll never get there, but
when I do, no doubt
I’ll look back, thinking
someone is following.


^^EOP^^





^^EOP^^


Severed finger of a convicted murderer uncurls like a waking pet.
Demonic compass points toward the most dangerous direction to get home. 
Its long yellow fingernail can pick any lock. 
On the fishhook, the finger resembles a long, fat mealworm.
Most times, it’s lodged in the throats of my enemies
or hiding among the tampons of cops’ wives. 
It avoids gold rings, bad luck. 
When wearing this rot relic on a chain,
sunlight smells like stale curtains in a worn-out hearse.
Rain never hits my clothes. 
Rooms seem hotter.
Radios turn on by themselves, always to the same Lucinda Williams song. 
Use any mirror as a doorway, I come out into the same sweaty
bedroom from a previous life. I forget who is wearing whom. 
I pierce the fingertip to draw up a will. 
I dip the finger in water. I point it toward the sun. I flick it to make it rain. 
Hanging on the wall,
I sleep under this bird, booger-picker, dream catcher,
missing piece of an inverted crucifix, rotting pencil. 
It sleeps over me like an accusative God. 
Around midnight, I wake up, the finger is typing in the next room.
What is it composing at this time of night? 
Letters to a parole board,
love letters to the rest of the hand,
midnight sermons,
ransom notes pertaining to me,
memoirs about life, hanging from my neck ...


^^EOP^^


When the mirror swings open, it calls me obscenely shapely. A ruby wing slaps the glass. Soft smear. Since,
like the drowning trick in reverse, I learned to float 
outside myself from a certain, mostly bearable height,
I watch terror push its anthem into the skin under
my dress, and the noise I obscure obscures my body 
still slimming to a petal. After his performance,
which is a hand tucking my performance into the pink
void between the heart’s line and the fate’s, I flower 
on command, a damp palm forcing a ghost to act out
the life my habit takes. Like cathedrals too haunted
and lovely to uplift or abandon, my fluted, parted legs 
offend and seem to be carved past clear expectations
of naturality. A bloody wing striking the mirror’s roof
reflecting the tops of your heads, lofted with wonder. 
Like hatred, the secret is only as hidden as the stage
disguising it—my hand bewitches since my magician
had a dream in which I tricked him into fucking me 
then holstered the theater’s box with blood’s jewelry
all exposed. Captivity stabbed through with singing,
the hollow weeping, I watch his hands as you watch 
my words for chasming midnight and wild morning
needling in. When he twists my arm, I can’t forgive
the direction in which I thrust the other. This lyric 
admits one appetite for my transformation. The birds
survive it, bright monsters in the fourth wall’s forest.
But I am not a trapdoor shut, not white globes alight 
in little cages screwed to the balcony. I was both wings
watching you suck that slick, sugared slice of laughter
when my violation hit the floor, inspiring a vague storm 
of applause. Thunder split something like rain over
this sorry house. Tenants in the first row went home
when they left, but red and wet from heel to crown.


^^EOP^^





^^EOP^^


Ok, we’ve rendered
the rendition 
how often? 
What were we trying
to get rid of? 
We exposed the homeless
character of desire
to the weather. 
Shall we talk
about the weather 
worsening four times
faster than expected, 
eight times, 
until the joy
of pattern recognition
kicks in? 
            Until the crest
            of the next ridge
            is what remains
            of division.
 


^^EOP^^


Now I can’t
get past the mezzanine,
never know who’s waiting
for me downstairs
by the revolving door
covered in shields or crosses
like the blood drive. Will this
be the year they finally succeed
in harvesting these last
self-organs, I ask, as they
tell me it’s for a cause?
As if I’m not the swollen one
smiling on their pamphlets.
Don’t bother with this logic
of sameness as you eye me
like the platter at labor lunch.
I used to envy the trees
wearing mists as veils,
modest trunks exploding into
thousands of muscle-bound
legs soon as they reach
the soil. Now even trees
seem docile and susceptible.
So too for the quasi-
goddesses with half-lives
shorter than a hair’s.
When we still had hair
and partners my partner
shaving said hair said we should be made of light. 
While every morning I
wake hoping to uncover
some slab of my body
hollowed out and encased
in steel. Everyone’s entitled
to her own magic bullet
theory of self. There’s
the get-to-know-you
game we play no longer
for we lost get-to and know-you.
If you had to press further into
the future in what county what
province would you elect
what version of what self? 
A half-frozen field late
January. Tall, spare, lone
turbine thrashing by
the abandoned interstate. 
I play my game. 
I await the next campaign.


^^EOP^^


Now you want me to tell you
a history of fish
while the lake clouds over?
But don’t you see
how thirst beats in the throat
of the lizards on the crushed leaves?
On the ground
autumn’s dead hedgehogs
have plunged through the periwinkles.
And you chew
the parched stalks:
already the corner of your lip is bleeding a bit.
And now
you want me to tell you
the history of birds?
But in the heat
of noon, the wild cuckoo
flies alone.
And still
the lost puppy howls among the brambles:
perhaps the bay horse, running,
struck him with a black hoof
on his snout.
Translated from the Italian


^^EOP^^


            Like any spell for bringing everyone you’ve ever loved back,
said the wind last night. What is it, about nighttime and fragment
seeming made for each other? It’s morning, now. The wind is just 
wind again, saying nothing, of course. The bomb cyclone, as it’s
called when there’s a more powerful than usual mashup of warm
and cold air leading to “hurricane-force wind events” hasn’t 
happened yet, but there’s an ominous bending and failing to rise
up that the bamboo keeps doing, that makes me think Sure,
anything could happen, but when isn’t that true? So many poems 
waiting for flight, grounded variously until better weather or until
the latest glitch (in vision, technique, both) that caused the latest
disaster gets worked out, the way it can seem impossible, during 
the intricate steps of dressage, that the horses ever do things like
trot into a barn or casually walk to any field’s other end—yet
they do, eventually. What’s difficult resolves. Disaster is almost 
never tragedy. The snowbells (that appeared overnight? or am I
just now noticing them?) are only snowbells if I call them that.
I could as easily call them Don’t tell me the worst I’d expected 
is true, or Lo, the queen’s bodice, borne unobtrusively aloft, or—
or I can say it’s spring again, with its first shy flowers, meaning
color, not bearing. Not mood. Hopkins thought flowers expressed 
devotion the only way they could: they turn toward the sun. From
humans, he suggested, God expects more—no, is owed more,
because we have more to give. Leaving out God and science, 
I suppose I get that, a version maybe of what Campion says: All
do not all things well—as in we do what we can. I had a house
near the sea, once, for example; now I live where there’s no sea 
at all, in a house with a yard filled with trees, among them this
barren pear tree from which I long ago hung a set of wind chimes
designed to sound like a cross between a ship’s bells and the sort of 
music tapped out by the rigging’s cable blocks as they hit their
masts unobstructed, sails down in a storm. If I close my eyes, it really
can seem I’m home again—the sea not far, the wind in the leaves 
standing in for the waves getting rougher than forecast, Rough
the way once you liked it, I can almost hear the waves choiring
back at me like an accusation of what I don’t deny, nor am I 
shamed of it, bring the boats to shore, friends, lay me down on
the shore. This far into the country, though, a boat’s pretty much
useless. Hence the pioneers with their teetered wagons that they 
called prairie schooners out of sheer nostalgia, already missing
the sea. Is that nostalgia? Or is it more like what Xenophanes
says, how if cows could draw, the gods in their pictures would have 
horns, the gods of birds would have feathers everywhere, each
would brandish, for stateliness, two wings for mastering a wind
strong enough to bring the stars down, as we used to say, before 
to touch meant collision, back when sex was what mattered
most; seemed to. Now precision does—specifically, that precision
with which love, felt honestly, deploys itself as if it hadn’t 
planned to. So that it feels like chance: chance as a boy with
a sash marked Fate across the promise that his chest is, or soon
will be, give it time, there’s time, still. The truth is, there aren’t 
that many people I can say I have loved, not in any way that matters
or stands memorable, really, and of those few I’m not so certain
I’d bring any of them back. At best, they wouldn’t find me 
anything close to who I was when I loved them, which is to say
I’d disappoint them all over again, just differently, so there’d at
least be that. What is happening, they used to ask me. Could you 
rephrase the question, I’d sort of mumble back, in a way it was
like dancing, when both people know how to dance, what I
mean is there was grace to it, a real grace, despite the mumbling, 
which is maybe why it took so long, for one of us to stop, if here
to stop doesn’t have to mean letting go; more like: I am grateful
for you, let neither of us wish for or do the other harm. Let sex— 
for, though I meant what I said about it not mattering most now,
it still matters—let sex be governed by that same restraint from
any harm unasked for. It almost sounds like prayer sometimes, 
he said, describing light on water. He said it like the sort of thing,
after sex, one simply says. Entering the body, pulling gently back
out of it—is that so little for a life to have come to? That, and 
the more than a few names long since scattered like those leaves
across which the Sibyl’s prophecies are written clearly enough,
if only the leaves would stop moving, if I could read and know, 
for once, what? what’s left for me, in terms of time, directions
of fortune, who I am? Who am I, the hero says to himself,
looking past his reflection on the lake’s surface down to where 
the darker greens give way at last to darkness. A light wind stirs
the surface. The reflection trembles without breaking apart. As if
this late in the long apprenticeship, “When I Change My Life” 
had stopped being a song anymore worth singing. I believe
and refuse to believe that, equally. Speak to me; speak into me,
the wind said, when I woke this morning, Let’s see what happens.


^^EOP^^


1 
A product can be authentic;
an object cannot. 
This presents a problem. 
An identity can be authentic;
an experience cannot. 
“How was your sleep experience?”
asks Marriott. 
Praise or blame
is the only legitimate response.  2 
Vultures wheel over Miami. 
A sign that appears
day after day
is not a sign. 
The library boasts a fine collection
of books written in private
languages.  3 
Identity is made
of select experiences.  4 
If you are genuinely sick,
the leaves recede 
and the flickering holes between them
come forward— 
not angels, but
unnamed objects


^^EOP^^


                    
                    
                    In the rowboat I tied her shoes.
And the river cussed and spat.
 
Our feet swelled and our bellies begged.

The end is never how you expect.
 
This is where I lose her:

at the shoreline, in sweet water.
 
We fed wild dogs overripe apples and herring.

My hands shine with hunger.
 
Her hair hung in willow boughs, mine in wild onion.

I reel the small fish of time.
 
The end never happens and always happens.

In winter we suet the trees. The cardinals arrive like snow.
 
I braid her willow hair. I tie her shoes once more.

It is winter again. The birches like crooked combs.
 
Why are you crying?        Why are you crying?
Begin but start with the end:
 
in spring she is pregnant. In summer she is not.

The baby swims in every room.
 
See where our steps wet the hallway?

That was when we were swept away.


^^EOP^^


It felt so normal to be ‘inspected,’ ‘looked at,’
‘examined,’ ‘explored,’ ‘interrogated’—
why does the perceptually deprived brain play such tricks?
Still firing off, cleaning up the sopping wetness
of the clouds with a snuffed-out candle wick. The spider
can’t be frightened into a jar. Imagine remembering anything
about those years other than pure sensation—
could the tree do it? The stump of one fallen
nourished for centuries by its surroundings. After some
time I learned to pay attention to ah and oh
and hey—body demanding a toll when another
eventually wanted to enter. At last, to guess instead
of knowing—saying now when the feeling came
strongest: how I miss the future, it’s sideways surrender.
I have since only rarely seen the tree—it puts into my ears
the sounds of all the people living without me:
the dark oaks of the dining room, every knife buried
among the airport car park—letterboxes
where there should have been a lake. Imagine if
afterwards everything can be pure sensation:
sugar-fed and alive in its dismantling.
 


^^EOP^^


As winter went on, every morning’s spoon of buckwheat honey
resembled more the taste of that isosceles at midpoint
of your weight, its smell brought sweetly back the pendulum-like pace
moving us from windowsill to floor, from floor to bed, and back
to floor, mapping haste’s measure of the room, our smell, but also meubles, book dust, hanging smoke, an open bottle, everything
connecting now for me, as smells will do, things that don’t connect,
may not be mine in memory, like childhood’s corridors, cats,
other’s bodies, and maybe other minds. All this from the spoon:
sweet, grassy in my nose, cloying almost, bitter on the tongue.
Yet, as clear as memory of pace, of smell, of movement made—
strange: where is the sound of us as we moved with one another?
 


^^EOP^^





All who have stood in a mother’s hand are sure to die because they were born
—Zhai Yongming



Between us bobs the baby, solemn in her infant wet suit.
The pool is the only place where
              screaming does not indicate terror. 
The neighbor’s pansy beds—O to lie down in those beds
and doze. Greener than grass, says Sappho,
              originator of envy. 
My sleep is pollinated by the baby’s wails: dreams
sprouting voices in peril. Mind sped up and emaciated
              like a greyhound 
in the track. The end of growth is death.
The painting begins with a scribble. Or is a scribble
              the finishing touch? 
Call your plants by their names, 10,000 words a day.
We feed, we weed, we read her books about owls.
              What am I minding 
but stillness? What have I grown except loss?


^^EOP^^


Good morning, daddy!
Ain’t you heard
The boogie-woogie rumble
Of a dream deferred?
 
Listen closely:
You’ll hear their feet
Beating out and beating out a—
 
            You think             It’s a happy beat?
 
Listen to it closely:
Ain’t you heard
something underneath
like a—
 
            What did I say?
 
Sure,
I’m happy!
Take it away!
 
            Hey, pop!             Re-bop!             Mop!
              Y-e-a-h!
 


^^EOP^^


Little cullud boys with beards
re-bop be-bop mop and stop.
 
Little cullud boys with fears,
frantic, kick their CC years
into flatted fifths and flatter beers
that at a sudden change become
sparkling Oriental wines
rich and strange
silken bathrobes with gold twines
and Heilbroner, Crawford,
Nat-undreamed-of Lewis combines
in silver thread and diamond notes
on trade-marks inside
Howard coats.
 
Little cullud boys in berets
            oop pop-a-da
horse a fantasy of days
            ool ya koo
and dig all plays.
 


^^EOP^^


Freedom will not come
Today, this year
            Nor ever
Through compromise and fear.
 
I have as much right
As the other fellow has
            To stand
On my two feet
And own the land.
 
I tire so of hearing people say, Let things take their course. Tomorrow is another day.
I do not need my freedom when I’m dead.
I cannot live on tomorrow’s bread.
            Freedom
            Is a strong seed
            Planted
            In a great need.
            I live here, too.
            I want my freedom
            Just as you.   
 


^^EOP^^


He came home from middle school
with a wet kitten tucked inside
his black leather jacket.
He'd found it shivering in the tall grass
flattened by rain.
It could only belong to him
for fifteen minutes
and it understood that, I think.
Though just a few weeks old,
already it expected disappointment.
Yet it began to purr,
this scrap of cloud-gray fur,
as he drew it forth to show me.
Castaway (its name
he said), so lonely and hungry
after the shipwreck of
another day at school.


^^EOP^^


Tinkling treble,
Rolling bass,
High noon teeth
In a midnight face,
Great long fingers
On great big hands,
Screaming pedals
Where his twelve-shoe lands,
Looks like his eyes
Are teasing pain,
A few minutes late
For the Freedom Train.
 
 


^^EOP^^


Hold fast to dreams
For if dreams die
Life is a broken-winged bird
That cannot fly.
 
Hold fast to dreams
For when dreams go
Life is a barren field
Frozen with snow.
 


^^EOP^^


Good evening, daddy!
I know you’ve heard
The boogie-woogie rumble
Of a dream deferred
Trilling the treble
And twining the bass
Into midnight ruffles
Of cat-gut lace.
 


^^EOP^^


My old man’s a white old man
And my old mother’s black.
If ever I cursed my white old man
I take my curses back.
 
If ever I cursed my black old mother
And wished she were in hell,
I’m sorry for that evil wish
And now I wish her well.
 
My old man died in a fine big house.
My ma died in a shack.
I wonder where I’m gonna die,
Being neither white nor black?
 
 


^^EOP^^


Gather out of star-dust
            Earth-dust,
            Cloud-dust,
And splinters of hail,
One handful of dream-dust
            Not for sale.
 


^^EOP^^


Down in the bass
That steady beat
Walking walking walking
Like marching feet.
 
Down in the bass
That easy roll,
Rolling like I like it
In my soul.
 
            Riffs, smears, breaks.
 
Hey, Lawdy, Mama!
Do you hear what I said?
Easy like I rock it
In my bed!
 


^^EOP^^


Sometimes when I’m lonely,
Don’t know why,
Keep thinkin’ I won’t be lonely
By and by.


^^EOP^^


If I had some small change
I’d buy me a mule,
Get on that mule and
Ride like a fool.
 
If I had some greenbacks
I’d buy me a Packard,
Fill it up with gas and
Drive that baby backward.
 
If I had a million
I’d get me a plane
And everybody in America’d
Think I was insane.
 
But I ain’t got a million,
Fact is, ain’t got a dime—
So just by if-ing
I have a good time!
 


^^EOP^^


See that lady
Dressed so fine?
She ain’t got boogie-woogie
On her mind—
 
But if she was to listen
I bet she’d hear,
Way up in the treble
The tingle of a tear.
 
            Be-Bach!
 


^^EOP^^


I play it cool
And dig all jive
That’s the reason
I stay alive.
 
My motto,
As I live and learn,
            is: Dig And Be Dug In Return.
 


^^EOP^^


Little snail,
Dreaming you go.
Weather and rose
Is all you know.
 
Weather and rose
Is all you see,
Drinking
The dewdrop’s
Mystery.
 


^^EOP^^


When I get to be a colored composer
I'm gonna write me some music about
Daybreak in Alabama
And I'm gonna put the purtiest songs in it
Rising out of the ground like a swamp mist
And falling out of heaven like soft dew
I'm gonna put some tall tall trees in it
And the scent of pine needles
And the smell of red clay after rain
And long red necks
And poppy colored faces
And big brown arms
And the field daisy eyes
Of black and white black white black people
And I'm gonna put white hands
And black hands and brown and yellow hands
And red clay earth hands in it
Touching everybody with kind fingers
Touching each other natural as dew
In that dawn of music when I
Get to be a colored composer
And write about daybreak
In Alabama.


^^EOP^^


The head of Lincoln looks down from the wall
While movies echo dramas on the screen.
The head of Lincoln is serenely tall
Above a crowd of black folk, humble, mean.
The movies end. The lights flash gaily on.
The band down in the pit bursts into jazz.
The crowd applauds a plump brown-skin bleached
blonde
Who sings the troubles every woman has.
She snaps her fingers, slowly shakes her hips,
And cries, all careless-like from reddened lips!
De man I loves has
Gone and done me wrong ...
While girls who wash rich white folks clothes by day
And sleek-haired boys who deal in love for pay
Press hands together, laughing at her song.
 


^^EOP^^


How thin and sharp is the moon tonight!
How thin and sharp and ghostly white
Is the slim curved crook of the moon tonight!


^^EOP^^


When she died, I took my mother's socks,
those fuzzy polka-dotted ones she'd worn
 
in hospice. I wore them all through winter.
 
Maybe that's creepy. But is it really so different
from the necklace she willed to me,
 
that single pearl clinging to its strand of silver?
 
The necklace isn't creepy. Every day for a year
I hung it over my heart, even in the shower,
 
even when it felt heavy as a beggar's first coin.
 
I want to say that having these things was like having a scar
but worse. In winter, socks are as inevitable as scars,
 
except there's more choice in it: when I was cold,
I chose which socks, and whose.
 
But I'm wrong. These tokens I harvested
from her deathbed are more like the pearl,
 
or rather, what makes a pearl:
 
that piece of sand, the irritant that the nacre
builds itself around, that tiny, everyday object
 
that, little by little, learns to glow.


^^EOP^^


                        for JA
 
I flutter in order
to enter
the phrase’s silver.
  Jackdaws have launched nearby
this time, silk green and ripped,
the movement a kind of chafing thinking.
 
Oh he’s marking
terrain right there—
right there with his
 
unmade song. The shadow kids
whip fronds, froth air up
into heat, pure and simple
 
“violence of the eye.” Wild iris
ink, wet in the margin’s stage.
Well, hadn’t this testament begun
 
to carry its chime in stripes?
That’s when I knew he was going away
from me, towards the sound.
 
Like the ring on the table
it can’t be decentered.
Rim around the recent.
 
Ashes, ashes,
A bright tangled seeming.
 


^^EOP^^


1 
After the beautiful boy killed himself I killed myself
and lived in the trash vortex, the j’accuse of the US
with gear and the beclouded night kindness and a mind
like a mule deer in the poorest of zips. My affection
got only so close before I withdrew into self-protection,
my white tail an insolent so long. I lived by borrowing
the stillness and dominion and circumference and how dare I
be anything at all, mud under his boot sole, the roux
of the cookbooks he borrowed from the library,
and I returned and wanted stew and the simmering of him.  2 
Where was the equipment for living? Where was the witness?
And where was the Very Rich Hours: the exchange of rings,
the gathering of flowers? Both beautiful and boy and April
gone the way of trumpeting May and ghost structures
of the Gothic, costly blue and gold depicting ...
Could you say beautiful and boy after the beautiful boy
killed himself? April felt like retrograde February,
impoverished color fields of angry, blowing on our hands
in the Middle Ages of Syracuse where we lived in a university
city, joining faith to magical thinking to tactics for fleeing.  3 
After the beautiful boy killed himself was
became impossible to hold in one mind, my mind,
and I could not look directly at is, the wind
and the thinly branched sapling that is/was his height
and others wore shoes like his shoes, like
was legal and the swellings of April illegal
made up as it was [was] of gaps and lapses.
I depended on the vertical hell of other people
for story, for a narrative however broken,
a tolerance that could be that charmed or bitter,
could be what takes the place of nouns and verbs.  4 
After the beautiful boy killed himself I was a mackle
of presence, a blurred capital letter that marked
a person’s breathing, while he was immaculately
gone except for all the damage to our throats
and to our umbilical selves. Touch was too much
or not enough. White space was obliterated by April’s
mute riot or was it organized into caravans stopped ...
Ah, what luxury to have his crossed letters on paper,
rationed wartime material we have now in abundance,
and map what we know in scratches and around that what?  5 
Cuts, knots, rips, fissures, dots, the ink drips
from the person after the beautiful boy killed himself,
stopgap concept, the grief counselor kept it together
or at arm’s length so the ________ can’t find the ________.
I asked her for experience and I got a view from above—
grace, I’ll take it, the casserole, the pepper pot;
I’ll take the fix, the unopened bills for the services
rendered, the renderings billed. Any fix is myopic,
like a mother’s look at the child’s flaws as virtues,
as self-incrimination, the crime being the rich
attachments of subjects, objects, finishes.  6 
Clouds blocked the sun all April
after the beautiful boy killed himself,
blocked by the body and the next steps, blocked
the pronouns, blocked and, blocked then, although, before, so after the beautiful boy
we loved the jagged now for its promise and threat,
for its torn map of Detroit and its alternate plans
of duration and what was it yesterday I said
after the beautiful boy killed himself about stopping
me while I was weeping to say ghost = get = go on.  7 
What energies and economies of the daily,
the obvious snows and obliteration and shoveling
disrupted when the beautiful boy killed himself?
He keeps moving down or is it up? Is there up
in the pedestrian advance to the drugstore for more
pain medication, buying a coffee to go and a doughnut?
Why not start from the start, from the hesitant
and make a progress that’s disrupted by the end,
disrupted by the currency? Are you paying for what
you break or the opposite? How do you intend to pay?  8 
Come back, come back—we’re asking the highest power
of corporate capital to make you vertical once more
without metaphor—the corporeal you. We will assign the pronoun
by shareholders and trustees who will agree to your exceptional
growth potential, no, growth imperative, to the cult of you
and the evangelism of the ask. We burn, we spread like disease
but the brutal agglomeration of you we love, we pull you up
by your bootstraps, we trade in the sublime machine for you.
We will endure you as you did not endure the terrible world,
I thought after the beautiful boy killed himself.


^^EOP^^


That summer, smoke gorged
itself on sky. Two silver 
sleeves of “boy” flung fire.
Hungry ravines echoed the Stop— 
don’t rush rock’s rough hewn
shrubs, O     Burning bush. That summer 
was one after the last clearing
orange to blue, animal brains wet 
as walnut slabs refusing to burn.
Between us—Stop. Look, if I could 
pause the—O      Wild
here you would choose me over 
a People, oiled blackberries purpling
our wet hands pressed to wetter 
lips. Only you could stop the smoke signals
lisping through the rain. In the pause you could 
ask: How do you autopsy a branch?
O      Ash already peopling the sky 
that was the summer before
Anthropocene chic & if I could 
freeze our branching away
if I could take dead coral off walls 
if I could pull all of it back
To us      To ocean      To ice 
O      What humidity would hold
still between us, our bodies luminous 
as heat snapping through clouds
electric eels echoing elsewhere: 
“O”      “O”      “O”      “O”


^^EOP^^


A bridge used to be there, someone recalled,
before the war:
an old pedestrian bridge.
The patrol passes every five hours.
Evening will be dry and pleasant. 
Two older guys, and a young one.
He read twilight like a book,
rejoice, he repeated to himself, be joyful:
you’ll still sleep
in your bed today. 
Today you’ll still wake up in a room
listening carefully to your body.
Today you’ll still be looking at the steel mill
standing idle all summer. 
Home that is always with you like a sin.
Parents that will never grow older.
Today you’ll still see one of your people,
whomever you call your people. 
He recalled the city he’d escaped from,
the scorched terrain he searched by hand.
He recalled a weeping man
saved by the squad. 
Life will be quiet, not terrifying.
He should have returned a while ago.
What could happen to him, exactly?
What could happen? 
The patrol will let him through,
and god will forgive.
God’s got other things to do. 
They all were killed at once—both older guys,
and the young one.
Silence between the riverbanks.
You won’t explain anything to anyone. 
The bomb landed right between them—
on that riverbank
closer to home. 
The moon appeared between clouds,
listened to the melody of insects.
A quiet, sleepy medic
loaded the bodies into a military truck. 
He quarreled with his stick shift.
Sought the leftover poison in a first-aid kit.
And an English-speaking observer
expertly looked at the corpses. 
Even tan.
Nervous mouth.
He closed the eyes of the young one.
He thought to himself: a strange people,
the locals.
Translated from the Ukrainian


^^EOP^^


Have psalter and breviary. Have hymnbook. Have laid
fingers on rosary strings, plucked
like lyres their clatterwood. Coughed incense. Adored
precisely as instructed. Stood Passiontide vigil, then sexted
at noon. Cast bone die to prophesy
dyings, told
beads their more sorrowful mysteries. Rehallowed
insomnia to Compline then Matins,
August sky vested in purple surplice. Had
ears to hear stern sermons, and so sang-
back-against utter depravity, anti-antiphonal. Droned undersong’s
cacophony during Evensong.
Left breadcrumb trails
through wine chalices. Deified,
defiled: sprayed
holy water from the bristles of an aspergillum
as if flailing a scourge. Reconsecrated
curse tablets to ever more
jealous gods. Desooted
candlesnuffer’s silver, chanted
Exorcism Rites at my self: Begone,
begone, begone, and all
thy fell companions. Told
What-Cannot-Not-Be
not to be. Laid
votive amulets like this
one on little-seen altars, into bog-slurp, waited
centuries for their resurfacing
and interpreting,
archaic, ill-
understandable and still
resurrectant, mnemonic, delivered
out of and back in to oblivion.


^^EOP^^





^^EOP^^





After Bruno Schulz



like my father i was intensely awkward around the unwell.
he had a single pair of shoes—saddle brown leather.
he handled these as carefully
as neolithic skulls. 
he first reappeared as an insect. arriving home, we opened the box, with its punched-in air holes,
and there he was, very green and flat as a tapeworm, mother relieved by the attentiveness
of his small yellow eyes, concerned, as always, that his size
implied inanition. 
he was so small and silent he could be easily lost around the house, sometimes for days.
until he reappeared on a chair leg or doorframe, gently pulsing in a way that struck me as
uncomfortably sexual—he was still my father, after all. he seemed to like the spots
where the sunlight hit the wallpaper, following them for hours across the flaking peonies. 
these periods of loss frightened my mother. i came home one day to find his body, so very like
a blade of grass, pinned to the noticeboard above the receipt
for a recently-purchased oscillating fan.  “coming to terms,” my mother said, is a diplomatic metaphor.


^^EOP^^


lies on the shoulder
by my drive to work.
I wondered first hell
is

^^EOP^^





^^EOP^^


                    
                    
                    Dear reader,

I’ve been thinking
a lot about stretch denim
that doesn’t also have a stretchy waistband
(by which I mean nature’s cruelest disagreements)
and I’ve been thinking
about the slobbering of  heat that is the promise of spring. Today, to wear out the woozy, to giddy the skittish dizzy into a steady simple rush of stillness I buttered
around the city listening to the Cranberries
as the air around me bounded
into its summer self
but literally two weeks ago there was a blizzard
that thawed into a song.

Plants have the most complicated biochemistry in nature—it’s not explicit, their influence, but powerful as passive aggression. Family
like a forest, like home it grows
wherever I go. Trees of forests of families gabbing at the root. Wild tobacco developing nicotine as a toxin to shoo away insects who feed on the leaves.

I guess this is a dirge
to the future I thought we could have
Not all plants were meant to grow together
in the same microclimate. Some things grow apart instead.

Walking the High Line not far from where we first met, in the seats by the popsicle stand. Blackberry ones were the best. Mango, second to the best. Coconut was trash. “I think you want to be with someone, so clearly so deep. It just doesn’t feel like you want to be with me.” Leo looked up at me full Eeyore face. “I been thinkin the same thing.”

Nations are always outlived by their cities

The train stopped running. Interstate trucking, global air travel, containerized shipping left the hanging train hanging And even there, to have engines of appetites in a city in a state in a nation in a world in a solar system in a galaxy in a universe where the only constant is change—body roll with the punches and the punch lines and the I can’t stand the rains. Yes, our High Line stopped running, but it didn’t go away

Because you see dear reader, in the garden
dry foliage from the previous year’s growth gives its sugars
to the new generation. Helps protect
plants from desiccating and freezing in the winter.
Shelter for birds, hibernating
butterflies, and other insects.

Death cycle interwoven with the spring.

It took time to forget
about who we were together, so we could come back
with intention and not surrender

Jiddy says that makes sense across from me at the Echo Park vegan brunch spot mid sorrel-bowl hoovering. Your pheromones have to recalibrate

Spring is a season of reconciliation, a suture
for the loss of winter and the summer’s sweaty
promises. Sparklers
on the beach
It’s July 4th and we’ve said no
to imperialism but yes
to public sex

We drive for hours because it’s an excuse to sing
together and I forget other people
are around and we’re driving
to the coast and the radio is cranked all the way up
and our inhibitions cranked all the way
down
Our layered associations, our accidental landscape.

I’ve tended to the garden
of our memories, like a recipe
for feelings. The derelict railroad I see when I close my eyes
grown wild with Queen Anne’s Lace—

I’m almost always talking to someone but almost never seeing anyone, I say as me n Leo pass through the Chelsea Market Passage and our voices bounce around the thrum of the crowd shuffling about us now. Our passage between and through the gently stalling masses like an obstacle course of bodies. I mean the last time I really dated someone was ... I look up at him while trailing off, which is becoming a pebble feature of our patter. Anyway, the wedding looked gorgeous, from what I saw on Insta, I say like a Hawaiian shirt in the winter: not quite believable but go off. He shakes his head and eyes into me like shards of glass. That’s not what you really think. Stalled behind a double-wide stroller I stop and turn to him. Leo, for the love of god you had flip-flops made for the guests with both yr freaking initials on them. I was praying that I would choke to death on my own vomit so I would never have to see it again. Leo grins wide as the High Line

In order to see
what we would become, what we were supposed to be, we
had to abandon
ourselves. We had to go derelict,
go wild. Let the living dynamics
of the world outside us grow over us, separately—
and then recreate our wilderness
with a shimmery wildness

Not constantly recreating our memory

—

Dear reader,

A roux, I’ve learned tonight in this mid-city dinner party apartment tucked somewhat safely away from asthmatic LA freeways, is the mixture of butter and flour used to swell sauces and soups and Paul’s baked sage mac n cheese that I’m whisking alive like an al dente Evanescence cheese-rock bop. Whistle while you whisk away the rage scrunched in yr boulders. I says to them around the table I says—

I don’t have food stories. With you, I say, I’m cooking new ones.

Being protective
of yr recipes is only natural. Things get stolen.

So much butter. Butter, butter, butter, butter rockin everywhere am I rite?

One stick, two stick, red stick, blue stick. I thought maybe half a stick? No, it’s half a stick for the sausages, but a whole one for the tomato sauce. Butter the bread, get yr sea salt rocks off. The water shd taste Atlantic. Monica’s kid practically revs himself into the tabletop behind us in her Albany Park apartment with Popeye’s “come hither” musk wafting in through the open window. Says she didn’t know how to cook before she got married, that trying new dishes was a way she and her husband bonded. Keeping kids alive is some shit, I think while remembering when we’d duct-tape 40s to our palms in college.

Mom does not want to be hooked up to no machines she texts
day after Auntie passes That’s not prolonging life that’s extending death

The garlic the green
pepper the onion—which! I just learned how to cut: Claw hands. Cracked my first egg ever for a cooking show in Berkeley where I made a spaghetti and chard frittata to serve a boy the morning after we’ve presumably played dick-butt. The basics are my revelation. The andouille sausage, the bacon
tips, the ham hock, the scallions, the smoked
paprika bubble bubble’s the gumbo in Roy’s Concordia apartment by the
bakery where the dad, just after a run, bought me a coffee while I was in line and slipped me his number

whale dies in thailand after swallowing 80 plastic bags

Dear reader, let’s make a culture!
Let’s make a dough. Like anyone whose culture has been scrubbed
from history, you can scrub my apple crumble
But you can never scrub my hunger

Let’s get bubbling
Let’s get wet
Let’s bold the buttock loaves @ Kristina’s Bernal Heights abode
Jess pulls meat from the rib cage
like her grandmother
The most flavorful parts are
closest
to the bone. Everything smells
like fuzzy comfort Insulin

is a polypeptide hormone produced by the beta cells of the islets of  Langerhans of the pancreas, tiny islands that regulate the metabolism of sugar in the blood. Insulin resistance begins when too many sugars are introduced too often into the body—the beta cells shoot their load so often the body is like, damn insulin! Why are you so obsessed with me?

Undigested sugar molecules rage around the blood, doing all sorts of crimes

Insulin, from the Latin insula: isle
Island—sugar—
Dad’s hair started to fall out. His long black trickster locks Tufts of it in the trash on the brush
Auntie’s sister goes in to get her foot cut off
Auntie goes in for dialysis. They told her stick a needle in the orange for practice. It’s porous, like skin. Auntie, you’ve been injecting the orange this whole time? What the heck?

I am the recipe I protect.

—

Dear reader,

We are in a pot.
One of us is the vegetables and one of us is the water. I can’t tell
who is cooking who, like a late 80s Aretha Franklin song—we give ourselves up to each other. Into each other. Throughout each other. Cutting

is decisive and precise. In what other context do you get to grip a knife like you do when preparing ceviche. Prep is so violent, right?

Scrape out the tomato
Smash the lemons and the limes
Rip off the shrimp tails
Slice open the cucumber, the onions, the chilies into smaller and smaller minces

We bust
the olives before shaving meat sleeves
from its pit. I can feel the chili seeds
from the backseat
of the maroon Honda in Santa Fe 25 years ago.

The ubiquity of garlic
breath.

I’m obsessed with softening, the going in between.

Simple ingredients orchid the kitchen-thing: an hour among the citrus and the onions and the cucumber and the chilies, shrimps bud from sickly gray to scrumptious punky pink

Dear reader,

It’s about family. Everything’s about family if you have enough string. Sitting in yr little chair while aunties flutter about the stove, the butcher block, the cutting board. We’re a country club in Durango. We’re a wedding cake in Mexico City. We’re a hole in the wall in Tijuana.

Btw why’s it called a pie-hole? Why not a stew-hole? Or a hoagie-hole? Or a roe-hole? Apparently imagination is the wages of dessert culture.

Me n Becky nibble De La Rosa cookies and blast La India, art denaturing our circuit of gray matter.
                

^^EOP^^


After the sewage flowed into the sea
and took the oxygen away, the fishes fled,
but the jellies didn’t mind. They stayed
and ate up the food the fishes left behind.
I sat on the beach in my red pajamas
and listened to the sparkling foam,
like feelings being fustigated. Nearby,
a crayfish tugged on a string. In the distance,
a man waved. Unnatural cycles seemed to be
establishing themselves, without regard to our lives.
Deep inside, I could feel a needle skip:
                 Autumn dark.
              Murmur of the saw.
                 Poor humans. 
 


^^EOP^^


You could say it wrong, like my wracked
brain, or with the wrong g
like gag or Garamond.
Some words are nearly in ruins.
Yesterday the gynecologist told me
I spell my name wrong—should have an o between the f and u.
Am I trying to get pregnant?
In my country, he begins.
And then, between my parted legs, tells me that over there
they do everything that we do,
just behind closed doors.
Am I anxious?
Well, someone is tweeting at me from a burner account,
or my step-grandma’s trying to troll me again.
But I’ve already gone quick-violet.
On the plane, beside me
is a healer who tells me about her interest
in belly dancing. Belly good is what my grandpa says instead of very.
Not his accent, just a joke.
We approach the fertile crescent: Hewlêr, Kirkuk, Baghdad—three neon shocks.
Across the aisle a woman opens up
a document that just says ART.
Then selects the text in baby blue
and makes it shrink.
Timing, says the healer. Such a powerful force in life.


^^EOP^^


The shortest sentence, I believe, in the New Testament.
Having to do with the raising of  Lazarus, and no less
the crucifixion of  Jesus himself once the Pharisees
realize the power of a voice that can call forth the dead.
Jesus seems to be identifying with this brother of Martha
and Mary, with in fact the whole weeping community. Take away the stone, Lazarus come forth, and he that was
dead came forth, bound hand and foot with graveclothes;
and his face was bound about with a napkin. Loose him
and let him go.

^^EOP^^


Gravity-defying, the lark in the clear air of a June morning stays aloft on a hoist of song only, and only when song goes as breath gives out does the bird let itself down the blue chute of air in such an aftermath silence so profound you’d think it was a double-life creature: one life aloft in blue, all clarity, the other hidden in the green swaddle of any rocky field out here where, when summer happens, you’d almost see the long silver ribbons of song the bird braids as if binding lit air to earth that is all shadows, to keep us (as we walk our grounded passages down here) alive to what is over our heads—song and silence—and the lot of us leaning up: mind-defeated again, just harking to it.


^^EOP^^


I can’t love them if their hands aren’t all tore up
From something, guitar strings, kitchen knives & grease 
Burns, heaving the window ACs onto their crooked old
Sills come June. Fighting back. That porchlight’s browned 
Inside with moth husks again & I can’t climb a ladder
To save my life, i.e., the world spins. Even when it’s lit, 
It’s half ash. Full-drunk under a half-moon & I’m dazed
We’re all still here. Most of us, least. For the one & every 
Girl gone, I sticker gold stars behind my front teeth so
I can taste just how good we were. I swear I can’t 
Love them if they can’t fathom why an unlit ambulance
On a late highway means good luck. I hold my cigarette- 
Smoking arm upright like I’m trying to keep blood
From rushing to a cut. What’s true is my shift’s over & 
I’m here with you now & I’m wrapped up tight
On the steps like a top sheet like the morning paper 
Before it’s morning. Look up & smile. What does it matter
That the stars we see are already dead. If that’s the case well 
Then the people are too. Alive is a little present I
Give myself once a day. Baby, don’t think I won’t doll 
Up & look myself fresh in the eyes, in the vermilion
Pincurl of my still heart & say: It’s happening again.


^^EOP^^





For Arthur Sze



] the full moon is two half-moons joined
the old word for such a joint is harmony
harmony joins the two halves of the moon together
and makes the moon whole [  ] there’s a lot of emptiness
inside the moon the moon is made of this emptiness
and it is glazed a blinding white eyeless as the open
eyes of gods when hearing a heart beat
they open their eyes on the animal they hunt [  ] some
times they hunt the moon and sometimes
the moon is the hunter [  ] the moon
has a heart and that heart thinks and pulses
and I who am saying I with you as you say I
am an echo of that pulse or am I a thought
that is the moon’s thought
                                   (  )
life borrows light borrows life
I like the riddle even if I have no choice but to be it [  ] or
so I sometimes think [  ] building so much by hand
building the moon by hand
building by hand my hands and building these thoughts [  ] my
head is feet and hands [  ] the moon has a foot and a lip
and when the harmony limps or lisps
the moon needs a dark crutch to stay full and bright [  ] some
times the moon is a bow drawn back
sometimes it’s the string of the lyre [  ] some
times the moon is a pot filled with smaller moons
rings and earrings and some other singing that has no name
but adorns the emptiness [  ] adores and
adorns the emptiness as it grows inside us [


^^EOP^^


Morning she comes, mother of all balms. 
Only the news reporter says it wrong:
but aren’t you strung: little ping 
and doesn’t memory embalm
                           your most-hurt city: 
those yellow creeks                                of your rickety holm
where your mater: your salve: 
left all her selves behind
so she could surrender to a lifetime 
of Septembering: what she members most: 
yellow grapes and celeries
and visiting her father’s glove 
a balm, to be by absence so enclaved: 
your mender
a follower, devoted 
to what she cannot see. O air miles,
how can it be real? 
How uncertain you should
be             if it existed, if there are no photos left 
of her playing
on her childhood lawn— 
burned are all the documents, or eaten— 
this ink,
like memory,
an ancient unguent, 
enshrining what cannot be held
of what went missing—the dog, her hat of hay, 
one brother.                              She was in prism, 
your mother says—and that’s how you will write her, 
atoning her, just in fluorite a figurine caught 
to fracture                                  her stolen years,
                                                        her brother, 
all her once-upon-a-chimes.


^^EOP^^


This first-light mountain, its east peak and west peak. 
Its first-light creeks:
Lagunitas, Redwood, Fern. Their fishes and mosses. 
Its night and day hawk-life, slope-life, fogs, coyote, tan oaks,
white-speckled amanita. Its spiderwebs’ sequins. 
To be personal is easy:
Wake. Slip arms and legs from sleep into name, into story. 
I wanted to be mountainal, wateral, wrenal.


^^EOP^^





For Eileen Myles



away from joy
you walk a little
missing a tooth
discussing famous
black dogs
on the dead
chests of lovers
I just finally
heard
that unnoticed
silence
of never having
one again
it’s been with me
all my life
I saw mine
named after
a god
his body laid
out on the lawn
brown fur
dried blood
yes it’s wise pathos
this want to live
in my body
like a dog
not thinking
if stones
for human deaths
then what
for the other ones


^^EOP^^


No wind, no rain,
the tree
just fell, as a piece of fruit does. 
But no, not fruit. Not ripe.
Not fell. 
It broke. It shattered. 
One cone’s
addition of resinous cell-sap,
one small-bodied bird
arriving to tap for a beetle. 
It shattered. 
What word, what act,
was it we thought did not matter?


^^EOP^^


It waits now for snows to fall
upward, into a summer
whose green leaves
vanish,
but back into branch, into sap, into rain. 
It waits for the old
to grow young, fed and unfearful,
for freighters to carry their hold-held oil
back into unfractured ground,
for fires to return
their shoeboxes of photos and risen homes. 
It unbuilds the power line’s towers
before the switch can be toggled,
puts the child, rock still in hand, back into his bed. 
A single gesture of erasure
pours back into trucks and then river
the concrete wall,
unrivets the derrick,
replenishes whale stocks and corals. 
And why not—it is easy—restore the lost nurse herds
of mammoths to grazing,
the hatched pterodactyl to flight?
Let each drowned and mud-silted ammonite once again swim? 
One by one unspoken, greed’s syllables, grievance’s insult.
One by one unsewn, each insignia’s dividing stitch.
One by one unimagined,
unmanufactured: the bullet, the knife, the colors, the concept. 
Reversal commands: undo this directional grammar of subject and object.
Reversal commands: unlearn the alphabet of bludgeon and blindness.
Reversal commands: revise, rephrase, reconsider. 
And the ink, malleable, obedient, does what is asked.


^^EOP^^





A torchon after Indigo Weller



Some need some Body
or more to ape sweat
on some site. Bloody 
purl or dirty spit
hocked up for to show
who gets eaten. Rig 
Body up. Bough bow
to breeze a lazed jig
and sway to grig’s good 
fiddling. Pine-deep
dusk, a spot where stood
Body. Thus they clap 
— 
when I mount banc’, jig
up the lectern. Bow
to say, “it’s all good,” 
we, gathered, withstood
the bends of dives deep
er, darker. They clap 
as I get down. Sweat
highlights my body,
how meats dyed bloody 
look fresher for show
ing, I got deep, spit
out my mouth, a rig 
— 
id red rind. Bloody
melon. Ha! No sweat!
Joking! Nobody 
knows the trouble. Rig
full o’ Deus. “Sho
gwine fix dis mess.” Spit 
in tragedy’s good
eye! “This one’s called ...” Jig
ger gogglers then bow 
housefully. They clap.
“... be misundeeeerstoooood!”
Hang notes high or deep, 
— 
make my tongue a bow—
what’s the gift?! My good
song vox? The gift?!?! Jig 
gle nickels from deep
down my craw. They clap.
I’se so jolly! Stood 
on that bank. Body
picked over, blood E
rato! Braxton’s sweat  y brow syndrome®, spit
out a sax bell wring
a negrocious show 
— 
of feels. Fa show, sweat
equals work. Bloody
inkpot of Body, 
I stay nib dipped, show
never run dry! Rig
orously, I spit 
out stressed feet. Lines jig!
Ha ha ha ha!!!! Good
one [that/I] is, bow 
deep but not out. Stood,
shining, dim. They clap,
waves slapping hulls. Deep 
— 
don’t mean sunken; good’s
not yummy, right?! Bow,
blanched with foam, jig-jigs. 
“This one’s called ...”—they clap—
“‘_ _ _  _ _ _ _ _ _   _ _ _ _ _barrow.’ So much dep
ends / upon / dead _ _ _ _ _ _ _” Stood, 
I on that bloody
rise of sweet Body;
there you is, too. Sweat 
it, let’s. They clap—“Rig
ht?” some ask, post. Spit
tle-lipped: I said: “Sho.”


^^EOP^^


                    
                    
                    writings on the wall
 
*

I was the one who said
the ditch in the backyard was maybe a river
that had flowed from somewhere else and was flowing to
somewhere else
 
*

I was the one who said where are you now?
 
*

I was the one who told about the one whose photograph in
the book of Eakins’s photographs was of
a guy the perfection of his body was his doom, and
Shakespeare said so too
 
*

Right there before my eyes was the one who said
where are you now? Where
are you Anne? I was the one
 
*

Who saw how Aeneas lay there in the darkness watching the
light, the little motions of light moving around the ceiling
and telling him something
 
*

I was the one whose mother’s voice called out of the urn
beseeching
 
*

I was the one who said how the day light knocks at the lid in
vain
 
*

I said be keep to your self be close be wall all dark
 
*

I said good people are punished, like all the rest
 
*

I said the boats on the river are taking it easy
 
*

I said the brain in your head whispers
 
*

I said death lives in our words
 
*

I said how beautiful is the past, how few the implements,
and how carefully made
 
*

I was the one who said
her body witness is, so also is her voice
 
*

I said better not know too much too soon all about it
 
*

where rhymes with beware, I said
 
*

I said it is the body breathing,
the crib of knowing
 
*

I wish I could recall now the lines written across my dream is what
I said
 
*

I said the horse’s hooves know all about it, the sky’s statement of
oncoming darkness
 
*

The fumes on the roof are visible and drifting away like
martyred souls, I said
 
*

I said the knees of the committee touch each other under the
table, furtive in pleasure
 
*

I said
Eurydice, My Father
 
*

I said we huddle over the ice,
the two of us
 
*

To squeeze from a stone its juice is her art’s happiness is
what I said
 
*

I am the one who said,
I hum to myself myself in a humming dream
 
*

And how we’re caught, I said,
In language: in being, in feeling, in acting. I said, it’s
exacting
 
*

I said the sea upheld us, would not let us go nor drown us,
and we looked down say a million years, and there were the
fish
 
*

See, the dead bloom in the dark, I said
 
*

The nightjar feeds while flying softly, smiling, smiling, I said
 
*

I said revenant whitefaced Death is walking not knowing
whether
 
*

I said the formula on the blackboard said who are you
 
*

I said Utnapishtim said to Gilgamesh blink of an eye
 
*

I said where are you now    Where are you Anne
 
*

Stanza my stone my father poet said
 
*

vwx    stones and sticks
 
*

The day doesn’t know what day it is, I said
 
*

What’s in the way the sun shines down, I said
 
*

I cried in my mute heart,
What is my name and nature
 
                

^^EOP^^


When the next great
                                        dies
will their emails
be packaged
                        and published
revealing
                        their motivation
                                                        for everything
they ever wrote
enlightening researchers
satisfying curious readers? 
There’s more written down
now
        than ever
                        and none of it
is written down.
                             Ten
                                  thousand
elephants
               sway
                            in the breeze.
Blades
            of grass
                               conspire
against
            a dandelion. 
An albatross flies five
hundred miles
                              without flapping
migrates
                  pole to pole.
The price
                      of a one hundred
trillion dollar bill. 
                                Have you ever
sat next to a
                          campfire
                                                until your shoes
began to melt?
                                And what
of the toes
                                in that case?


^^EOP^^


People continue
to predict
                the end
of the world.
                       Are they
upset
       when they’re wrong?
The difference
between being
                ostracized
                                and a view
of you
                from space.
What does your
                      shirt
                                say?
She lost an eye
                     and regrew it
became
                chartreuse.
May the
                overpass
be blessed.
Your bed
                is a hole
the size of
                Jupiter.
Caught on the sticky
side of the tape
                                again.
Cannot
       see
                what does not
exist.
                (paraphrasing)
Who?
I want to start a college
made of anesthesia.


^^EOP^^





Rabbi Nathan ben Abraham I  /Cairo Geniza
(For Harriet Bart)



Who are you? Where are you hiding? 
Were you thrown, 
             tumbling through space, 
             aleatory, 
                          radiant, only 
                                              to land, wrapped in dust, coming 
                                              over and down?  
Or did you cross the black waves in the bottom of a ship,
             and arrive, shivering,
nameless, on the dock,
             then, and always, alone?  
And when you entered the forest, the dark
             series that had no edge,
             did you look to the bark and
             the leaves
             for a name,
                          or did you wait by the path,
             asking passersby,
                                              practicing each syllable
             on your tongue and your teeth,
             memorizing the word until
             it meant something fixed,
                                              something beyond
                          its saying? 
The world is full of strangers.
             You never come into their thoughts
                                       or dreams, yet there they are, 
in yours each night,
             or only once, 
                                       those human faces
                          ephemeral,
                                       stubborn,
                                                    singular ...   
Do they join the fawn and does
             there in the mist
at dawn, wandering
             through the ghostly tendrils
             of bindweed,
                          the carpets of wild lupine?   
The root is the measure of the canopy.
Wool fills the weak heart of the willow.
Was the rabbi, then, the root or the canopy?   
Catalog margins, and incompletes,
             jewelweed bursting in the sore eye’s
sightline,
             marjoram, sage,  
sweet pine,
             mint, leafhopper,
                          mint again, and mint
             again, perennial surprise.  
The rabbi made a list:
             chickpeas,
             saltwort, and
             slowest boxwood— 
(these are, each one,
alkali, and ash)
             purslane, basil,
             vetch, and
             pigweed.  
Medicinal: a linen square
held against the thigh.  
Sweet basil, cinnamon, ginger,
             clove—and henna,
             and poppy seeds. 
What you bring inside, you bring inside.   
Where are you? What are you hiding?
             Your right hand extended to the west,
                          your left to the east,
             though you turn and
                          turn in your bed.  
Do you know the perils—the sycamore’s map,
             the gall on
the grapevine, the
             moth in the kale?    Aleph, pe, and resh,
             the silver yad tracing down the column
             when the column’s no longer there.  
Tattered weeds, seed packets, rags. 
What magic hovered nearby to shield you?  Never touch the book with your hand.   
Slow-motion walk before a moving car,
             fallen from the hayloft,
                          fallen on the marl, the fatal
                          final ticket of admission— 
             who remembers
                                       to study the family tree?   
All my notes thrown
             in the trash—the means
to save them,
             at last.   
The single word changes, infinitely changing,  ruach, 
within the wind                          a breath 
             within the breath 
             infinite                          wind   
Difficult word like a stone on the tongue  
                                                                              The difficult persisting in its means of
                                                                 speech. 
The difficult persisting in its silence 
             and in the dreams of the waiting strangers.


^^EOP^^


They buried their son last winter.
Strange weather for winter—rain, thunder.
They buried him quietly—everybody’s busy.
Who did he fight for? I asked. We don’t know, they say.
He fought for someone, they say, but who—who knows?
Will it change anything, they say, what’s the point now?
I would have asked him myself, but now—there’s no need.
And he wouldn’t reply—he was buried without his head. 
It’s the third year of war; they’re repairing the bridges.
I know so many things about you, but who’d listen?
I know, for example, the song you used to sing.
I know your sister. I always had a thing for her.
I know what you were afraid of, and why, even.
Who you met that winter, what you told him.
The sky gleams, full of ashes, every night now.
You always played for a neighboring school.
But who did you fight for? 
To come here every year, to weed dry grass.
To dig the earth every year—heavy, lifeless.
To see the calm after tragedy every year.
To insist you didn’t shoot at us, at your people.
The birds disappear behind waves of rain.
To ask forgiveness for your sins.
But what do I know about your sins?
To beg the rain to finally stop.
It’s easier for birds, who know nothing of salvation, the soul.
Translated from the Ukrainian


^^EOP^^


how do I show you love when it is not attached to a video of me putting a nail to a balloon on loop? when a heart beats fast this is what I imagine. something too fast to see happen / too loud to forget & from here, the ground, we are beginning to look like lightning or the frameworks of buildings too far away or the line where the lake meets the sky. you are every 1996 space exploration gone right & I am waiting for you to come home with a backpack filled with moon rock & stardust to keep around our apartment. we find small jars to hide behind our pillows & fill every corner with something only we have touched / the rest in our cat’s fur. you remind me of something like a firefly underneath my tongue with so much spark I am finally able to live out my dream of becoming some sort of lighthouse even though sometimes I fall back into a dark galaxy of faults. it isn’t always possible to jam sharp stars into the round holes of us. I want to tell you that SpaceX named a platform for rockets to land on  Just Read the Instructions & another Of Course I Still Love You & wouldn’t it be nice to be still in the water for once



 
                

^^EOP^^


The “wolves in the waves” driving or being driven
inside the rain, which is one sort of day to be alone
in, then again the beach mile either way disappearing
into the thinness of the air, dead detail of the gone world
from the night before—probably an eaten-out barrel
or two, traps and lines of netting, lumber and almost
carcasses and scored horseshoe shells—brought home
from who knows where, then someone with a dog
making a single shadow out of an idea of sun: each
day rising and thinking I died for some kind of beauty,
standing in the morning on the height of my deck,
trying to wake up, nothing but my eyes to go by—
how dark down does the water go before the tide—
I the god of starfish fallen, the flounder’s whiter bones.


^^EOP^^


Neighbor, your mower
cast dust over the edge
where the field meets
the field, toy-sized ring-
necked snakes halved
and flattened by blades
among blades, and now
our things are mingled.
What do you covet
that is mine? Chigger-
riddled passion
blooms, a glint
of beetles loitering
under their anther eaves,
a car idling in a sealed
garage, arranging
the inevitable fog
into a fog that will arrive
without pain? Neighbor,
if your wishes require
me to act, I will act
according to your wishes.
I am ready, every day
as I pass, to cast over
a glance and make sure
all is still still, to drag you
out—or leave you there—
in your designated air.


^^EOP^^


                                                       I.
                                                Revelation
  We tell in strength. “The telling,” when to tell, leads to a discovery between the teller and the listener. Acquiring knowledge; the teller  holds his/her information as a tool for health, movement towards truth. 
 
                                                       II.
                                                 Salvation
  To converse as an attempt to recuperate, a holding on not to die. 
 
                                                       III.
                                                   Speech
  To acquire “language” for talking about a plague in the self. 
 
                                                       IV.
                                           Sharing Secrets Who to tell? Is there someone? The search for what to tell. 
 
                                                       V.
                                        Mature Masculinity Welcome the responsibility to do the work of building verbs, adjectives and nouns for mortality and its subsequent eternal breaking of concrete.  
                I.      Revelation                                         Revel at ion,                     rebel at I one a course                     to regret erections,                     to whip the cream in my scrotum                     till it hardens into unsweetened,                     unsafe revved elations                     of milk turned sour                     by the human body,                     of propagation of destruction.                     The epiphany: I am unsafe,                     you who want me                     know that I who want you,                     harbor the bitter balm of defeat.
                      II.    Salvation                     If I were to show you                     how to continue holding on,                     I would not kiss you,                     I would not mix my fluids with yours,                     for your salvation                     cannot bear the live weight                     of your sharing liquids with me.
                      III.   Language                     To tell,                     to talk,                     to tongue into sounds                     how I would cleanse you with urine,                     how my tasting tongue would wash your body,                     how my saliva and sperm would bloat you,                     to touch you in our lovemaking                     and not tell you                     would amount to murder,                     to talk about how to language this                     so that you would still languish                     in my unsafe arms and die,                     seems beyond me,                     I would almost rather lie                     but my tongue muscle moves involuntarily                     to tell of the danger in me.
                      IV.    Of Health                     To use my full and willing                     body to reveal and speak                     the strength that I impart                     without fear,                     without killing,                     without taking away what I would give,                     to use my man's tongue                     to share,                     to give,                     to lend,                     to exact nothing,                     to receive all things,                     to expand my macho                     and let the whole world                     into the safety of my mature masculinity.
                      V.    Quarantine                     Sometimes I fear touching your plump ear lobes:                     I might contaminate you.                     Sometimes I refuse odors that would                     drive my hands to open your thick thighs.                     Sometimes closing my ears to your voice                     wrenches my stomach and I vomit to calm wanting.                     Can it be that I am the bearer of plagues?                     Am I poison to desire?                     Do I have to deny yearning for firm full flesh                     so that I’ll not kill what I love?                     No juices can flow 'tween you and me.                     Quicksand will suck me in.
 
 
 


^^EOP^^


Stress is very important to me. 
With stress, I do the best possible job. 
From a personal perspective, I manage stress 
by visiting the gym every evening. 
It’s a great stress reducer. 
I find that when I’m under the pressure 
of a deadline, I can do some of my most 
creative work. I’m not a person 
who has a difficult time with stress. 
When I’m under pressure, I focus, 
and get the job done. I find it exhilarating 
to be in a dynamic environment 
where the pressure is on. 
I find a fast pace to be invigorating, 
and thrive when the pressure is on. 
I am an excellent employee 
and I didn’t want my unhappiness 
to have any impact on the job 
I was doing for my employer. 
I’m looking for a bigger challenge 
and to grow my career 
and I couldn’t job hunt part time 
while working. It didn’t seem ethical 
to use my former employer’s time. 
I’m looking for a company where I can grow 
in a team-oriented environment. 
One of my greatest passions 
is helping others. When I was younger, 
I’ve enjoyed helping mom 
with household repairs. As I grew older, 
that habit grew and I desired 
to help others as well. 
I’m passionate about painting. 
I take an evening art class 
once a week and try to find time 
each weekend to paint. Painting 
is a good way for me to relax 
and even though I don’t have much talent, 
I do enjoy it. When I’m involved with a project 
at work I want to do my best to achieve success. 
I feel the same way about what I do 
in my personal life. I’m an avid skier 
and I like to spend weekends 
and vacations on the ski slopes.


^^EOP^^


I can see you through the bonfire, with us.
A fifth of Old Crow circling the dark.
 
Where did that whole life go? In Texas
the chemo inches toward your heart,
 
things always dwindling to just the two of us,
a crumpled cigarette, a distant car:
 
our voices, at dawn, so clearly posthumous.
Woodsmoke rising to the ashy stars.


^^EOP^^


I had driven into one side of a city,
and through it, and was on the way out
on a four-lane, caught up in the traffic,
when I happened to glance to my right
where a man stood alone smoking,
fixed in the shade of a windowless
warehouse, leaning back into a wall
with one shoe cocked against it,
the other one flat on the pavement.
He was beside me for only an instant,
wearing a short-sleeved yellow shirt
and gray work pants, as the hand
that held the cigarette swept out
and away, and he turned to watch it
as with the tip of a finger he tapped
once at the ash, which began to drift
into that moment already behind us,
as I, with the others, sped on.


^^EOP^^


  What I remember is the ebb and flow of sound
That summer morning as the mower came and went
And came again, crescendo and diminuendo,
And always when the sound was loudest how it ceased
A moment while he backed the horses for the turn,
The rapid clatter giving place to the slow click
And the mower's voice. That was the sound I listened for,
The voice did what the horses did. It shared the action
As sympathetic magic does or incantation.
The voice hauled and the horses hauled. The strength of one
Was in the other and in the strength was impatience.
Over and over as the mower made his rounds
I heard his voice and only once or twice he backed
And turned and went ahead and spoke no word at all.  


^^EOP^^





a Markov Sonnet



The waraq, empty of chlorophyll, hung chewed & dangling
Because there was no witness amidst the yellowing foliage.
The toothing beast’s rapture, heavy in the air like a song.
 
                                    ***
 
Because there was no witness amidst the yellowing foliage,
The toothing beast’s rapture, heavy in the air like a song
Unfamiliar to soil-worn hands, harvesting small implosions.
 
                                    ***
 
The toothing beast’s rapture, heavy in the air like a song
Unfamiliar to soil-worn hands. Harvesting small implosions,
A marble heaven built over hill & tomb, reaches everywhere.
 
                                    ***
 
Unfamiliar to soil-worn hands harvesting small implosions,
A marble heaven built over hill & tomb reaches everywhere
The unyellowed, muting wind can neither stain nor uproot.
 
                                    ***
 
A marble heaven built over hill & tomb reaches everywhere.
The unyellowed, muting wind can neither stain nor uproot
A land ungodded – the dead’s hollow, hallowed roaring.
 
                                    ***
 
The unyellowed, muting wind can neither stain nor uproot
A land ungodded. The dead’s hollow, hallowed roaring
Silence, interrupted by riot of metal teeth & ricochet
 
                                    *** 
A land ungodded the dead’s hollow, hallowed roaring
Silence. Interrupted by riot of metal teeth & ricochet,
A country can only be accountable for the screams.
 
                                    *** 
Silence interrupted by riot of metal teeth & ricochet.
A country can only be accountable for the screams
We cannot unhear or unwrite from our memory.
 
                                    *** 
A country can only be accountable for the screams
We cannot unhear or unwrite. From our memory,
A history unfragmented, free of limbs disfigured.
 
                                    *** 
We cannot unhear or unwrite, from our memory,
A history unfragmented. Free of limbs disfigured,
Would you believe me if I said I bled for this?
 
                                    *** 
A history unfragmented free of limbs disfigured.
Would you believe me if I said I bled for this?
Leaves caught in my throat like a contradiction
 
                                   *** 
Would you believe me if I said I bled for this –
Leaves caught in my throat like a contradiction: Name name name unname name –                                                          name name name unname name –
 
 


^^EOP^^


  
 


^^EOP^^


in theory, she big bang.
her brown round lump of a body
stardusting half dozen babies into being
and giving God all the glory. 
first Junior, who sprang to 6’4” like his daddy
ate up everything including the cardboard
pickled his tongue in sips of thunderbird
till shriveled liver polka-dotted his hands and lips pink. 
Sista came next, wearing Ethel like storm cloud
and hex, shamed her into Angelina, meaning:
messenger of God but she big
and unpretty as a heathen. 
Doris Yvonne got all the pretty and the skinny
and the crazy, so folks couldn’t covet.
at 6, she saw colors fuzzed round people
thought everybody had this rainbow vision. 
then in 1952, my mama brown-nosed herself
here. granny named her Amber, a quiet, too-dark
punk of a girl, ass-whippings all the way home
from school. married her fool-self off at 14. 
Wayne came out in handcuffs. did not
pass go. went straight to jail. met
Muhammad and became Ramel
became crackhead became ghost. 
Pamela named me. cute as she wanna be
spoiled with religion, granny’s baby
spent half her life in the church testifying
to chicken wings, getting her holyghost on. 
granny big bang. sequined hat
gangster. kicked Otis senior out
for mucking up her doilies with
engine grease. grandbabies everywhere. 
fat as pork rinds and hungry as slaves.
she banged pots til they bled gravy,
banged her big body to the floor
in stroke. invented: serious as a heart attack. 
she buried all the men with Jesus
on her breath. and when her big-boned
self big-banged to dust, we didn’t call
it death. we called it magic.


^^EOP^^


    i’ve left Earth in search of darker planets, a solar system revolving too near a black hole. i’ve left in search of a new God. i do not trust the God you have given us. my grandmother’s hallelujah is only outdone by the fear she nurses every time the blood-fat summer swallows another child who used to sing in the choir. take your God back. though his songs are beautiful, his miracles are inconsistent. i want the fate of Lazarus for Renisha, want Chucky, Bo, Meech, Trayvon, Sean & Jonylah risen three days after their entombing, their ghost re-gifted flesh & blood, their flesh & blood re-gifted their children. i’ve left Earth, i am equal parts sick of your go back to Africa & i just don’t see race. neither did the poplar tree. we did not build your boats (though we did leave a trail of kin to guide us home). we did not build your prisons (though we did & we fill them too). we did not ask to be part of your America (though are we not America? her joints brittle & dragging a ripped gown through Oakland?). i can’t stand your ground. i’m sick of calling your recklessness the law. each night, i count my brothers. & in the morning, when some do not survive to be counted, i count the holes they leave. i reach for black folks & touch only air. your master magic trick, America. now he’s breathing, now he don’t. abra-cadaver. white bread voodoo. sorcery you claim not to practice, hand my cousin a pistol to do your work. i tried, white people. i tried to love you, but you spent my brother’s funeral making plans for brunch, talking too loud next to his bones. you took one look at the river, plump with the body of boy after girl after sweet boi & ask why does it always have to be about race? because you made it that way! because you put an asterisk on my sister’s gorgeous face! call her pretty (for a black girl)! because black girls go missing without so much as a whisper of where?! because there are no amber alerts for amber-skinned girls! because Jordan boomed. because Emmett whistled. because Huey P. spoke. because Martin preached. because black boys can always be too loud to live. because it’s taken my papa’s & my grandma’s time, my father’s time, my mother’s time, my aunt’s time, my uncle’s time, my brother’s & my sister’s time . . . how much time do you want for your progress? i’ve left Earth to find a place where my kin can be safe, where black people ain’t but people the same color as the good, wet earth, until that means something, until then i bid you well, i bid you war, i bid you our lives to gamble with no more. i’ve left Earth & i am touching everything you beg your telescopes to show you. i’m giving the stars their right names. & this life, this new story & history you cannot steal or sell or cast overboard or hang or beat or drown or own or redline or shackle or silence or cheat or choke or cover up or jail or shoot or jail or shoot or jail or shoot or ruin 
                                                                                                   this, if only this one, is ours.
 


^^EOP^^


I am tired of work; I am tired of building up somebody else’s civilization. 
Let us take a rest, M’Lissy Jane. 
I will go down to the Last Chance Saloon, drink a gallon or two of gin, shoot a game or two of dice and sleep the rest of the night on one of Mike’s barrels. 
You will let the old shanty go to rot, the white people’s clothes turn to dust, and the Calvary Baptist Church sink to the bottomless pit. 
You will spend your days forgetting you married me and your nights hunting the warm gin Mike serves the ladies in the rear of the Last Chance Saloon. 
Throw the children into the river; civilization has given us too many. It is better to die than it is to grow up and find out that you are colored. 
Pluck the stars out of the heavens. The stars mark our destiny. The stars marked my destiny. 
I am tired of civilization.
 


^^EOP^^


in it we clip it comics
                                   
                                    Appa, our sheets are sails                when those people came
                                    they trapped the wind that leaves your body behind
so we find a piece of it land                         
in it we clip it the postage stamps
                                   
                                    Papa, our letters are shirts              when those people came
                                    they stripped the night that leaves your body behind
so we loosen the it soil
in it we clip it the obituaries
                                   
                                    Bapa, our names are masks             when those people came
                                    they carve out the eyes that leave your body behind
so we dig the it damp
in it we clip it the headlines
                                   
                                    Naana, our rice is sand                     when those people came
                                    they filled the bowls that leave your body behind
so we peel back the it sod
in it we clip it the coupons
                                   
                                    Baba, our blood is water                   when those people came
                                    they drained the well that leaves your body behind
so we fill it with it sky
in it we clip it the tongue
                                   
                                    Abbaa, our cries are coups               when those people come
                                    they will steal the sons who leave your body behind        
 


^^EOP^^


We are on our knees. We are saying that the tulips have had it hard this week. We are saying something about the brightness & the dryness & we are saying we hope it will change. I press a finger into the loam, flick the dust on my jeans. We are listening to the snip of shears. I pick up a smooth, small disc of pink Sioux quartz, hold it like an avian heart in the palm. A disc slipped & beating from a time when all of North America was under sea. My finger walks the buttery vein that parses the stone in two & then in four. Its edges are under siege; its end at the foot of suburban perennials. Do you have stones, someone is asking me. Where you are from, do you have stones, like these. We have purple sunbirds, I am saying, & their hearts have four rooms, one for every answer to questions like these.


^^EOP^^


I can imagine someone who found
these fields unbearable, who climbed
the hillside in the heat, cursing the dust,
cracking the brittle weeds underfoot,
wishing a few more trees for shade.
 
An Easterner especially, who would scorn
the meagerness of summer, the dry
twisted shapes of black elm,
scrub oak, and chaparral, a landscape
August has already drained of green.
 
One who would hurry over the clinging
thistle, foxtail, golden poppy,
knowing everything was just a weed,
unable to conceive that these trees
and sparse brown bushes were alive.
 
And hate the bright stillness of the noon
without wind, without motion,
the only other living thing
a hawk, hungry for prey, suspended
in the blinding, sunlit blue.
 
And yet how gentle it seems to someone
raised in a landscape short of rain—
the skyline of a hill broken by no more
trees than one can count, the grass,
the empty sky, the wish for water.


^^EOP^^


The road wasn't a proper road; it was
two ruts across a pasture and down
into a dry creek bed and up
 
the other side, a cow path really,
soft sand up to the hub caps. You didn't gun it at the right time,
 
he said. I knew that before he
said it, but I didn't know how to get
the old Chevrolet out of the crevice
 
I had wedged it into. You'll figure it out,
he said, and then he took a walk,
left me to my own devices, which until
 
that moment had included tears.
My face remained nearly dry,
as was the gas tank when he finally
 
returned, took a shovel out of the trunk,
and moved enough sand from around
the rear tires so he could rock
 
back and forth and get a little traction.
That country had very little traction;
it had mourning doves, which lay their eggs
 
on the ground, a few twigs for a nest,
no fluff. Mourning dove. Even the name
sounds soft. Even the notes they coo,
 
perched on a fence wire. But they are
hatched on the dirt. When they leave the shell,
the wind is already blowing their feathers dry.


^^EOP^^


no more dandruff
on his blue suit
open casket


^^EOP^^


That silence again
             a wall
of feathers, and near
 
enough
            to block the
circuit of our time—
 
Adobe wall,
           roads of dust—
thirty two years
 
until the bones
            discoursed—
That's how long
 
I've dug into
            myself—
And the baby?
 
She is a promise—
            ungraspable,
mist—
 
Fuss or no fuss,
           yearn, yearn,
yearn. Heart
 
pounds, ears
            throb—
Will it ask
 
the question
            tattooed
on our skin?
 
Until dirt
            fills
my grave, you say.
 
Call it wait
            or rest—the stare,
the lunge back
 
into what we can’t
            swim—
Another shore now—
 
how our arms flail
            the joints’
acidic burn—
 
A hunger     
            unbeknownst
to us, a flame cupped
 
in skin—earth
           turning us
toward a thin stream
 
of self—Oh anticipant,
            Oh dear
loving Lord—to hold
 
a burden like a need
            and let
a new life begin.
 


^^EOP^^


In the bedroom,
I notice you’ve stacked
my things into piles,
clusters of everyday items:
 
my grandmother’s costume beads,
spare reading glasses,
prescription bottles
 
that have long expired.
 
It is getting dark.
Through the window,
the moon shades in its marble.
 
And another woman
appears in my mirror,
this one too heavy,
the other, too old, to be me.
 
Now, I run my fingers
over a layer of dust on the tabletop
where, in my absence,
 
you’ve gathered my poems,
early drafts without
beginnings or endings,
 
while in the backyard,
the cherry blossoms bloom,
and black-capped chickadees
sate at the feeder,
 
the garden still waiting
for whatever might come.


^^EOP^^


in the dreary February underbelly
atlantic ocean outside my window
draped in silk pajamas and flaxen
sweater i lied belly-up on my bed
my laptop resting on a pillow
as the angels conducted brain surgery
scraped my head clean while the angelic
frequency healer directed them by name
asked them questions about my internal
weathers the electric zings of my condition
i was told to rest and hydrate as my brain
and body had been through a lot but I had
to go into the snow take my tired vessels
out into the road and accept the clean clear
air of midwinter the aquarian burst of a zodiacal
electrocution
 
they cured my frequency got it aligned
with godliness or the choirs of them
I would hear exactly one year later upon
Vera’s 3am death death of red throbs
and hydration death of electric conditions
and snow death of vessel and midwinter
 
upon waking I skyped with a Los Angeles
healer in a wooden paneled room and asked
why and when asked him to ask the entities
to see what arrival pulsed the now and dreary
underbelly my laptop on my pillow slanted
insidious glare but so silver
 


^^EOP^^


Is it true that Troy lived life without a
written form before the Greeks invaded
with their horse, or did I learn that from a poem?
Either way, is that not how affection
ends, married or devoted to motion?
 
The upper hand forgetting how it felt
to feed the token, the brass first held in
the fingers then dropped into the subway vestibule.
This daily verb and its prescription cost,
on the rise from root to roof, would have you
 
be an estimate of man, could convince
you to never love another or another as he goes.
& if my looks one day be gone, my mood
will excuse my bad behavior. O trophies
of action, between which occasions suffocate,
 
& which boil into vapor, I should have seen X coming.
Not that anything would change the case, or more
Closely approximate the correct answer, but with the lawn
exposed I would not have to wonder when
it is you enter and when it is you leave.
 


^^EOP^^


It was August 1977 when Elvis Presley fell
face down on his Graceland bathroom floor;
by the time paramedics arrived, he was
 
cold and blue. I knew this because I was with
my grandmother, Belle, who called her sister,
Geraldine, who came over at once so we
 
could watch the news. My grandmother knew
Elvis liked peanut butter on white bread
with American cheese, eaten in his jungle room
 
which had Tiki chairs, fur lampshades,
a waterfall. Other neighbors arrived:
women in short skirts, women who
 
brought with them more of the food Elvis
loved: coconut cakes, fried chicken, bacon.
Elvis was dead, and summer had been so
 
hot the things we touched burned our hands:
handles of garden hoses, car doors,
the metal swing set my grandfather
 
built for me on the back lawn. I listened
to the sound of southern women's voices
expressing disbelief; they said I swan
 
and I pictured something rippling
and solitary; they said Well, shut my mouth and
I saw blue Elvis, falling.


^^EOP^^


In a flock on Market,
just below Union Square,
the last to land
and standing a little canted,
it teetered—I want to say now
though it's hardly true—
like Ahab toward the starboard
and regarded me
with blood-red eyes.
We all lose something,
though that day
I hadn't lost a thing.
I saw in that imperfect bird
no antipathy, no envy, no vengeance.
It needed no pity,
but just a crumb,
something to hop toward.


^^EOP^^


At the railway station I ask
if there’s a train to where you are. 
I’m told there is one but it’s left already,
so has tomorrow’s and the day after’s. 
Somewhere in the trees, painted in
degrees of green, the morning 
paint still wet, a magpie robin sets up its
musical kit. You hear it in your garden, 
I in mine. At night, like a colicky child,
our old bones tired, desire keeps us awake. 
Put it to sleep if you can, I’ll do
the same, and for now let’s forget 
the railway station. Parking’s not easy there,
the trains keep to no time.


^^EOP^^





After Kwame Dawes



i 
When the coming of another grave
jabs at me like harvest, stolen. And the flame
inside consumes. The uneasy hand of the sun
approaching. What was, given back by night.
When a body ascends away from reason,
a name is a form of oblation. Like ash, like loss
to the goddess of lost things, I fear
the belonging that ranks. I’m sorry,
I have held the few smooth lines I come from
in the way of a rooster, talon tied to blade. 
Yes, belonging is a lie I tell
like any official crowd, something to hem
restlessness. A sock’s taut elastic waiting
for the day it goes to sag: trouble
in my own bones for a short flat time.
The digging I need in storm. This glory of tears,
I bind my pain, my labor to something else.  ii 
For those days you pocket-dial your cousin,
kapwatid long since drowned. For those moments
when feathers of your hope
are a bother stuck at lips. For those
whose desolation has the texture of silt, of velour
against the nerves. For days you cannot thank
your sweat: down to a toenail,
your presence is worth the awe I reserve
for newfound constellations, opening
the narrow sky above a single wall. 
Coffee, toothbite, styrofoam. Styrofoam and cargo.
Outside the train stop, a hawk: how it glances upside
then side to side between each pulling
redsplash bite of fallen pigeon. Do you also stare
into the crankled dark absorbed by windows—
praying a deity of lost things might visit—
bloom your fingers at their ghosts? 
Then you might feel dizzy. Here, a spell:
whether giant lavender or dwarf wisteria,
whether cedar or banyan tree, fruit-
bearing or root, concrete, quarried rock,
or arkipelago, say body, say love. May you feel easy
in your skin. May the language of ancestors
tattoo the ground you walk on,
back from all the places where their failings
gather as a congregation of mercies.  iii 
I, too, have been losing my gentleness
since the first young wound. What is thick:
the cold, the doses of exclusion, the generous
human contribution to earthly hurt, the song
that pulls me from the knot of my mouth
back toward searching the low round hills
in my only soul. My monster is a bargain,
despair dropped easy like antelope meat
into the boiling pot. It simmers
like migration, multiplies
my shadows. Reduce me to desire
in my brown-boy sidewalk stance,
down from contempt in an idling car
my tightening body remembers best. 
The beat was four-four time enough
to nod at first, dipped how dreams dip
into the earth. Counting the insults
alive in your ear, the collapses,
the collapses, counting them now
grow small. Enough to hear
your body—into the groove—
expand. The stars, the city lights
who swallow them: they do not leave you,
but gleam. Like oil spill and candle
glut—like a forest burning. 
I am desperate for a language to hold me
as does a water crossroads: between gravel
shimmering in the transparent above the gravel.
What is sharp and thin in me, I carry.
Like you carry: the strength
you save: the mischief you will wear again
when you return: to this place
where all that has seen famine
returns. If each day is orphan
and river to a goddess of  lost things,
as my lament also dies down to whisper
curved, horned like a dawn that knows
death, light flow into the ladle you offer—
as a seed’s journey to harvest, reaching—I drink.


^^EOP^^


Dear mother and father and old and young people of my home. Dear pets and weeds and flowers and footfalls. I write to you in a script speckled with time. I write to the language of a poet and many who chanted after her. I quote those verses which are laments, songs, praises, and warnings. The laments are about not being of your skin, your tongue, your high heaven. The songs are about television screens, newsprint din, and the men with the megaphone going around shutting people’s windows down. The praises are to those that wear spotless clothes, hidden weapons, buck-skin shoes, and plastic faces. The warnings are about daring to speak, daring to say I’m two languages not one, I’m three faces not one, and I’m a quarter bile not full. Dear people of my city, town, lane, and invisible spaces, tell me, how do I return to you? It is the night of the patient moon. But the doorkeepers are asking for proof that I lived here, the watchful voices are mocking my  wandering toes, and the vigilantes are simply admiring their righteous claws.
 
I, Anima, stand bewildered in the midst of midnight’s jowl. What is it, why is it that for many there’s no home? Although it is chaand raat, the night of the moon? And a child’s tearful whisper: Take me to Eid tomorrow, Ma, take me to Eid. I, Anima, ask you to wait for me to find out the answer when I carry the grasshopper home.



 
                

^^EOP^^


If you want definitions, here is one: a lover is one who waits.

The next part, the part where definitions are unwoven and the threads laid bare, can be left to Barthes, Roland, who said everything about it that needs to be said. And for what cannot be (and there are still some of those things) there are films, which—no matter what the structuralists say—are not to be read.

There was a girl who sat every evening at a particular table, hoping it was close enough to where the boys sat to make it appear a natural veering off when (if) he came to sit at it, opposite her; but not close enough to make her seem desperate.

Not always was her waiting played out as gestures of solitude. Other people gave her company. There was nothing in her face that could be read as signs of biding. This did not mean that she knew her time was up. This did not mean that she ceased to wonder and hope and despair and curse.

This is where Barthes got the story of the mandarin wrong, the one who pined for the courtesan who had said that after the 100th night of waiting, she would be his. What Barthes did was to report the mandarin’s departure on the penultimate night. He didn’t say how, on the night the mandarin left, the courtesan had made up her mind to tell him he’d waited enough, he could come in and

instead

she waited.








 
rb: A Lover’s Discourse





barthes
 


^^EOP^^


Beauty is brief and violent
like the white thunderbolt
of Nilgiri slow and sudden
braided like her hair
one morning was a cluster
of grapes hung beside each
ear maybe it comes from where
hunger the voices of children
come breaking their way
to my heart the stones
my feet which are light
and heavy from walking
that path full and swift
the river flows eroding
the banks with its sinuous
desire gentle and unkind
the days the years boulders
tossed by a giant down the hill
we must climb to the sudden
sinuous blue


^^EOP^^


i poetry 
Pull down the crows from the sky Piya, summer’s blood is barely dry
What is a poem if it cannot try
To call you a ****ing ***** or die
Whispering in your arms, this lie
When Kabira met Keats, he said:
Our poems make canopies overhead  Always 
Or, beloved, if I told you
We are words
And the spaces between us
Make poetry
Would you not say Piya, why the fuss?
We knew it was thus  Always  sun’s amber squirt or piss’s intricate stains on indian walls voice’s uncertain trickle down page’s length small syllables entombed in marble vastness kisses kismet some call this poetry 
Others declare it’s a fact! Check it out on Google or Wiki or just about anywhere.
India is the only country in the whole wide world with an ocean named after it
Where cunning gods tricked flatfoot demons into parting with sublunary nectar
Placed in mythic textual jars no human hands could ever touch and lightning
Struck dead in the water lovelorn whales keening in decibels no biped ear might
Fathom and red coral crumbled to depths in which no ship anchored and grainy
Infinities of sand queried: what’s any poem but this endless curving water body?  Always 
Okay, all right, I think I get it
But, Piya, this universal shit Kaavya, dhvani, and infinite woe
This my clownish, doggerel show
It is not poetry, nor Indian
And I cannot call it English
Except the crows insist it is, it is  Always, the cawing 
Poetry does not sell!
Which may be just as well
No bourgeois form, this
Shaped like a kiss
At the world’s dawn
Was a tulip poem born
Maybe it was the dawn  Always 
When that first turtle
Space-time loaded
On its crenellated back
Limped gamely ashore
A love poem took shape
Out of thin air and lack
And that, Piya, was that  Always  ii prose 
Pull down the crows from the sky, Piya! 
Long before those roads diverged
They cawed above the yellow woods:
Syntax is wing and body! Surge
Of air pushing a weight of words
Had we no prose, Piya, we could not ask why!  Why, Piya, why?  iii epic 
Of the epic, we demand feats great gods
Cannot perform but men easily accomplish.
When the Ramayana went to Bali, the gods
Mounted stilts, casting huge shadows on dim
Walls, and the crows crashed from the sky  That was history, Piya  iv tragedy 
Everything happens offstage
Clytemnestra’s scream, Draupadi’s rage
Catharsis rehearsing softly in the wings
Then the crow-garbed chorus troops in and sings  Fate, Piya, is a funny thing  v comedy 
Beloved, if I told you how the rangeela women
Of  Barsana curse and beat their cowering men
At Lathmar Holi, would you ever stop laughing then?  Even the crows, Piya, cheer!  vi novel 
1864: the first Indian novel in English, Rajmohan’s Wife
Black and white make gray: the long, postcolonial twilight  Crows are early birds, Piya  vii tweet
 
Twitter 2006: in this electrifying handholding, our new, pterodactyl longings  & language in its 6-inch grave unmaking president & slave  Characters reveal character, my sweet


^^EOP^^


Aji held onto the brown and black
patched calf’s tail
A pundit sang her mantra for
43 minutes
Years
Aji understood the calf would
lead her through oceans
into her next journey
My Aji and I
are alike
We have silver hairs
I am holding on to a dream tail
hoping it will carry me
through oceans
into my next journey


^^EOP^^


Can you let go the concern
for how it began      what happened 
Here the word house remains
A reddening (      ) near house 
To describe the sounds
coming in      A human voice
barks through the window 
the same voice      like horsehair
stretched along the bow drawn
across the strings 
Where the action is missing
we place (      ) A girl pours out 
water from a pail flung up
so that the water      arches
into a sickle in an instant
of daylight 
The word swallows      as a complaint
of swallows raiding the air
suddenly thick with gnats 
When you notice the ash
you will mutter ash
& it will appear again: ash
on everything, behind the ears ash 
Maybe this shadow belongs
to the house at 4:30
Shadow is a length of gauze
loosened over the garden 
It began with blizzards
for nine hours 
A cleft on the ceiling
or a cleft in the chest
No matter, a cleft let
the weather in 
Here is a description
of a face in anger
a weather of arrows  
Instead of counting sheep
the injured man folds clothes
in his head into heaps 
Separate what is missing
from what’s disappeared 
(here has been eaten by silverfish)
We are left to think of (      ) 
as the space between falling
asleep & waking up Swallow can be a passage 
the gullet, throat,
a grave in the ground
We’re surrounded by swallows 
that open (      ) so fluent with bodies
nobodies 
Here there was a story
& we were part of the after-
waves in a disaster 
braiding wreaths of roadside flowers 
The violet ones we’ll call purple daughters
The white ones: asylum lights


^^EOP^^


A people’s first language is the motion of their basketweave.  Yes, death, our motion: yours. But, for making me forget  where around my husband’s bend a cobra lurked,  your repentance: not enough.  
He and I we remain close as severed roots of banyan tree.  Yes, your melody taught me to lace  the rhythm of my work, a melody that fits through a basket’s  thousand eyes—a rattle without a chant  
until I heard my husband’s  killing song. I was a child no one believed, beaten  as an aging weaver’s hand. Vision, too, is never enough  like baskets never empty: my son will live  
inside the pause between two whispers. He will embrace that pause like a man  fucking, pull himself from it just as quick. I draw him away from your path  by my own strand inside the bark. I am no longer the child  you taught, nameless  
inside the junctions, bound to the weaving.


^^EOP^^


Leaning out over
a lantana bush
abloom with polybags,
yellow and pink,
and a woman
gathering firewood
beside a sluggish gutter
while her twitchy goats
go looking for
a patch to graze on,
is the big cluster fig,
its giant’s foot, its
buttress roots, caught
in the rusted door
of the garden shed.
How it came to be there
no one knows.
Growing faster
than a beanstalk,
it’s become a high-rise
for birds. Pariah kites
and crows are heard
in its windows,
singing, screeching,
cawing, as if newly
in love, survivors of
the human disaster.


^^EOP^^


As a rule, we are only because men have looked down upon us with such kindness straight into our eyes.
Warriors stare each other down. 
Reach its climax at the Shikhara, or the Vortex
is the subject of the verse. Has been, since way before
Pound’s age, peaks like the city all over a pleasure
we are not given credit for. Like how to make time
move by not moving. How to make a new time
in the palm of your hand, a son made of dirt
is our most popular deity, with an elephant’s
borrowed tusk and a half
the trunk, which leads to good luck
depending on what side it points to
sitting idle an idol at your desk.

^^EOP^^


He stood at the back of  his old Church, wanting to join in with the congregation.
Everyone followed the priest,
I confess to almighty God, and to you my brothers and sisters, that
I have sinned through my own fault in my thoughts and in my words ...
He looked for her. The back of many black-haired heads made
his stomach upset. Heads all bent.

He glimpsed her thick plait curled on her shoulder by
the end of the Penitential Act. Moving, he saw her.
Always in a sari. Always with her mother.

Their son sat up on the altar, his shoes shinier
than all the other boys. His mother would have shone
them with Kiwi shoe polish and an old brush. The sound
would wake him. She must be watching him to keep
his face still. Her son on the altar at Morning Mass.

Their daughter was hand-in-hand with mother and
grandmother. Her two plaits shone with oil. After
the shoes, her mother would have woken and washed
her for Mass. She would tell the small girl Stop crying!
while tightly plaiting her thick-oiled hair.

He left before Communion started, walking down the road to the bus stop.


^^EOP^^





After A.A. (1967–2015)



It’s 2005
and we are almost glamorous,
the five of us— 
the chairs are cane,
my shirt batik,
the sunshine Goa and Heineken. 
We’re past the clumsy brutality
of eighteen— 
we’ve deleted
makeshift faces,
borrowed persuasions,
stances without journeys. 
We’ve forgiven the treacheries
of student seminars,
wrong addresses
at different ends of the city,
digressions of faith. 
No edge
to our voices anymore
when we say Zen or Gramsci. 
We’re wearing
the dumb happy
of holiday
and wearing it well—  and there’s always so much sun. 
Against limewashed churches
and cashew plantations of melted green
we’re laughing hard,
beer-glazed, sand-drizzled, stoned
on Sgt. Pepper and Kishore Kumar. 
And there’s the other picture, look,
where arms entwined,
we are bathed in fierce siesta light
and seem to know this moment is teetering
on the verge
of never again. 
It isn’t difficult, of course,
to skip the nostalgia, 
to fast-forward
the embarrassment
of memory, 
to speak,
as others do,
of calcium
rather than satori. 
So, the morning I heard
it wasn’t difficult to turn efficient, 
to delete
pictures of hummingbirds
and cardamom tea 
and the air ticket you emailed me
never knowing it would be
the one to your funeral. 
It gets easier, friend,
with age,
to delete, plan breakfast,
turn the page. 
It would have been easier still
if you hadn’t deleted the sun.


^^EOP^^


Up and down the campus he goes, chatting
With clouds and trees or a bee worrying
The hive of his beard. His brow has billows
For he thinks like the sea. He has his lows,
Yet knows there always is another high,
And just in time the sea comes rolling by
To prove him right. He has rid himself of
All hubris and gabs in the tongue of love
Which is the tongue of rain on stone, of stone
On leaf, of leaf on wind, of wind on bone.
He has given up on our wants and wars,
And passes cleanly through a virtual port,
Yet the ocean rouses him when it roars
And settles him roaring back into thought.


^^EOP^^


the sleep that restores
weakens to strengthen
to rattle first
cocos nucifera ...  yes, cocos nucifera, consort of a lesser wind cocos nucifera’s trunk bends and sings coquettish, it curtsies and flirts 
... yet in a cat 5 assault
its branches are ripped out like feathers ...
one by one, half the treetop
decapitated, gone  (the tree rat lives in the coconut tree at night it scurries inside thuds upon the kitchen counter and awakens you  in a hurricane it is but a downy feather before an electric fan on a hot and humid afternoon)


^^EOP^^


As if what I wanted to say most
would be lost in the saying
all the lines running slightly aslant
clouds and white horses grazing
wherever you look the gaze lifted
by the wind a rippling in the barley
and in the hot curtain of the atmosphere
the last hunger before it settles
on two sparrows on an earthen pot
or pine cones on a bed of pine needles
fallen as if someone had put them there
for your viewing but that is just how
pine cones fall I want to write but
the school is inside a thick fog
and the children must shout across the valley
that may have grown between them
and it is hard to read because already
the title of the grade 5 English textbook
is burning in a sooty fire lit
in the offset printing and I don’t
have a pencil and I don’t know
the spelling so I go on erasing until
the page begins to tear like a cloud
through pale pastel blue sky and the fog
inside the classroom keeps growing
and a child speaks the alphabet through tears


^^EOP^^


It would try to lisp a dumbness sometimes—
the language of welts rising slowly on the panes,
a cracked blur of riot-torn air,
confused which year it was. 
The last time it made a sound was when
it crinkled on its way into a bin,
a great plot of justice. I wasn’t born, then;
my father was. 
It must have been whole once,
for you could still conceive it like a dream,
a gloriously illegitimate thing, though;
until a country was torn out of its heart one day
and you saw its impaled ghost in the moon. 
My grandfather told me we had slept so long
with a flag over us, we couldn’t run when
machetes poked us awake amidst still-dreaming heads
rolling in the streets like marbles struck in game. 
There was nowhere to go and we went nowhere,
with its face slumped on our backs
and history books that said what had happened is the past, 
until sixty years later, a community’s threats betraying
her voice, a poor nun requested me
to leave my month-old job in a convent
where I’d studied since childhood. 
I keep trying to find its shape in photographs, old letters,
the wind of stories trapped in some cancerous throat, dying ... 
a tattered roof in the stars, a tent flying off
with meanings barely gathered into a heap.


^^EOP^^





Whatever its causes, however much we speculate about its connections with other psychological issues, crossdreaming in itself  is a form of sexual stimulation.
—anonymous web user



v. praxis 
you do not know me if you graze
my saber & my light
but not the wound I guard.        1 accuses another
of everything but love.        1 demands 
cameras, safety whistles, glue
to hold herself together
against the brutal gaze.      we only need
these awkward straps, heat-slick dildos, 
Kutchi mirrors, concentric abstract
aurae of this crescent moon
sweeping our bodies w/ cool white
reflected & deflected light 
because of what we’ve lost or left
because the language is disaster
because our species has forgotten
acute angles, 
triple dream projected
—inner, outer, secret—
on empty, aching
temple walls.        afterward 
the residue.      what isn’t conscious
throngs toward the surface:
10,000 joy-and-sorrow fishes
crashing into air.


^^EOP^^


In Trinidad, three men appeared
  in court on August 15, 2017,
   charged with having bird
  parts in their possession.
They were caught
  near the Caroni Bird Sanctuary
   by a team of game wardens.
  The wardens happened to be
“conducting surveillance” in
  the area when they spotted the
   men with the dead birds. 
  The men attempted to escape
in a boat. 
  They were caught.
   They were granted bail. The case
  was adjourned. 
Drones have been
  brought in to protect
   the birds. The Ministry of
  Agriculture has conducted
test flights in Trinidad. Here
  is the DNA of the scarlet ibis
   rendered as a barcode:
 
  
The desire to eat the scarlet ibis
  has long haunted man. Fat ibises
   are preferred over lean egrets.
  Even the indigenous peoples
of America prized the
  bird flesh. They made
   special expeditions for
  their eggs. In fact, in their
quest to eat ibis meat, the
  first peoples accidentally
   discovered the islands of
  the Caribbean. The birds made
new land. The natives carried
  baskets with eggs and emaciated
   fledglings. They cooked the
  eggs even if addled or in an
advanced state of decay,
  according to one writer. So
   that birds of all stages of
  life floated in a sky of yelks.
Soup, richly spiced with
  death and Spanish pepper.
   Yet the scarlet ibis, if
  allowed a return to its former
glory, can bring about the
  annihilation of all mammals.
   Among its plumage, the bird
  harbors pathogenic bacteria,
no match for human medicine.
  Man, for good reason, is
   their prime predator.


^^EOP^^


You won’t
kill me
because I
will not
oblige you
by dying. 
I hold all
my hands
under
the cherry
trees. 
Clusters of
shyest
pinks
joining
hands. 
Laced
like this, 
diadem
like this, 
we live the
past/
present/
future/
all at once 
and even now. 
Wouldn’t we tear
seas,
cities,
money
to get to
each other? 
The public
garden— 
the books
of its leaves, 
the leaves
of its books— 
denotes privilege,
entitlement
gorgeous belief 
that we’ll meet
again and
again
holding 
this
feelingtone
of
flowers


^^EOP^^


                    
                    
                    3 AM walks on Fridays across the Marais—from that insomniac
bar on Rue de Lappe, via a Place des Vosges gurgling secrets
in her sleep, zagging down to Rue du Roi de Sicile before
zigging back to the tip of Rue des Francs-Bourgeois
((sound asleep)), with pit stops to salute gothic
gargoyles, brush Art Deco façades, and peer
at miniature parks penned in for the night—
then up Boulevard de Sébastopol, up north,
all the way north to your shared digs
in Château Rouge, holding a wasted,
bedraggled moon aloft, turn by
slow turn—first you, then I—
till he would faint & fall
from an unsafe,
matinal
sky.    
 Fortnightly
sessions—when down
to the last clean fitted sheet—
at the prematurely aged laundrette
rasping out wrong or no change on the top
floor (was it? Or does memory begin to fray?) of
Résidence André Allix, high above the funicular station
at Saint-Juste, Vieux Lyon; some years later, the same ritual
with the swankier, snootier machines in Château-Landon, Paris
claiming more coins; the tortuous rides you would take to reach—
each time—before I’d begin to fold the cobalt nakshi kantha
quilt (you had brought back from a fair trade crafts village
near the northern suburbs of Dhaka) that you knew
I should trip over—each time—if left alone (that
quilt still alive, still untorn: strangers tend
to help, most, keen to touch, to stroke
the wealth of colors, to ask, Where
is it/are you from? One came
home the other day). 
Vernal
morning-walk
battles simmering
from the night before,
wildfiring, pyring by the axis
of Parc Josaphat in Schaerbeek;
our voices scorching the sleep-filled
wings of the neighboring swans, and
words—both barbed and burning—whirl-
pooling the ponds beneath their feet, then all
of it—the earth, the air, the green, that high blaze
of words and decibels, yes, everything—unspooling
in a snarl of arms and thighs, hips and groins, extra-large
elbows, tongues and—it once even felt—uncaged ribs with
double, smelted hearts, purple-hot beneath and hammering their
own daft, arrhythmic anthem, overheard only by an inquiring fox
 



 

Then, the smaller, more regular ones: week-end washing, the family of filthy plates and pans and casseroles somersaulting well past burnished wooden spigots to be the first to greet me when arriving at your ancient garret in Angers by the last TGV, just grazing past midnight and the lone, last tram—with that recurrent, half-annoyed, half-amused, thought: would you first run out of copper and steel and stone, space in your cavernous sink or the resolve never to soap and scrub and rinse (drying’s all right)?
 

 
Happier, low-maintenance rites as well: molten, dark hot chocolate brunches to celebrate impending surgery, yes, “celebrate” the verb we’d adopted as shaggy, wet-nosed mongrel, just right for consolation. The nights in hospital, where I knew—each time—you woke to place quiet fingers and parse the storm warnings within my breath. Then, the weeks of binge-relishing Wong Kar-wai films—from Ashes of Time to 2046 (we as “We” would not live to see My Blueberry Nights and Norah Jones)—for sustenance through rebirth and recovery, till I rose, irrevocably in love with Patrice Chéreau after Son  frère,  and,  it  is  true,  seldom  returned.
 

 
All these and a few, more diffident, others went
missing in that one, endless, afternoon of our
remaindering, slipped away—unnoticed—
amidst the naming, the labeling, the
allotting, the packing. They could
have fled through the fissures
in the kitchen wall, or rolled
down cracks in the floor-
boards—and some, I
reckon, even threw
themselves out
of windows
we’d left
open.


^^EOP^^


Hello flowers and cigarettes
every afternoon spoke to a bird
a small set of hands
they gone out in the pond and slept
who seem to be doing something nicely
which made them drowsy
only to grace and share the beautiful moments
across Latin streets
Hello flowers and cigarettes
cordially invited
into an employment contract
and at last there were too many


^^EOP^^


Lemon balm is for forgiveness.
Pull up from the root, steep
in boiling water. Add locusts’ wings,
salt, the dried bones of hummingbirds.
Drink when you feel ready.
Drink even if you do not. 
Pepper seeds are for courage.
Sprinkle them on your tongue.
Sprinkle in the doorway and along
the windowsill. Mix pepper and water
to a thick paste. Spackle the cracks
in the concrete, anoint the part
in your hair. You need as much
courage as you can get. 
Water is for healing.
Leave a jar open beneath the full moon.
Let it rest. Water your plants.
Wash your face. Drink. 
The sharpened blade is for memory.
Metal lives long, never grows weary
of our comings and goings. Wrap this blade
in newspaper. Keep beneath your bed.
Be patient, daughter.
Be patient.


^^EOP^^


If suddenly she rears
pulls, pitches
into the lightning 
if the split sky strikes
splinters the glassy ground
(her stride is a circle growing smaller) 
when she sees the stars
—all skies have storms
and she has seen them 
if she shies and starts
when she skids
when she lowers her eyes
if she stops to listen: 
nervous rider, beware.


^^EOP^^


darkriver moonrise
girlrise locksdrip
firmfoot mudbank
starwheel skinflush 
red
mouthswell tongueloll
breastswell hipswell
archback cockride
nailrake treebark
sunripe wombswell
cuntswell rockback
haunchsquat pullsquirt
babesquall blooddrip
sweatdrip slimedrip 
devour
headfirst skullcrack
laugh 
leaffall headback
laugh 
you were seen mother
but there was nothing
to see


^^EOP^^


What’s Godhead—
now standing upright,
fecundity no less
I tell you more about. 
Phases of the moon, you see:
an auspicious moment I’ve
come to believe in with
Shiva or some other deity. 
What Greece from antiquity
bestowed upon us with an
outsider named Sikander—
Alexander the Great going 
to the Indus Valley but not
ancient Rome, I presume to
know less about; then it’s
Parvati, consort of Shiva, 
being on the diurnal stage
as I dwell on enlightenment—
fires burning and smoke
rising from the ground. 
Sandalwood, the ghee of life
with avatars coming closer,
and I will recite mantras
when Shiva looks back at me 
from the corner of his eye
as I pretend I am in some
other place like Rishikesh,
close to the Ganges, but 
here by the Rideau River—
this North with celestial fires,
making promises to myself
from long ago.


^^EOP^^


If you must hear      the story
of my turbulent gaze      after waking, 
the march of my hours      to hermit
into a higher body,      it is that 
whatever you put            into the Universe
eventually       returns. 
In our oneness      of gift,
                     we are eyes together, 
nerves together,         affected together.
If I’ve never      told you 
how madly we share      in the stars, 
how it was all      founded      for you,
then let the longing      for Arcturus 
                     be the gilding      of our sleep. 
I know      when your time      was in its
making,      I was left      to sing alone, 
unfed      to trample through      a hundred
layers      of night      without a heart 
                                   to hold my guard. 
If I had known      all those     days
to listen deep   into myself      so that you 
would begin      to hear      me,      I’d sooner
soak      the decibels      of      your cells 
into  the exhale  of my      embrace.
            A scorning within       is within 
                coming back      to scorn.
A rose quartz promise      lifted into 
the world   is the world      coming back
                          to surrender      its love. 
Even after      I took my health
into a vineyard      of hawks, 
I could not break myself from caring
but only     to seek you,      find you, 
            whisper into your palm:
you are not lost,      you won’t be lost.


^^EOP^^


i passed my lit exams with
colors flying to a precipice
the rundown colors of the other 
of tribulation and witch hunting
i knew nothing but of the crude and
rude wife of bath i was well versed 
medieval texts renaissance men
used abused erased to
historicize temporalities
of others 
while lovers on a balcony bargain
a pound of flesh to a specter of
the rotten state betrayed
by cassius 
of the ancient mariner these rimes echo
water water everywhere nor any drop to
drink discovery as glorious as thirst 
many o and odes followed lyrical ballads
to psyche melancholy and immortality
which i turned to audes 
i read and read and read pages
and pages and pages on fanny and
emma and jane and
elizabeth 
i had the bourgeois gentilhomme
the puritan andromaque the
fantasy of le grand
meaulnes 
the reality of la mare au diable the
dirt of les fleurs du mal carmen’s
dilemma saved the day 
it still resonates l’amour est enfant
de bohème il n’a jamais jamais
connu de loi except the romani law 
revived by dramouss la peste
et l’étranger vive la francopholie
noire et masculine blemished of its politics 
the middle ages bled through the
middle passage passed down to the
middle class ripping through my
middle in a carnage 
sixteenth-century white
brutality to twentieth-century
slow violence 
i absorb the flow in oblivion
and erase myself to imitation
only to live in dejection 
until i listen to my creole tongue
search my historical voice
hear my name and
ask what is in a name? 
that which we call a rose
would not be the same rose
if we call it enn fler roz
or gulaab ke phulwa 
i grab tagore’s Gitanjali
i breathe and finally reach
the Lorde.


^^EOP^^


Make broadness broadness
from narrowness
Lead lead us
We see nothing
behind nothing ahead
These worlds are broad above
beyond our knowing
The great river plains open and descend
slowly from west to east
beyond our knowing
Us
Doctor, suture me from
narrowness to broadness
All the suns all the dawns all the waters
rise and pass
in broadness
Our bodies move over over this land
rising and falling
Broadness
stretch out our skies and dawns
so we can walk walk
out of our selves
Doctor, move me from dark
spaces of invented light
I do not know just
what it is
that I am like
Broadness open for
us us
Unharness our days


^^EOP^^


a churile swims the length of
the demerara river in my dreams.
she tows her dead
child behind her, catches me
in a net of  black hair. 
do you want to know how to
buss a gyaff, she asks. 
ditch the ipa chart. mimic
your grandmother’s
canal no. 1 lips. howl
the choo-ryle’s grief into a
cornelia ida cane field sitting
at the bottom
of your uncle’s coors light can. 
the churile’s grief is the undertow of
every overseas gyaff. in her hands
the saltwater-pickled tongue of my
great-great-great grandmother sings. 
a tongue without a mouth
sings the loudest, she says. 
do you want to know how to
buss a gyaff? 
listen for the
wagwans the sita-rams
the how yuh dos
the langtime me nah see yous
listen for
what the story says and 
wield your grandfather’s cutlass.
reply with
di’ ’tory ’tweet.
(even if it’s not.) chop up
the queen’s english, prune
the consonants, make room
for the vowels to stretch their backs. 
somewhere at the bottom of the demerara river
a colonial officer is hoarding the Ss that somersault off my tongue,
smooth like the tamarind seeds my mother
swallows when she is five. somewhere
at the bottom of the demerara river
is the tamarind tree i wish
climbed up my esophagus
and out of my yankee mouth
that time i swallowed
a handful of tamarind seeds. i was desperate
to cough up
a shipwreck a ship manifest
a house on stilts
a bottomless bottomhouse
a saltwater-pickled tongue—
anything to soak up the currents of
a seasickness over a hundred years young
that drenches
my feet


^^EOP^^


These are all ancient names of what you will once call home.  
The shape of the fire altar is independent of time.   Each temple is an offering made to the gods by giving them a home.   An inward realization can only be achieved by draining out your wealth and strength. So he went on
Another building rampage.
 “A world conquer campaign,” as my brother used to say. Drew a straight line across a map And let the priest and the architect connect the fact that often it was a Queen
on whose insistence these stone gardens were built.


^^EOP^^


Did you ever feel this. Astonished
by the blood drawn from
your arms when you took a step forward
and the air scraped you. 
Maybe you think peace. Think it
as a floral carpet, a persistent scent
that is supposed to be
a memory you treasure. Only
it was put there by someone else. 
When the sun hits
it feels like something.
Someone cooks soup.
You love a person you envy.
And the emotions wash
into a teacup
and you drink them
and your teeth are storm-stained. 
If there were a wave,
blue-black, flooding lives out,
spinning each person
and the next
and their needs
together as if they were fabrics
in a laundry machine,
could I ever trust it? If I touch
and you forget
you have borders against nature.
We’re floating somewhere
in a primordial pool.
And I’ve got you, and I’ve got you.


^^EOP^^


We must be
the inviolate
petals, always
queering to-
ward the sun,
must be water
on the lips of
flaming cities,
quenching
the husbands,
insatiable. These
days the abdomen
blossoms, but
we must be
boneless, edible
fish. We must
beg for bouquets
for absent sons.
This is how we
know devotion:
listening to lovers
sleep, breathing
like monster trucks,
wanting to soothe
them when the dream
is done. We march
the sinking avenues,
finger the curls
at the baby’s neck,
hanging from
the brink at
office hour,
gulping Xanax
in their white
oblong shells.
Cities can sleep
but we can never.
Vigilant animals
on our hands and
knees, asking for
it again and again.


^^EOP^^

