
no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

Dear Writers, I’m compiling the first in what I hope is a series of publications I’m calling artists among artists. The theme for issue 1 is “Faggot Dinosaur.” I hope to hear from you! Thank you and best wishes.  

^^EOP^^

          Philosophic
in its complex, ovoid emptiness,
a skillful pundit coined it as a sort
    of stopgap doorstop for those
           quaint equations             Romans never
dreamt of. In form completely clever
and discrete—a mirror come unsilvered,      loose watch face without the works,               a hollowed globe              from tip to toe
unbroken, it evades the grappling
hooks of mass, tilts the thin rim of no thing,      remains embryonic sum,              non-cogito.


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

                    
                    
                    We'd  like  to  talk  with  you  about  fear they  said  so
many  people  live  in  fear  these  days  they  drove  up
all  four  of  them  in  a  small  car nice   boy  they  said
beautiful  dogs they  said  so  friendly  the  man  ahead
of  the  woman  the other  two  waiting  in  the  drive  I
was  outside digging up the garden no one home I said
what   are  you  selling   anyway  I'm   not  interested  I
said  well  you  have  a  nice  day  they  said  here's  our
card  there's   a  phone  number  you  can  call  anytime
any  other   houses  down  this  road  anyone  else   live
here  we'd  like  to  talk  to  them  about  living  in  fear
                

^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

The Wise Men will unlearn your name.
Above your head no star will flame.
One weary sound will be the same—
the hoarse roar of the gale.
The shadows fall from your tired eyes
as your lone bedside candle dies,
for here the calendar breeds nights
till stores of candles fail. 
What prompts this melancholy key?
A long familiar melody.
It sounds again. So let it be.
Let it sound from this night.
Let it sound in my hour of  death—
as gratefulness of eyes and lips
for that which sometimes makes us lift
our gaze to the far sky. 
You glare in silence at the wall.
Your stocking gapes: no gifts at all.
It's clear that you are now too old
to trust in good Saint Nick;
that it's too late for miracles.
—But suddenly, lifting your eyes
to heaven's light, you realize:
your life is a sheer gift.


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

Dear Writers, I’m compiling the first in what I hope is a series of publications I’m calling artists among artists. The theme for issue 1 is “Faggot Dinosaur.” I hope to hear from you! Thank you and best wishes.  

^^EOP^^

          Philosophic
in its complex, ovoid emptiness,
a skillful pundit coined it as a sort
    of stopgap doorstop for those
           quaint equations             Romans never
dreamt of. In form completely clever
and discrete—a mirror come unsilvered,      loose watch face without the works,               a hollowed globe              from tip to toe
unbroken, it evades the grappling
hooks of mass, tilts the thin rim of no thing,      remains embryonic sum,              non-cogito.


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

                    
                    
                    We'd  like  to  talk  with  you  about  fear they  said  so
many  people  live  in  fear  these  days  they  drove  up
all  four  of  them  in  a  small  car nice   boy  they  said
beautiful  dogs they  said  so  friendly  the  man  ahead
of  the  woman  the other  two  waiting  in  the  drive  I
was  outside digging up the garden no one home I said
what   are  you  selling   anyway  I'm   not  interested  I
said  well  you  have  a  nice  day  they  said  here's  our
card  there's   a  phone  number  you  can  call  anytime
any  other   houses  down  this  road  anyone  else   live
here  we'd  like  to  talk  to  them  about  living  in  fear
                

^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

The Wise Men will unlearn your name.
Above your head no star will flame.
One weary sound will be the same—
the hoarse roar of the gale.
The shadows fall from your tired eyes
as your lone bedside candle dies,
for here the calendar breeds nights
till stores of candles fail. 
What prompts this melancholy key?
A long familiar melody.
It sounds again. So let it be.
Let it sound from this night.
Let it sound in my hour of  death—
as gratefulness of eyes and lips
for that which sometimes makes us lift
our gaze to the far sky. 
You glare in silence at the wall.
Your stocking gapes: no gifts at all.
It's clear that you are now too old
to trust in good Saint Nick;
that it's too late for miracles.
—But suddenly, lifting your eyes
to heaven's light, you realize:
your life is a sheer gift.


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

One morning
they dig up the sidewalk and leave.
No sign of the truck,
only the large,
dark shadow digging and digging,
piling up sludge with a hand shovel
beside the only tree.
Two o’clock I come by
and he’s slumbering in the grass beside rat holes.
Three and he’s stretched across a jagged stonewall,
folded hands tucked beneath one ear—
a beautiful young boy smiling,
not the heavy, large shadow who can’t breathe.
Four-thirty and the August heat
takes one down here.
He’s pulled up an elbow joint
some three feet round.
At seven I head home for the night,
pass the fresh gravel mound,
a soft footprint near the manhole
like the “x” abuelo would place beside his name
all the years he couldn’t write.


^^EOP^^

when aliens come to the earth 
they will land on top of gigantic mountains 
they will see the people everywhere 
each alien will communicate telepathically with another alien 
on the opposite side of the sphere 
that is its clone and itself at the same time 
like an atom in quantum physics 
the same alien in two places at once 
and this multiplied by millions 
on top of gigantic mountains 
'the strategy is to destroy humans' 
each alien will tell itself and its clone 
humans will understand this strategy once 
the killing started, immediately happening 
in two places on opposite ends of the world at 
once, an alien and itself 
murdering two humans by looking at their faces 
then that happening repeatedly or something 
for some amount of time 
the humans falling over and their faces hitting the pavement 
or the carpet, or the grass 
or the side of a coffee table 
on some dog shit 
* 
there will be resistance 
soldiers on all parts of the earth will fight with lasers 
citizen militias will hold resistance meetings 
a resistance against death 
a no-death resistance 
a movement for death later 
a movement for a different, still-uncontrollable death 
'humans don't want to die this way' 
will be their manifesto, one sheet of paper 
or a piece of cardboard or something 
* 
there will be humans in basements looking at each other 
wandering, solitary humans that want more to find another human than to avoid dying 
solitary, severely depressed and/or enlightened humans that commit suicide by seeking out alien faces and looking at them; these humans may feel happy inside an insane nervous breakdown 
humans that kill other humans because they feel insane 
humans that sit in a corner, feeling extremely small, maybe considering intense killing rampages/some indefinable, positive emotion for humanity 
humans that watch tv, use the internet to read the newspaper, and drive their cars around; they will be motionless on couches with their eyes open 
* 
the fish and insects and trees 
will have the ocean and the forest 
pretty sure they won't care


^^EOP^^

I'm preparing myself for an extended period of loneliness
That will begin very soon I think
I've illegally downloaded two new depressing songs
I've placed a copy of Good Morning, Midnight under my pillow for easy reference
I've printed out the tablature for every Morrissey song I know so I can sing them to myself
Alone in my room
Just a few things are needed really
To make me calm
While I figure out a simple, clean, and effective way to kill myself,
With minimal stress for the person who has to find and dispose of my body
But I'll probably never think of a way
Because I'll probably never kill myself
I'll just lie in my bed suffocating myself with my pillows
While listening to the four songs you said were your favorite
And maybe burn myself a little with the iron
On special occasions
And the next time I'm in a subway station,
I'll stand a little further on the yellow line
Or maybe the next I'm at your apartment
I'll try a little harder


^^EOP^^

Saturday morning in late March.
I was alone and took a long walk,   
though I also carried a book
of the Alone, which companioned me. 
The day was clear, unnaturally clear,
like a freshly wiped pane of glass,
a window over the water,
and blue, preternaturally blue,
like the sky in a Magritte painting,
and cold, vividly cold, so that
you could clap your hands and remember
winter, which had left a few moments ago—
if you strained you could almost see it
disappearing over the hills in a black parka.
Spring was coming but hadn't arrived yet.
I walked on the edge of the park.
The wind whispered a secret to the trees,
which held their breath
and scarcely moved.
On the other side of the street,
the skyscrapers stood on tiptoe. 
I walked down to the pier to watch
the launching of a passenger ship.
Ice had broken up on the river
and the water rippled smoothly in blue light.
The moon was a faint smudge   
in the clouds, a brushstroke, an afterthought
in the vacant mind of the sky.
Seagulls materialized out of vapor
amidst the masts and flags. Don't let our voices die on land,
they cawed, swooping down for fish
and then soaring back upwards. 
The kiosks were opening
and couples moved slowly past them,
arm in arm, festive.
Children darted in and out of walkways,
which sprouted with vendors.
Voices greeted the air.
Kites and balloons. Handmade signs.
Voyages to unknown places.
The whole day had the drama of an expectation. 
Down at the water, the queenly ship
started moving away from the pier.
Banners fluttered.   
The passengers clustered at the rails on deck.
I stood with the people on shore and waved
goodbye to the travelers.
Some were jubilant;
others were broken-hearted.
I have always been both. 
Suddenly, a great cry went up.
The ship set sail for the horizon
and rumbled into the future
but the cry persisted
and cut the air
like an iron bell ringing
in an empty church.
I looked around the pier
but everyone else was gone
and I was left alone   
to peer into the ghostly distance.   
I had no idea where that ship was going
but I felt lucky to see it off
and bereft when it disappeared.


^^EOP^^

He glanced around to check if the treacherous gods
had really given him the reward promised for his accomplished song
and there she was, Eurydice restored, perfectly naked and fleshed
in her rhyming body again, the upper and lower smiles and eyes,
the line of mouth-sternum-navel-cleft, the chime of breasts and hips
and of the two knees, the feet, the toes, and that expression
of an unimaginable intelligence that yoked all these with a skill
she herself had forgotten the learning of: there she was, with him
                  once more
just for an instant as she vanished. And then he heard her from
                  behind
the invisible veil, absence: a shrill and batlike but lexical indictment.
Why had he violated the divine command, why, when he had seized
all song to himself and robbed her of power to open her own
                  oblivion?
It grew in volume and now seemed to spew from an insane old
                  mother with one breast
hanging like a huge withered testicle from a rent in her weathered
                  gown,
who was being watched by a tall woman, copper-helmet-coiffed,
                  richly suited in salmon colour,
a mythical allusion, since salmon were long extinct in the bays and
                rivers here:
songs never brought them anymore. The young restrained breasts
                and the old free one
oppressed him equally and he went to live among men, waiting for
                the crazy
and the competent to join forces and come for him with their
                  scissors.
Orpheus listened patiently to my poem and when it quieted he said
                  to me:
That wasn't it at all. I sang outward from my face to blue spaces
                  between clouds,
to fern fronds, and men and women sipped my song as you drink
                   from a stream going by.
What I sang is lost in time, you don't kmow what it was, all you have
                  is your own
old stories about me. And if women tore me into pieces, maybe that
                  only signifies
each one keeps part of my body, which is melody among visible
                  things.


^^EOP^^

Stone gullets among       Inrush       Feed         Backsuck and
The borders swallow            Outburst             Huge engorgements       Swallow
In gulps the sea      Tide crams jagged         Smacks snorts chuckups       Follow
       In urgent thirst      Jaws the hollow      Insurge       Hollow
Gushing evacuations follow       Jetty it must       Outpush       Greed


^^EOP^^




That afternoon the dream of the toads rang through the elms by Little River and affected the thoughts of men, though they were not conscious that they heard it.--Henry Thoreau



The dream of toads: we rarely credit what we consider lesser life with emotions big as ours, but we are easily distracted, abstracted. People sit nibbling before television's flicker watching ghosts chase balls and each other while the skunk is out risking grisly death to cross the highway to mate; while the fox scales the wire fence where it knows the shotgun lurks to taste the sweet blood of a hen. Birds are greedy little bombs bursting to give voice to appetite. I had a cat who died of love. Dogs trail their masters across con- tinents. We are far too busy to be starkly simple in passion. We will never dream the intense wet spring lust of the toads. 


^^EOP^^

She notes in the poem she's reading where the disembodied
voice speaking encounters "an ugly old woman"
just momentarily, in part of a single line, in one
of the many long corridors and sharp turnings of the poem,
so that she's quickly lost to view. That's me, she thinks,
I'm an ugly old woman, I who sit here reading this poem
and its ugly old woman phrase and the poet, when he stumbled
over her splayed, swollen legs, registered her presence,
her inheritance, her baggage of limitations-ugly, old,
woman-but never knew, couldn't, because who could
know, who can stop and know her ... And this reader keeps
thinking, loving, understanding, trapped in her eye
following the voice on and on while somewhere back in the poem
in a blank passage an ugly old woman sits against a wall.


^^EOP^^

Your idea of embracing horror
was overwhelmed by the horror: 
                                                                                  in the mild
milkiness of the afternoon, on the bluff
that commands a vision of bank towers
knifing up far higher than the rising, empty
shell of the moon ... on the height where you stand
and still can't understand your life
as anything but slow dying, your time seeps out
as into a warm bath, the way the exemplary career
of Petronius the Just—pornographer and satirist-
once leaked away.


^^EOP^^

All their fences

     All their prisons

All their exercises

     All their agendas

All their stanzas look alike

     All their metaphors

All their bookstores

     All their plantations

All their assassinations

     All their stanzas look alike

All their rejection letters

     All their letters to the editor

All their arts and letters

     All their letters of recommendation

All their stanzas look alike

     All their sexy coverage

All their literary journals

     All their car commercials

All their bribe-spiked blurbs

     All their stanzas look alike

All their favorite writers

     All their writing programs

All their visiting writers

     All their writers-in-residence

All their stanzas look alike

     All their third worlds

All their world series

     All their serial killers

All their killing fields

     All their stanzas look alike

All their state grants

     All their tenure tracks

All their artist colonies

     All their core faculties

All their stanzas look alike

     All their Selected Collecteds

All their Oxford Nortons

     All their Academy Societies

All their Oprah Vendlers

     All their stanzas look alike

All their haloed holocausts

     All their coy hetero couplets

All their hollow haloed causes

      All their tone-deaf tercets

All their stanzas look alike

      All their tables of contents

All their Poet Laureates

      All their Ku Klux classics

All their Supreme Court justices

      Except one, except one

Exceptional one. Exceptional or not,

      One is not enough.

All their stanzas look alike.

      Even this, after publication,

Might look alike. Disproves

      My stereo types.


^^EOP^^

When I think of that roomI see the de Kooning at the end of the hallSometimes rain on the long windowsOr the tinkering of drops on the skylightBut not YvonSplashing Scotch into a cocktail glassOtherwise fastidious—In retrospectI should have asked her moreAbout the famous jazz guitaristShe had been engaged toBut that much was true—Even after she bought me a pocket knifeSheathed in velvet Every young man needs a knifeShe informed her groupBut in the restaurant her friendsEyed me like a turnip. One that talked—While she was away at her office, I tried to readHer unfinished essayOn the vagaries of diplomacyReclining On a rug of embroidered storksThe two small RodinsSeemed misplacedA grand pianoShe didn’t play(though I did, affecting a controlledpassionwhile gazing over rooftopsat carefully maintained gardens)—I don’t remember her smellI don’t recall her fingersThe last I heard she was living in BarcelonaShe never did learn to cookNow her letters are worth money


^^EOP^^

Nonentity’s birthplace: a front yard sweepsits dirt clean. Devil hopped up the oak tree,devil-take-the-profit seized  a jay in the twigs by the feet, wings buffetingthis child’s cheeks to rhyme. Leaf of giftbox tissue folded over her pocket comb. Hindpocket kazoo. Won’t somebody please startsomething other & oddball soon,  narrow her down out of folly  & trivia to destiny? But Whynot the tortie cat flopped an irregular sunny patch, wriggles & rolls & revives the blissy fits of ignorance.Decades crunch as minor upcountry thunder. My nod to Mastermind’s robot rabbit, said to dwell in his top hat, who tips me a silk evening. Gloaming again & neverfar from home. Listen you hoots: alas for me, for my love with the gallant and grifter soul has tucked into just the crevice he feared. Fear told  & tells him the truth, so he trusts it. Listenyou hollers, whatever you had in mind for me. 


^^EOP^^

A blue staincreeps acrossthe deep pileof the evergreens.From inside theforest it seemslike an interiormatter, somethingwholly to dowith trees, a colorpassed from oneto another, arequirementto which theysubmit unflinchingly like soldiers or brave peoplegetting older. Then the sun comes back andit’s totally over.


^^EOP^^

This is the place it happened. It was here.You might not know it was unless you knew.All day the cars blow past and disappear.This is the place it happened. It was here.Look at the sparkling dust, the oily smear.Look at the highway marker, still askew.This is the place it happened. It was here.You might not know it was unless you knew.


^^EOP^^

Missionary girl reports that Chinese addicts sayyour heart begs you to stay away

^^EOP^^




Unlike Francis Bacon, we no longer believe in the little patterns we make of the chaos of history.               —Overheard remark



As he looked up from his glass, its quickly melting ice,into the bisected glowing demonic eyes of the goat,he sensed that something fundamental had shifted,or was done. As if, after a life of enchantment, hehad awakened, like Bottom, wearing the ears of an ass, and the only light was a lanthorn, an ersatz moon. It was not that the calendar hadn’t numbered the dayswith an orbital accuracy, its calculationsexact, but like a man who wants to hang a hammockin his yard, to let its bright net cradle him, but onlyhas one tree, so he—wild and aware of it—knewhe had lost the order he required, and with it, rest—his thoughts only a sagging bundle of loose ends,and the heart, a naked animal in search of a pelt, that once fell for every Large Meaning it could wrap itself in, as organs are packed in ice for transitfrom one ending to the next, an afterlife of parts—andthe whole? Exorbitant claim—not less than all,and oddly spelled; its ear rhyme is its opposite,the great hole in the heart of things. The goat,he noticed, had a rank smell, feral. Unnerved,he looks away, watches the last of his ice as it melts, the way some godlike eye might seethe mighty glaciers in a slow dissolve back into sea.He notes how incommensurate the simile, a lastattempt to dignify his shaking gaze, and reachesfor the bill; he’s damned if the goat will pay. 


^^EOP^^

I can only give you back what you imagine.I am a soulless man. When I take you into my mouth, it is not my mouth. It isan unlit pit, an aperture opened just enoughin the pinhole camera to capture the shade.I have caused you to rise up to me, and Ihave watched as you rose and waned.Our times together have been innumerable. Still,like a Capistrano swallow, you come back.You understand: I understand you. Understandeach jiggle and tug. Your pudgy, mercurial wad.I am simply a hand inexhaustible as yours could never be. You’re nevertheless prepared to shoot.If I could I’d finish you. Be more than just your rag.


^^EOP^^

Nothing has changed. They have a welcome sign,a hill with cows and a white house on top,a mall and grocery store where people shop,a diner where some people go to dine.It is the same no matter where you go,and downtown you will find no big surprises.Each fall the dew point falls until it rises.White snow, green buds, green lawn, red leaves, white snow.This is all right. This is their hope. And yet, though what you see is never what you get,it does feel somehow changed from what it was.Is it the people? Houses? Fields? The weather?Is it the streets? Is it these things together?Nothing here ever changes, till it does.


^^EOP^^

On the crowded hill bordering the mill,across the shallow stream, nearer than they seem,they wait and will be waiting.Rain. The small smilax is the same to the flyas the big bush of lilacs exploding nearby.The rain may be abating.On the quiet hill beside the droning mill,across the dirty stream, nearer than they seem,they wait and will be waiting.The glass-eyed cicada drones in the linden draped like a tentabove three polished stones. Aphids swarm at the scentof the yellow petals.A bird comes to prod a clump of wet fur.The ferns idiotically nod when she takes it away with her.Something somewhere settles.On the crowded hill bordering the millis our best cemetery, pretty, but not very.All are welcome here.Sun finds a bare teak box on the tidy green plot.It finds lichen-crusted blocks fringed with forget-me-not.Angels preen everywhere.On the crowded hill bordering the millis our best cemetery, pretty, but not very. All are welcome here.


^^EOP^^




For A.J. Verdelle



Those mornings I traveled north on I91,passing below the basalt cliff of East Rockwhere the elms discussed their genealogies.I was a chaplain at Hartford Hospital,took the Myers-Briggs with Sister Margaret,learned I was an I drawn to Es.In small group I said, “I do not like it—the way so many young black men die hereunrecognized, their gurneys stripped,their belongings catalogued and unclaimed.”On the neonatal ICU, newborns breathed,blue, spider-delicate in a nest of tubes.A Sunday of themselves, their tissue purpled,their eyelids the film on old water in a well,their faces resigned in their see-through attics,their skin mottled mildewed wallpaper.It is correct to love even at the wrong time.On rounds, the newborns eyed me, each one like Orpheus in his dark hallway, saying:I knew I would find you, I knew I would lose you. 

^^EOP^^

First there was Jim, clamping to my long black hair             that nine-pound Cleopatra wig              with nylon bands and bobbie pins.Meanwhile I was on fire for Chad, who coached me             a bit impatiently Tuesday nights             on my Joan-of-Arc inflection.Then Terence said I’d be perfect for the lounge-singer-             turned-whore, and as it turned out             that was a fairly easy gig.Max signed me on soon after, claiming I was a natural             for Eternally Aggrieved Girl,             which in hindsight hurts me deeply.So by the time you followed me back to the green room             to wait in the hallway—whistling!—             for my scrubbed face to emerge,naturally I was wary, waiting for the script              you never bothered to come up with.             It was damned awkward sitting there,nothing but milkshakes between us. Maybe, I thought,              you’d assumed I was the one with a script.               Finally I decided to give Terence a call.I didn’t like the way you looked at me so steadily             with your chin resting on one fist,             as if the table were a table, the boardsA floor. Listening there as if you meant it,              as if something I could say were true, and every             moment from now on would be my cue.


^^EOP^^

I heard from people after the shootings. People I knew well or barely or not at all. Largely the same message: how horrible it was, how little there was to say about how horrible it was. People wrote, called, mostly e-mailed because they know I teach at Virginia Tech,to say, there’s nothing to say. Eventually I answered these messages: there’s nothing to say back except of course there’s nothing to say, thank you for your willingness to say it. Because this was about nothing. A boy who felt that he was nothing, who erased and entered that erasure, and guns that are good for nothing, and talk of guns that is good for nothing, and spring that is good for flowers, and Jesus for some, and scotch for others, and “and” for me in this poem, “and” that is good for sewing the minutes together, which otherwise go about going away, bereft of us and us of them. Like a scarf left on a train and nothing like a scarf left on a train. As if the train, empty of everything but a scarf, still opens its doors at every stop, because this is what a train does, this is what a man does with his hand on a lever, because otherwise, why the lever, why the hand, and then it was over, and then it had just begun.


^^EOP^^

There is so much sweetness in children’s voices,And so much discontent at the end of day,And so much satisfaction when a train goes by.I don’t know why the rooster keeps crying,Nor why elephants keep raising their trunks,Nor why Hawthorne kept hearing trains at night.A handsome child is a gift from God,And a friend is a vein in the back of the hand,And a wound is an inheritance from the wind.Some say we are living at the end of time,But I believe a thousand pagan ministersWill arrive tomorrow to baptize the wind.There’s nothing we need to do about John. The BaptistHas been laying his hands on earth for so longThat the well water is sweet for a hundred miles.It’s all right if we don’t know what the roosterIs saying in the middle of the night, nor why we feelSo much satisfaction when a train goes by.


^^EOP^^

                    
                    
                    I remember she rented a room on the second floor from Jenny Holtzerman, an Austrian widow. The two women lived on Girard Avenue South, in Kenwood, an elegant suburb of Minneapolis. Any promise of husbands had disappeared long ago. From the kitchen I often remember the jelly smell of a linzer torte. I was in high school and often I eavesdropped. Once, quietly, she said to my mother, “I never knew the love of a man.” She had mentioned having a husband, but during the war they were separated in the chaos of Budapest, and later she lost track of him. Once she showed me her room: the walls were bare with cracks. Her daybed was narrow, barely slept-in. Her room resembled hundreds of scant little rooms around the world, the way it accepted blue and purple-violet detail—on her bureau, no family photographs, instead, playbills autographed by cast members, a calendar tattered, crossed, marked, no jewelry, some coins. Her window sashes warped, her wires shorted and the paint around her doorframe kept chipping off—“like in The Cherry Orchard,” she said, “by Chekhov.” She told a joke in Hungarian to Hannah Tamasek and even I, not knowing a word, laughed. She bowed gently in a mannerism distinctly Viennese and spoke on occasion of the Austro-Hungarian Empire. She loved the Guthrie Theater, where curtains rose on miniature worlds, preferring memorized dialogue and costumes to something truer. Five feet tall in orthopedic shoes, she limped. Time has a way of rearranging things and I could have most details wrong now, but there was this: during the war, she met a man, whom she gave money to, she did not know the man well, but had trusted him to smuggle her father across the border, the man pocketed the money, bought chocolates for his mistress from Belgium, and placed Margaret’s father on a train to Auschwitz. So it makes sense to me now that simple decisions baffled Margaret. It makes sense to me now that when news reached us of Primo Levi’s suicide, Margaret did not blink. It makes sense to me now that when Dr. Sikorski spoke of fighting in the Warsaw sewers, Margaret said, “I do not believe in God.” Those who saw what they saw grow fewer. Margaret has been dead a long time now. But perhaps you will understand why I chose her, why I have smudged the slow waltz of her smile and added only a few modest blue strokes—here and here. As you leave Margaret behind and turn the page, listen as the page falls back and your hand gently buries her. This is what the past sounds like.
                

^^EOP^^

Roadlight licks the night ahead, licksthe white line on night’s new hide, licksthe undulating blacktop flat, sticks its end-less forking tongue out onward, flicksitself at culvert, tree, passing truck, a signinsisting heartbeats equal conscious life(it may be) of someone’s (maybe my) forever unborn child. I let the knifeof wind inside and sing A Whiter Shade of Pale,no earthly reason why, and think of whatwon’t be and who, and whether it bespeed, wind, song, or my mind’s roarthat drowns for once time’s slangy whine,here comes hope to climb clear of before;stillborn hope with desperate, Moro-reflex, undead grip climbs right back up my neck, raising each pointless, residual nape hair in ancestral salute to an absence, to the airthat won’t question itself, won’t ever checkthe moral rearview. I accelerate gamely,wondering what makes me want to leaveeach person, place and thing I learn to love.What shoves me off again, racing insanely,as if to the place that will always savea place for me, a room that will containthe kind of people who’d embrace the things I’m still afraid I’m still afraid to face.  


^^EOP^^

I butterflied Australian rack of lambwith shallots, garlic, parsley, butter, wine(some in the pan, some for the palate).Although the livestock loved in nursery rhymeavoided clumps of mint, it served my familynonetheless. I am no PETA zealot(leather jacket, handbag, wallet, shoes)but wonder if the deeds we do pursueus in the afterlife. Does the fleecycreature have a tenderable claim?My lambent mind considers our short leaseon life, the oven hot. Am I to blame?Who gave thee such a tender voice? asked Blake.Myself am Hell. I watch the mutton bake.


^^EOP^^




ou plutôt les chanter



Recite your lines aloud, Ronsard advised,Or, even better, sing them. Common speechHeld all the rhythmic measures that he prizedIn poetry. He had much more to teach,But first he taught that. Several poets paidHim heed. The odd one even made the grade,Building a pretty castle on the beach.But on the whole it’s useless to point outThat making the thing musical is partOf pinning down what you are on about.The voice leads to the craft, the craft to art:All this is patent to the gifted fewWho know, before they can, what they must doTo make the mind a spokesman for the heart.As for the million others, they are blessed:This is their age. Their slapdash in demandFrom all who would take fright were thought expressedIn ways that showed a hint of being planned,They may say anything, in any way.Why not? Why shouldn’t they? Why wouldn’t they?Nothing to study, nothing to understand.And yet it could be that their flight from rhymeAnd reason is a technically preciseResponse to the confusion of a timeWhen nothing, said once, merits hearing twice.It isn’t that their deafness fails to matchThe chaos. It’s the only thing they catch.No form, no pattern. Just the rolling diceOf idle talk. Always a blight before,It finds a place today, fulfills a need:As those who cannot write increase the storeOf verses fit for those who cannot read,For those who can do both the field is clearTo meet and trade their wares, the only fearThat mutual benefit might look like greed.It isn’t, though. It’s just the interchangeOf showpiece and attention that has beenThere since the cavemen took pains to arrangePictures of deer and bison to be seen To best advantage in the flickering light.Our luck is to sell tickets on the nightOnly to those who might know what we mean,And they are drawn to us by love of sound.In the first instance, it is how we singThat brings them in. No mystery more profoundThan how a melody soars from a stringOf syllables, and yet this much we know:Ronsard was right to emphasize it so,Even in his day. Now, it’s everything:The language falls apart before our eyes,But what it once was echoes in our earsAs poetry, whose gathered force defiesEven the drift of our declining years.A single lilting line, a single turnOf phrase: these always proved, at last we learn,Life cries for joy though it must end in tears.


^^EOP^^

How is it that you hold such influence over me:your practiced slouch, your porkpie hat at rakish angle,commending the dumpling-shaped lump atop your pelvis—as if we’ve one more thing to consider amidst the striptease of all your stanzas and all your lines—draws me down into the center of you: the prize peony,so that I’m nothing more than an ant whose singular laboris to gather the beading liquid inside you; bring it to light.I have never written a true poem, it seems. Snatchesof my salacious dreams, sandwiched together all afternoon at my desk, awaiting the dark visitation of The Word.When you arrive, unfasten your notebook, and recite,I am only a schoolboy with a schoolboy’s hard mind.You are the headmaster. Now you must master me.


^^EOP^^

There is something men and women living in housesDon’t understand. The old alchemists standingNear their stoves hinted at it a thousand times.Ravens at night hide in an old woman’s shoe.A four-year-old speaks some ancient language.We have lived our own death a thousand times.Each sentence we speak to friends means the oppositeAs well. Each time we say, “I trust in God,” it meansGod has already abandoned us a thousand times.Mothers again and again have knelt in churchIn wartime asking God to protect their sons,And their prayers were refused a thousand times.The baby loon follows the mother’s sleekBody for months. By the end of summer, sheHas dipped her head into Rainy Lake a thousand times.Robert, you’ve wasted so much of your lifeSitting indoors to write poems. Would youDo that again? I would, a thousand times.


^^EOP^^

How many miles to the borderwhere all the sky there isexists for the soul alone?Where the only breathersbreathing are constructedfrom some new electricityand the flowers are madeindestructible, and messagesfrom the dead arrive like calmwhite birds with a gift?One more night of spiritualice and we might all becomebirds, green birds frozen on a black winter branch.There is a drumming in the shadowsunder leaves: a million eight-eyedspiders on the march.The buckeyes beat themselves half to death against some lit-from-within screen.


^^EOP^^

Everyone comes here from a long way off(is a line from a poem I read last night).                              *     *     * Driving up 80 in the haze, they talked and talked.(Smoke in the air shimmering from wildfires.)His story was sad and hers was roiled, troubled.                             *     *     * Alternatively:A man and a woman, old friends, are in a theaterwatching a movie in which a man and a woman,old friends, are driving through summer on a mountain road.The woman is describing the end of her marriageand sobbing, shaking her head and laughingand sobbing. The man is watching the road, listening,his own more diffuse unhappiness in abeyance,and because, in the restaurant before the filmthe woman had been describing the end of her marriageand cried, they are not sure whether they are in the theateror on the mountain road, and when the timber truckcomes suddenly around the bend, they both flinch.                             *     *     * He found that it was no good trying to tellwhat happened that day. Everything he saidseemed fictional the moment that he said it,the rain, the scent of her hair, what she saidas she was leaving, and why it was importantfor him to explain that the car had been parkedunder eucalyptus on a hillside, and how velvetyand blurred the trees looked through the windshield;not, he said, that making fictions might not bethe best way of getting at it, but that nothing he saidhad the brute, abject, unassimilated qualityof a wounding experience: the ego in any tellingwas already seeing itself as a character, and a character,he said, was exactly what he was not at that moment,even as he kept wanting to explain to someone,to whomever would listen, that she had closed the doorso quietly and so firmly that the beads of rainon the side window didn’t even quiver.                             *     *     * Names for involuntary movements of the body—squirm, wince, flinch, and shudder—sound like a law firm in Dickens:“Mr. Flinch took off his black glovesas if he were skinning his hands.”“Quiver dipped the nib of his peninto the throat of the inkwell.”                             *     *     * The receptionist at the hospital morgue told himto call the city medical examiner’s office,but you only got a recorded voice on weekends.                            *     *     *Setup without the punchline:Three greenhorns are being measured for suitsby a very large tailor on Hester Street.                            *     *     *Once there were two sisters called Knock Me and Sock Me;their best friend was a bear named Always Arguing.What kind of animals were the sisters? one child asked.Maybe they could be raccoons, said the other.Or pandas, said the first. They could be pandas.                            *     *     *“Why?” he asked. “Because she was lonely,and angry,” said the friendwho knew her better,“and she’d run out of stories.Or come to the one story.”                            *     *     *It is good to sit down to birthday cakewith children, who think it is the entire pointof life and who, therefore, respect each detailof the ceremony. There ought to be a rule,he thought, for who gets to lick the knifethat cuts the cake and the rule should haveits pattern somewhere in the winter stars.Which do you add to the tea first, he’d asked,the sugar or the milk? And the child had said,instantly: “The milk.” (Laws as cooland angular as words: angular, sidereal.)                            *     *     *Stories about the distribution of wealth:Once upon a time there was an old manand an old women who were very, very poor.                            *     *     *How Eldie Got Her NameThe neighborhood had been so dangerous,she said, there was one summer when the mailmenrefused to deliver the mail. Her mothernever appeared and her grandmother,who had bought a handgun for protectionand had also taught her how to use it,would walk her to the post office for the sweet,singsong, half-rhymed letters that smelled,or that she imagined smelled, of Florida.She had, when she was ten, shot at an intruderclimbing in the window. The roar,she said, was tremendous and she doesn’t knowto this day whether she hit the man or not.(A big-boned young woman, skin the colorof the inside of some light-colored hazelnutconfection, auburn eyes, some plucked stringof melancholy radiating from her whole bodywhen she spoke.) Did her mama come back?They had asked. She never came back.The mail started up again but the letters stopped.Turned out she was good in school, and thatwas what saved her. She loved the laborof schoolwork. Loved finishing a projectand contemplating the neatness of her script.Her grandmother shook her head, sometimes,amused and proud, and called her “Little Diligence.”                            *     *     *Punchline without the setup:And the three nuns from Immaculate Conceptionnodded and smiled as they passed,because they thought he was addressing them in Latin.                            *     *     *He had known, as long as he’d known anything,that he had a father somewhere. When he was twelve,his mother told him why he had no shadow.                            *     *     *Because she, not her sister, answered the door,she was the first to hear the news.                            *     *     *A Ballad:He loved to watch that woman sew.She let her hair grow long for show.Riddle’s a needle (a refrain might go)and plainly said is thread.                            *     *     *She looked beautiful, and looked her age, too.She’d had a go at putting herself together;she had always had the confidence that,with a face like hers, a few touchesto represent the idea of a put-together lookwould do, like some set designer’s geniusminimalism. It had a slightly harridan effectand he remembered that it wasn’t what washeadlong or slapdash about her, but the waythey gestured, like a quotation, at an understandingof elegance it would have been boring to spell out,that had at first dazzled him about her.He felt himself stirring at this recognition,and at a certain memory that attended it,and then laughed at the thought that he hadactually stimulated himself with an analysisof her style, and she said, as if she were rememberingthe way he could make her insecure, “What?What are you smiling about?” and he said, “Nothing.”And she said, “Oh, yes. Right. I remember nothing.”                            *     *     *Two jokes walk into a bar.A cage went in search of a bird.A boy walks out in the morning with a gun.Three rabbis walk into a penguin.                            *     *     *In the other world the girls were named Eleanor and Filina,and one night it was very warm and they could not sleepfor the heat and the stillness, and they went outside,beyond the wall of their parents’ garden and into a meadow.It was a dark night, moonless, and the stars were so thickthey seemed to shudder, and the sisters stood a long timein the sweet smell of the cooling grasses, looking at the skyand listening in the silence. After a while they heard a stirringand saw that a pair of bright eyes was watching themfrom the woods’ edge. “Maybe it’s their friend, the bear,”one of the children said. “I don’t like this story,” said the other.


^^EOP^^

He was tall, lean, serious about his profession, said it disturbed him to see mismatched teeth. Squinting, he asked me to turn toward the light as he held an unglazed crown by my upper incisors. With a small brush he applied yellow, gray, pink, violet and green from a palette of glazes, then fired it at sixteen hundred  degrees. We went outside to check the final color, and he was pleased. Today the dentist put it in my mouth, and no one could ever guess my secret: there’s no one quite like me, and I can prove it by the unique shade of the ivory sculptures attached to bony sockets in my jaw. A gallery opens when I smile. Even the forgery gleams. 


^^EOP^^

Warsaw, October: rose-madder by four,the soldierly grey boulevards slipperywith tickets to winter. After forty years rebuilding,the Old Town is like this beautiful girl I knewwhose face was wheel-broken in a crash,and remade so well it was hard to say howshe looked wrong. I’d brought two questions here—holding them as if they might slip: who weremy mother’s people? Where did they die?In an attic-archive—deep card indexes, ink turned lilacwith age—I handed my questions to a love-laborerin a yarmulke; with sad palms and a shakeof the head he regretted that any answers nowlay probably beyond our reach. SoI abandoned questing and went back to tourism;joined the passeggiata, drank black tea, got stickiedunder sooty lime trees, saw boisterous children,all knees and elbows, skyline-caperingon the wall at the river-divide. Beyondtheir frail silhouettes against the petrol duskhuge cranes were moving, courtly, confident,building another new Warsaw across the Vistula.


^^EOP^^

I was just getting to that.But first, old age.If you could just let me finish.Once it was I who rudelyinterrupted proceedings: the chair rapped& called to order, but I seized from pendingapproval the minutes & ran off with the handsome mustachioed night watch. Matching wits we wound upjangling on a motelbureau in simultaneous alarm & ran down together to silence,Bide-a-Wee’s appointedguest in his sleep deceasedso far from home he didn’t knowa soul. A what? We heard  Gideons rustling in the drawer,& as we rifled the fellow’s bags before we fled, & fled, his time flew too,from his cuffs & collars flapping ahead.


^^EOP^^

Glove box rummages itself & dumps: fuzzy cough droppings & stuck (menthol) among them a misdirectional map intrigues me: say clotheslines’fripperies hopping the breeze off the alley & garbage lids clanging downhill to the sea: say therein the sea floesof penguins bobbing up to Argentine flamingos.How hard is it to get lost? Listen to lostuseless horses whingeing for home & hames, a lostgrail stuffed with dirt deaf to human legends long unstrung of sacred tune & lost, children prodded along in the loops of war,hopscotch mistake, the cast stoneskipped off the lake instead & lost the tournamentto the nice policeman there with the ice creamprecinct & his body buddy Dad. Dad declares he knowsby the spit & stripe of her this’s no one of his own, his kids mope, & he goes. Ear to ear I must look lucky at last, librarianat the dictionary of things looking-up ever sinceI hid in the glove box, pretending to be directions.


^^EOP^^

The merest suggestion of mouth
and I was ravenous—I filled the house
with chocolate, chestnuts, strudel,
blood sausage; I bathed in butter. 
A glimpse of tongue and I was undone,
simply a hint of heavy cream
and the wax came off in a greasy slab,
there were no cauldrons large enough. 
I imagined his body drawn in sections,
flank, ribs, and tenderloin, I rubbed
the blade to sparks, my stove walls
sweated, windows dripping. 
Afterwards the house was a shell.
My tongue: scorched white.
I had to staple my stomach
down to the size of a lichee nut. 
Thimbleful of broth, thimbleful
of gruel, the merest suggestion
floods my mouth with memory
so rich I practically drown.


^^EOP^^

around the house stood an
orchard of plum, apple and pear
a blackwalnut tree, one white pine,
groves of white oak and willow clumps
the home of Jessie was largely redwood 
blood, flesh and bone sprouted
inside her womb of redwood
for five generations
the trees now stand unpruned and wild 
after relocating so many years before the War
the seeds of Jessie have returned 
afternoon sunlight on the field
breezes moving grass and leaves
memories with family names wait
within the earth, the mountains,
the valley, the field, the trees


^^EOP^^

I take the bird on the woodpile,
separate it from its function, feather
by feather. I blow up its scale.
I make a whole life out of it:
everywhere I am, its sense of loitering
lights on my shoulder.


^^EOP^^

On a mountain flat with snow
a blue cloud
paints a last touch of life.
There’s endless harm in trying
a dead body on for size.
The gentleman stands out
in every detail, except color.
He considers his life of a madness
that breaks unexpected
(one boy had a sweetheart
he wore her hair round his finger
it kept it from falling off
with the rest)
or comes also if he composes it
(lift one eye shut, put
rifle butt in the slack jaw
of soldiers decomposing). He fell in love like a woman
in the folded arms
of a drying sweater:
touched one shoulder
and a whole platoon
was affixed with smiles.
Teeth already loose
falling from their envelopes
thick folded letters
in a dead white mist.


^^EOP^^

Of course we knew the “incidents,” the aura
of Divinity, duck-and-cover in the parking garage,
Gloria Swanson chinchilla redux, yes,
he’d been a bombshell—the eyes still sang
with the merriment of a punchbowl, fine wrists,
that dahlia neck, skin bleached with peroxide,
of course he swam in the nude, stashed gin
in the toilet tank, stored stockings in the freezer
so they wouldn’t run, had a thing for Adenauer,
played roulette with the .45 won in a Cuban dancehall,
raging along hallways, fathering four children,
feeling the eyes of the back stairs, beck of the undercurrent,
his own hand in his lap like an orphan,
of course he gardened in Dior, of course he was flagrant, 
but what escaped us was the way he peeked
into the neighbor’s kitchen drawers for something
he swore they’d stolen, beyond the foreground obligation,
aspiration insistent as a stuck car horn in the slow
blue hours of morning, discarded affection,
what escaped us was the dampness at the collarbone,
the delicacy of the pose (cigarette and upturned cheek),
the lingering by the kitchen knives, the bias cut
off the dressing gown, break and fall, tumbrel of illusion— 
and what we wanted to escape: that he was ruthless, beyond hope.


^^EOP^^

1. READING THE RESULTS 
I don’t move,
but the inside corner
of my right eye turns glassy,
then shatters, 
hands focus more sharply. 
I don’t move,
but the pigeon shudders
on the sill. 
The door opens to a maze
of wallpaper, family photos—
their bliss-frieze burns
the last unaffected corner of my sight,
like molten Karo. 
My husband’s mouth collapses,
and the air about his shoulders
has crystallized.
We don’t say a word,
all the noise is around us,
the letter, half-folded, on the desk,
an albatross, a dove.  
2. POSITIVE 
Because in those days there were no words
for such things I took handfuls of vitamins and slept
with a trumpet flower under my pillow, I ate
at the Kiev on Second Avenue at four every morning:
enormous boiled potato pierogis shivering in pools
of butter, little sides of sautéed onions, paper cups of pure
sour cream, Dr. Brown’s Cel-Ray, no ice, as chaser, 
but now when the call comes I’m sitting in the kitchen
with two plastic funnels over my breasts and the pump
on the coutner with its hydraulic suck and the cast iron
sputtering of eggs, the kids already bickering at table,
milk flowing into baby bottles, even now the word
heroin makes me feel the lovely way
a body can go slack from inside out.  
3. A SINGLE DROP 
I’d never paid much mind
     to my implements, but now
          I paint “Fire Engine Red” 
on the handle of my razor, a single drop
     on my nail clippers, one long
          stroke on my lethal toothbrush 
to cordon off my blood,
     I tend and sop each splash or seep,
          soiled band-aids, love-smeared sheets— 
every bleeding gum, torn hangnail,
     paper cut, scrape, gully  of cracked lip
          another hazard, each 
infectious throb now
     forever watched as I patrol
          my body’s raging arroyo 
in the family bathroom,
     to keep my children
          safe from me.  
4. PAPER GOWNS 
X-rays, lab coat, and me wearing
those delicate petals (gaping,
cold through the sleeves).
He asks me to extend my palms:
the motion is of pushing away. Breathe with your mouth, he says, soft
tup, tup, tup, along my spine,
as if checking a cantaloupe. 
There is a piece of gum
beneath the windowsill,
green imprint of a thumb.
We’re talking percentages, genotypes,
we’re talking bundled pharmaceuticals.
Studies, it seems, are inconclusive. 
I try to look at the big picture:
a talc-free rubber glove at the edge of the trash,
neither in, nor out. On the insurance card,
raised numbers, black ink worn away.
There's a girl on the street with her head back,
the strap of her dress falling carelessly.


^^EOP^^

This was my gig: white lace apron,
cut-out bra and crop. I crouched above him
every Thursday in the marble bathroom,
pissed on his bare chest as let him lick me dry.
He wasn’t the first to love the thought
of the redness of a bottom, mark of a heel. 
So when my ex dropped three tabs of sunshine
and decided I’d screwed his best friend,
I thought I knew what to expect. Hadn’t
the drag queen across the street, pistol-whipped,
sat silent on her folded raincoat? There is nothing
anyone can do

^^EOP^^




“first there is a word
the word is the song”



1 
song gives birth to
the song and dance
as the dance steps
the story speaks  
2 
the icy mountain water
that pierces the deep thirst
drums my fire
drums my medicine pouch  
3 
deep within my blood
a feather in the sky
foam on clear water
Tayko-mol!  
4 
free as the bear
and tall as redwoods
throb my blood roots
when spirits ride high  
5 
a valley ripe with acorns
and yellow poppies everywhere
as i stand here
dreaming of you  
6 
jolting my dream
an old man struggling
with an eel      his coat appears
disheveled and empty  
7 
in a sacred manner
i sang and waited
       a lick of your blood
       i must take, reverently, deer  
8 
for you, blue corn baby,
my thoughts
on a melody of love
sail the sky  
9 
around fire on my head
a rattlesnake hisses and slithers
then flies up      out of sight
fighting in sleep i cry out  
10 
the snake in my spine is tensing
for combat
thoughts become forced and tight
the air is a sharp knife  
11 
from under me today
the earth was pulled
balancing on a sharp mountain ridge
i search for a plain  
12 
Tayko-mol has not left us
but lives in the pulse
of our words, and waits
in the azure for us all


^^EOP^^

Nothing curves at sea,
and the men there die abruptly,
in imitation of the fact, except
when the ship rises higher than necessary
and then they must drop suddenly
but for a long time,
so that their deaths appear natural
in the end, and the women sweeping the coutyards
pause, thinking the dust
to be the cause of a specific dryness
in the mouth. They leave half of a
pastry to harden on a plate.
They leave all of the lemons and figs
in bowls. They leave fuschia
splattered on the stone steps leading
down to the bay. They carry their brooms
with them, keep sweeping the air,
cleaning it back to the sea.
They sweep the sand from the shore,
feet standing in neat little rows of foam.
Each at the edge of something when
the foghorns remind them:
they will not clearly remember it,
they will not altogether forget it.
They will wait for something to emerge,
like a man at sea carving his children
from soap. One woman will start the rumor
that the sea is deeper than necessary:
Tell her, when has anyone ever come back
for one day’s effort on earth?


^^EOP^^




for Gerard Malanga and Andy Warhol




                 First Day On The Job  
Shepherd him milk & sugar
12 o'clock among unicorns
time of blue veils
mummified Gramercy
My impressario message eaten up
ache in my crotch
I arrive at The Friends   I am sailing by way
of the sky 
bus September boat with vacant windows
thank-you I am weak
O friendly tamarack
                     I'm coming with my little chair
insignificant when you manhandle God 
End of my Poem 
my coat a lalop girl on a dead rock
something in the air with telephones
the twin end of the day
like an atlantic squall
I can't always voice
my lyricide     
                       Last Day On The Job  
Forget us: alpine flowers deer
I wasn't to last for long
Forget us beards escorted by dogs
coming out of the white portals for exercise
Send her back to California with his eyes
says the kind old Good Humor Man
Send YOU to Robespière's Thermidor
where your last day of fire a mountain
of children that come up to you & say
I don't remember meeting you Goodbye
fatal hour matrons Third Avenue
And unseen indescriminant princesses who shatter
wine bottles on the lumespento traffic lights
Catshit cloud overhead while you're king
of pencil-sharpeners!  
                                                                     1964
                                               From Andy Warhol's                                         (Intransit) Monster Issue


^^EOP^^

It's all in a day's work   the door from Life to Death 
Muhammed Ali comes in one door   and Russ Meyer comes in
    t' uther     While Ali
          Stages a CONFAB at 11.00 AM but doesn't
show all the cameras and tape-recorders are left 
With their tongues hanging out in the heat
Under the veranda I just recoveredd from food-poisoning & look up 
AUSTRALIA AND NEW ZEALAND SHAKE HANDS
        How'd you doo
It is prophetic I meet a child born at the same hour
and day as my oldest child
I learn   your Anglo   grandfather became the
           ArchArchimandrite
Of Alexandria “for all the Greeks downunder” 
MOHAMMED ALI GIVES his speech finally “On the
         Intoxications OF
         LIFE” (That's for Real, Folks) and tells one girl
sitting up near the stage to
pull her dress down because it was “showing”
above her knee   That's it it's all Over wham boom! 
Now Russ MEYER must be the “greatest” genius of America (?)
His “genius” lies   in that he is the only one to successfully
make blood spurt from a victim
on the silver screen like a slide trombone carying a hilarious note  
                                      .... So
many things have happened   The People's Liberation Army 
has seized the Israeli Ambassador ('Ray'.)   Bedford-
Stuyvesant exploded again   (I wonder what's happening
on Killens' block?)   and lava has overflowed on  (Mt) Aetna (again)
    Can't    keep upt with it all
This Hermaphrodite   running up and down the stairs with
a sword   Hey!
The doors slam open  the crowds emerge
Like an age ashamed of itself
Like an elephant with a  caulifflower ear      Some are doing 
           A St. Vitus dance and shooting fireworks
out of cactus-launchers  
You come toward me like a diffident haystack
I'm talking to you all the time you pretend not to hear me
You're with your two pals   (One of them the “returned” of the Boogey Woogies)   the road parts us   like a part in the hair
of the whole Earth   and splits me with it
The stars make a sound like a tuning-folk
Maybe I'm learning anew lanaguage to speak a newlanguage Maybe  
What is this   Cult of the Fedora hat
and the jalopy of the heart
Rose of Lima   Unbeliever that I am  I believe in you so much  
“Plebiscite”              “Dolores” 
                  .... 
                              “Quitting Time”
          Washerwomen in the elephant grass   're listening 
Once again I come upon an evening 5,000 mi. away from (New York)
the mirage of “The City” become so obsessive
    I see Skyscrapers appear moving through the fog
on horses' legs!
    “With no interjection..., oh?”
New York  my poems are always an elegy to you
The horses see me coming
the horses smell the sunset wing   Zapata...in whiteshadow
still rides on it
    Gold-club-headed exorcized Jewish demons
happily hopping backwards  
                                                                 May 25, 1971
                                                     2405 Alpine Road, Ca.


^^EOP^^




Pagano, the arc of night fallen



Ice on the underhanded lilies cakewalk
Underground, in the garage caverns of Galatian eocene
gift of the man in the panther-skin
trailed by detectives of the fanfare aboveworld
  hewer or warrior   of the blue muscles in the saga-like 
Cranial canopy of the newscast's morning December All are gone and connect him with the language
of light and darkness refusal   out of the   flowers of the staff
came a dove by that time the apple will be old and forgotten
in telecast streams of your eyes
wife in symphony of blue porcelain your symphony in blue  
                                                             Sometime, 1965
                                                                   Newark, N.J.


^^EOP^^

           “Sooner or later we'll all get to speak like Ted Berrigan”
A donkey might consider itself a white stallion
and the ear-phones oft the desert
                                                    tune into us
A hair-breaking pallor
    Nothing to be afraid of 
How long has the checker-board been “on the scene”? 
                                           It's the miracle she-wolf. 
I know I am “too serious”
For “The Daughters of Nothing already for Nothing”
Who will erase my ulcer
See its dry its dry it's got a combination
My friends.
What's left over?  Pagliacci. In the guise of Enrico Caruso bangs his drum with hysteric eyes
His girl-friend's inside he's beating the heart of his bass drum
O that crazy clown Pagliacci!
It seems we stood and talked like this before
Don't Grab from me Baby
I keep my face and open spigot a cry of the winds
Fall all your fresh newspapers 
Inquisitors
Happiness
It is the divine stone the white stone with the name
                                                      which no one knows  
                                                               New York City
                                                   On Ted's 31st Birthday


^^EOP^^




for Shari Lewis (1934-1998)



Once again, I've missed Lamb Chop's Play-Along
Which, as it is, isn't
broadcast in Papiamento, myself being the Centurion
of the English where I am  Aha! The Brook, Cherith running by here meaning
the while I can “compare notes” with Elijah
(Without a Jezebel to spook him!)
Although admittedly
in the movie Betty Davis is a winnter, ever quite
without a struggle
           Especially in the Waltz sequence 
Which continues to reverberate in my head. So that I ask 
“Is it, I, then, that am “The Revenant”? 
This McTalk
with its “scrolling windows”
can never answer. But just now, could use 
A bit of that compote of “stewed pears 
          With cinnamon” 
The discalced
                    Carmelite Sisters
fed San Juan De La Cruz
thus, nursing and resusciating him back
                                           to “health”
Which is, in itself, at best
         —a provisional state! 
Other than that,
          

^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

Mortal, if thou art beloved Life's offences are removed; All the fateful things that checked thee, Hearten, hallow, and protect thee. Grow'st thou mellow? What is age? Tinct on life's illumined page, Where the purple letters glow Deeper, painted long ago. What is sorrow? Comfort's prime, Love's choice Indian summer clime. Sickness!—thou wilt pray it worse For so blessed, balmy nurse. And for death! when thou art dying 'Twill be Love beside thee lying. Death is lonesome? Oh, how brave Shows the foot-frequented grave! Heaven itself is but the casket For Love's treasure, ere he ask it,— Ere with burning heart he follow, Piercing through corruption's hollow. If thou art beloved, oh then Fear no grief from mortal men.


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

O wind, thou hast thy kingdom in the trees,         And all thy royalties         Sweep through the land to-day.               It is mid June, And thou, with all thy instruments in tune,              Thine orchestraOf heaving fields and heavy swinging fir,               Strikest a lay               That doth rehearse Her ancient freedom to the universe.         All other sound in awe               Repeats its law:         The bird is mute; the sea         Sucks up its waves; from rain         The burthened clouds refrain, To listen to thee in thy leafery,               Thou unconfined, Lavish, large, soothing, refluent summer wind. 


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

Yea, gold is son of Zeus: no rust     Its timeless light can stain; The worm that brings man's flesh to dust     Assaults its strength in vain: More gold than gold the love I sing,A hard, inviolable thing.Men say the passions should grow old      With waning years; my heart Is incorruptible as gold,      'Tis my immortal part: Nor is there any god can layOn love the finger of decay.


^^EOP^^

A Girl,      Her soul a deep-wave pearl Dim, lucent of all lovely mysteries;      A face flowered for heart’s ease,      A brow’s grace soft as seas      Seen through faint forest-trees:      A mouth, the lips apart, Like aspen-leaflets trembling in the breeze     From her tempestuous heart.     Such: and our souls so knit,     I leave a page half-writ —            The work begun Will be to heaven’s conception done,            If she come to it.


^^EOP^^




Βροδοπαχεες αγναι Χαριτες, δεντε Λιος κοραι



  Ye rosy-armed, pure Graces, come,     Daughters of Zeus, be near! Oh, wherefore have my lips been dumb     So long in silence drear?And why have I so cheerless been,    So sorrowful and wild? It was because ye were not seen,    Because ye had not smiled.Although his prayer the Muses bless,    The poet doth requireThat ye, in frolic gentleness,    Should stand beside his lyre.Ne’er will he mortal ear delight,      Nor care-vex’d spirit ease;Except he sing with ye in sight,     Rose-flushed among the trees.


^^EOP^^

The abracadabra boys—have they been in the stacks and cloisters? Have they picked up languages for throwing into chow mein poems?
Have they been to a sea of jargons and brought back jargons? Their salutations go: Who cometh? and, It ith I cometh.
They know postures from impostures, pistils from pustules, to hear them tell it. They foregather and make pitty pat with each other in Latin and in their private pig Latin, very ofay.
They give with passwords. “Who cometh?” “A kumquat cometh.” “And how cometh the kumquat?” “On an abbadabba, ancient and honorable sire, ever and ever on an abbadabba.”
Do they have fun? Sure—their fun is being what they are, like our fun is being what we are—only they are more sorry for us being what we are than we are for them being what they are.
Pointing at you, at us, at the rabble, they sigh and say, these abracadabra boys, “They lack jargons. They fail to distinguish between pustules and pistils. They knoweth not how the kumquat cometh.”


^^EOP^^




       (for Phil Garrison and Peter Lamborn Wilson)



       As ashes are the shadow of smoke,
      panic is the shadow of light,
      beef the shadow of grass,
      love the shadow of attention,
      psychology the shadow of plastic
      the shadow of oil the shadow
      of giant ferns the shadow of
      bacteria the shadow of light’s grandmother,
      rosy finch the shadow of loon,
      jealousy & myth twin shadows of desire,
      Europe shadow of a desert river,
      idea the shadow of pain,
      sleep the shadow of bread,
      liquid the shadow of lust,
      time the shadow of
      et cetera,
logos is the shadow of what happens. 
      Take some broad-shouldered little fart, at las-
t, fresh from the 5 o’clock (morn) shadow of barbarism,
squatting over barley-paste, hot goat, dried fig
      (meal the shadow —
              since the shadows were removed
              from rocky Grecian hills, trees cut away,
              soil reduced to olive grounds —
                   down to shadow of surroundings —
      of Homeric
      heaps of meat that cast deadanimal-shaped shadows
      by the tents on the sandy shores of Ilium)
      squatting over his shapeless shadow in the shadow of the Parthenon —
      itself
                                 shadow form from wood, “in the light of”
                                 stone. Well now, there’s been some
                                 organized ruckus in his medium, rare town, which,
                                 God knows, nobody there “thought” would
                                 survive, a golden paradigm, for thousands of
                                 Apollonian twirls. Who knows what they thought
                                 of what they thought? It must’ve
      been intensely local; that
      the universe crept into
      valley code was just
      brain refreshment. Dirt was all
      around. Some bright body shambled
      the streets — in mud & heat — barely
      shook his bald, Why is the sky
      blues into registration, virgin
      ears & experienced buttholes,
as the shadow of estrangement from
a bloody dream’s red tape, & got chemicaled,
but Mr. Broad Wit seized
evaporation from the street to isolate
spirit of
spearmint from what had always gone before.
Summer was a-comin’ in still (Lawdy!
sing coo-coo!), facts & symbols
be-danced & babblin’
beat of a million bovine feet
upon the tender luxury
      sidewinding from the brain.
            So he thought “Thought!” Why not?
Natural! in a sense. Never before
had such perfect innocence been explored
like new property.
Well, such a new idea as “idea”
looks pretty good till you can check out how it settles into the ground.
Blood’s biodegradable but logos
piled up like a plastic eyesore, fore-
shadowed a bloodless dry reign,
precipitation of pedestrain pedantry,
pedestrian mind for millenia, postulating
its pustulations of post- & pre-, professing
everything, subjugating us all in the tick-tech
burned-out success of a nob objectivity,
turning babble to a soapy
bubble up up & away until pop!
goes the wizard. 
Aw c’mon, the alchemy that pilfers
from golden sundance volumes of German silver
sucks tongue of essence —
ah yes, essence, with its can-do incandescence,
like “Lovelight’s our leverage to spring some uptight average
from alla this quotidian sewage
& italicize it, boot it through the uprights
to an airy footnote.” 
So anyway this guy imagined up God outa the play-dough
of his panicked exclusions
& then compounded the felony by trying to imitate the damn thing,
double-indemnity solipsism in the fool’s guise of cool & wise
utopian Republic! Razional! Sozialismus!
Computerized zoosphere! Hologram rain forest — a more direct
use of light.
But despite all right & crystal wings, thinking
that — “The-variability-of-the-world-has-no-more-reality-than-the-shadows-on-a-cave-wall”—
has no more reality than
Plato’s reflection in the waters
of a Theater-of-Dionysus Port-O-Let. 
Well, he thought he was correting a mess
& left a mess of
shadows for our meat.
If unity really strung out from above,
not shot up from below, we’d have
no babies to throw out with
anybody’s rationalized bathwater. 
Islands in the stream
of biosphere placidly gavotte
drinking play-tonic sprinkled geo-
metrically, until the teleology
becomes archaic — & eats it too.
The world pole-flips one more time, mechanically geo-
mantric, shakes the pants off of objective
dance to reveal gradual chance, just
numbers having a ball, as the rationale
of it all. 
Back up a hemidemisecond! My better half
says — “In the winter the house is all shadow.”
But the long hot summer of essentialism
“was” a system of no resistance —
& all the psychological shit that makes a
toilet contemplative, inner-directed: a pure good-bye. 
Yet it was hard (abstract thought),
difficult to invent, like anything you can’t
immediately step on, phrase or foot — 
      (& 4 is the shadow of 3 is the shadow of 2 is the shadow of 1
      & old is the shadow of Jung
      & red is the shadow of orange
      & dots the shadow of dot
      & hand is the shadow of and
      however the shadow of breath
      & season the shadow of winter
      the step the shadow of the gesture
      & soprano is the shadow of the star
      & ring’s shadow is “orange”
      & window shadow of the shadow.) 
—after all, Empedocles
& Anaximander had
illuminated life as shadows of whatever, up from sea-slime,
dissolving to the harmony of a sphere. 
Logos, in the light, is only haze,
a honey-head, that the shape
be kept as “beautiful.” 
(& the shadow structure
is the real — it’s not being looked at
nor still distorted by leftover rays in the shadowee,
nor in such relation to light as shadowing implies:
once you’ve taken in the light,
you’re artificially simple for good — bedazzled.
Chiaroscuro conjures up dichotomy — Step 1,
then, as it loses all idea to total presence,
becomes invisible enough.
& we’re home.
Lightning strikes — OK.
Half-known moves around the kitchen.
The cereal box is food for thought.
Is it easier to be right when you’re already wrong?
Hmm, cool today; better pull on my dark-blue paradigm.
The quality of nothing is not strained,
but saying so’s tense like a cartoon zebra.
“The variability of the world”
— incidental winks of it start to party into view —
absolutely hot & cool, at the moment,
is, & likely to remain so.) 
      Eat a fig. Drink some coffee. Went driving
      today ’73 bug mid-Sunday plus live-in sweetie
      over littered subtle prairie out to Erie where we
      coffee smoke four baconstrips & country fries breathed in the
      work like hell old dirt streets & east to Firestone Screwball pool coke
      & ice Route 52 two dozen silver queen Indian corn
      Valmont Road yellow plum tomatoes cloudy light above
      Kiowa Peak stoplight bickyard pond by Public Service.


^^EOP^^




(for the Barteks)




up at 7, dress & cook an egg
black with pan soot, eat with
hot bread and butter
binoculars, book, notebook, 2 baloney sandwiches
& a peanutbutter 
english sparrows singing as I walk to Hotel Yancey
pigeons wheel
above grand island
coffee & the world-herald
Saturday 7:30 in their elegant warm cafe 
Vera Coons comes in her green car
we pick up her friend Bea while
speaking of Canada geese
I hear a cardinal
startling, we see a cardinal
crows flying
we’re driving south on highway 281
cornfields, bright day, temp. 21 
hit the Platter Restaurant where George
Stoppekotte sits in his pickup
he climbs in, we all sit & talk & wait for Bill Schleicher
“if they take all the water out of the Platte River, by God,
we folks here are gonna sit with our fingers dry” 
Bill comes with Harley Kandish, shuffle around
George & Bill lead off in the pickup, Harley rides with us
cross the Platte, gray with ice
sunlight
heading west 
sparrow hawk on a low fence
“when you talk about wild asparagus, those 2 guys
spot it where no one else does”
we stop, check out black blobs
in the trees, George says they
spotted wild geese
a magpie, we all drive on
— I train my binocs on the passing trees
(black Angus in bright yellow corn)
stop again, geese
“ — put a spot of salt in everything she made”
“your dipstick’ll boil that oil eventually
then you can’t get the darn varnish out”
2 ducks — scaup? goldeneye? meadowlark in a tree 
we see an eagle
white-headed, gargantuan, in cottonwood
by river back — we drink
coffee — high spirits — everybody talks at once of
Spanish peanuts — postum — people
killing eagles being sick — where we’re going —
once Harley saw an eagle & a bluebird & a beaver
all in the same spot
in Colorado 
& another eagle! closer perched upright, dark-bodied
turning its arctic head
in the light 
drive on
ducks (buffleheads?) on Bufflehead pond
hundreds of geese flap into a field &
mass there
giant trucks whiz by 
we’re 49 miles from grand island, turn south
pass piles of mallards in a pond
goldfinches lilt by
turn east
pass restored Fort Kearney
hey — great horned owl on a telephone pole
now he’s sitting on a haystack!
“there was a crippled pelican down on Steen Lake
a long while”
I’ve got pelicans on my socks 
stop & piss in a refuge
Bill says “we saw an immature on a haystack once
& he was dead — not a wound on him.
maybe he at a poison mouse”
thought I heard a woodpecker pecking but it was
the pickup cooling off —
but there is a fat little downy there, we look —
english sparrows out here
sounds erupt
like a whale under the pond ice 
stop for lunch here
last baloney sandwich, Vera’s coffee, cigarette
at a red picnic table by the pond &
more sandwiches, pickles, from Vera
chickadee sings
talk
“there’s something about a deer —
couldn’t shoot one” 
“this was back when the Prince of Wales
toured the country,
they entertained him at Swift & Company.
my sister-in-law was secretary to
Old Man Swift.
well she saw the Prince standing there looking forlorn
& took a glass of water up to him & asked if he was thirsty
and he was” 
“I was Secretary of Equitable Finance for 47 years”
talk of city politics & economics
& ecological
considerations, & we leave,
drive east 
glittering corn
3 mergansers on a pond
fly off
another eagle
Platte River iced with curving channels open
brown islands, everywhere
shit, beautiful round brick barn
young bald eagle flapping & soaring up
— 2 more, sitting in trees
— another, white-headed, closer,
sits in massive stillness,
then takes off! soars!
flashing snow light from tail & head
— drive a bit, stop & 3 more are seen
sitting among strings & bunches of brown ducks that
continually pour into & out of some
body of water there 
“majestic” we say
in such majesty so multiplied
still majestic
in so much left & right of ducks?
drive on
blue lake changes from brown to silver as we pass 
“there’s somebody’s little broken dream”
we walk into a sanctuary
Bill hands out peanuts in the shell
points out diamond willow
(chipping sparrow), through woods
I climb green tower & look out upon islands & channels of the Platte
“that’s alkali,
you put your finger in it & lick it & it’s just like salt”
badger hole
wild plum
“I don’t stomp em, I just throw em in there
stems & all”
“ — that’s due process” 
back to the car — banana, chocolate
warm day now
talk about Greeks fixing lamb —
too much 
midafternoon, sit & talk
motors start
“sunflower” “cherry wood” talk, east again
loggerhead (?) shrike flies off
flicker
meadowlarks all over sides of the road
chipping sparrow with his
white line over eye,
black-bordered chestnut cap
George saw 7 robins in a tree
nothern robin in a russian olive 
paved road
windmills
walk to river & scan black spots — all nests
blue ice, blue sky
straggled brown horizon
white posts in the river
purple & yellow
black
hawk hovering over a field
marsh hawk?  no, red-tail —
fox squirrel way off
gray cliffs of snow in the ditch
2 hairies on a post
“I wanted to go up to Baribou to see the circus museum”
pumphouse with purple shingles
shrike 
goblin shapes of field wood
panoramic freight train view
nameless little town
wave at man burning stumps
talk of water
& we slowly drive through country
wide cornfields keep us from the trees
the eagles sit in
“I just always have lip-ice”
2 hawks —
complex identification discussion, or debate, and I maintain:
ferruginous rough-leg
nearing doniphan 
roads zigzag along the cardinal directions
following slow northward Platte curve
eagle again —
flapping & soaring across our path, distant —
field of lemon yellow
cooling off, sunlight graying
Swainson’s hawk above our heads, says Vera
“there’s a policeman’s car & it says ‘Whites’
live there” ...
“now they collect
interest instead of apples” 
back to the Platter
people split off
north into city
nearly five o’clock
clouds lit yellow-gray in the west
twelve eagles in our wake
& legions not seen, motionless on cottonwood braches
they don’t care
& I care but it’s ok
“beautiful day”
“beautiful day” 
looking into the sun
makes it all seem
light & dark 
home — mara & sierra
fed ducks today
sierra showed me her new
blue car


^^EOP^^

The buffaloes are gone.And those who saw the buffaloes are gone.Those who saw the buffaloes by thousands and how they pawed the prairie sod into dust with their hoofs, their great heads down pawing on in a great pageant of dusk,Those who saw the buffaloes are gone.And the buffaloes are gone.


^^EOP^^

Surrounded by bone, surrounded by cells,
by rings, by rings of hell, by hair, surrounded by
air-is-a-thing, surrounded by silhouette, by honey-wet bees, yet
by skeletons of trees, surrounded by actual, yes, for practical
purposes, people, surrounded by surreal
popcorn, surrounded by the reborn: Surrender in the center
to surroundings. O surrender forever, never
end her, let her blend around, surrender to the surroundings that
surround the tender endo-surrender, that
tumble through the tumbling to that blue that
curls around the crumbling, to that, the blue that
rumbles under the sun bounding the pearl that
we walk on, talk on; we can chalk that
up to experience, sensing the brown here that’s
blue now, a drop of water surrounding a cow that’s
black & white, the warbling Blackburnian twitter that’s
machining midnight orange in the light that’s
glittering in the light green visible wind. That’s
the ticket to the tunnel through the thicket that’s
a cricket’s funnel of music to correct & pick it out
from under the wing that whirls up over & out.


^^EOP^^

It is all kind of lovely that I know
what I attend here now the maturity of snow
has settled around forming a sort of time
pushing that other over either horizon and all is mine 
in any colors to be chosen and
everything is cold and nothing is totally frozen 
soon enough
the primary rough
erosion of what white fat it will occur
     stiff yellows O
beautiful beautifully austere
     be gotten down to, that much rash and achievement that
             would promote to, but 
now I know my own red
network electrifying this welcome annual hush.


^^EOP^^




                                for Paul Levitt




Be perpendicular to the basket,
toes avid for the line. 
Already this description
is perilously abstract: the ball
and basket are round, the nailhead
centered in the centerplank
of the foul-circle is round,
and though the rumpled body
isn’t round, it isn’t
perpendicular. You have to draw
“an imaginary line,” as the breezy 
coaches say, “through your shoulders.”
Here’s how to cheat: remember
your collarbone. Now the instructions
grow spiritual—deep breathing,
relax and concentrate both; aim
for the front of the rim but miss it
deliberately so the ball goes in.
Ignore this part of the clinic 
and shoot 200 foul shots
every day. Teach yourself not to be
bored by any boring one of them.
You have to love to do this, and chances
are you don’t; you’d love to be good
at it but not by a love that drives
you to shoot 200 foul shots
every day, and the lovingly unlaunched
foul shots we’re talking about now—
the clinic having served to bring us
together—circle eccentrically
in a sky of stolid orbits
as unlike as you and I are
from the arcs those foul shots
leave behind when they go in.


^^EOP^^

Each of them must have terrified
his parents by being so big, obsessive
and exact so young, already gone
and leaving, like a big tipper,
that huge changeling’s body in his place.
The prince of bone spurs and bad knees. 
The year I first saw them play
Malone was a high school freshman,
already too big for any bed,
14, a natural resource.
You have to learn not to
apologize, a form of vanity.
You flare up in the lane, exotic
anywhere else. You roll the ball
off fingers twice as long as your
girlfriend’s. Great touch for a big man,
says some jerk. Now they’re defunct
and Moses Malone, boy wonder at 19,
rises at 20 from the St. Louis bench,
his pet of a body grown sullen
as fast as it grew up. 
Something in you remembers every
time the ball left your fingertips
wrong and nothing the ball
can do in the air will change that.
You watch it set, stupid moon,
the way you watch yourself
in a recurring dream.
You never lose your touch
or forget how taxed bodies
go at the same pace they owe,
how brutally well the universe
works to be beautiful,
how we metabolize loss
as fast as we have to.


^^EOP^^




                           for Richard Hugo




The Rev. Royal Filkin preaches
tomorrow on why we are sad.
Brethren, Montana’s a landscape
requiring faith: the visible
government arrives in trucks,
if you live out far enough.
If you live in town, the government’s
gone, on errands, in trucks. 
Let citizens go to meetings,
I’ll stay home. I hate a parade.
By the time you get the trout
up through the tiny triangular
holes in the Coors cans, they’re so
small you have to throw them back.
Glum miles we go
to Grandmother’s house. 
The earth out here doesn’t bear us
up so much as it keeps us out,
an old trick of the beautiful.
Remember what Chief Left Hand said?
Never mind. Everything else
was taken from him,
let’s leave his grief alone.
My Eastern friends ask me 
how I like it in the West,
or God’s country, as it’s sometimes
called, though God, like a slumlord,
lives in the suburbs: Heaven.
And I don’t live “in the West”;
I live in this canyon among a few
other houses and abandoned
mines, vaccinations that didn’t take.


^^EOP^^

9:13 p.m., Lucky Bock in hand,
I inscribe: walked the lovely
33 blocks to school today, streets clear and
thick melting snow all around.
taught my 4 hours of poetry; the afternoon
class was hard; kid named Schweikert
kept on fucking up. took typed-up
poems of yesterday to Platt and put up
poster there of Anne and Reed’s reading Sat.
ate nearly 2 peanutbutter sandwiches with
raw carrots. typed. read kids’ poems.
at 4 I started home, got a ride
with Jim Bay. press release to daily paper.
stopped in Baird’s for 2 beers,
looked at paper. home, kissed Mara, Sierra.
in the mail: Out There, from Chicago, and a letter
stating the city of Grand Island had decided not
to prosecute re my arrest
Friday for intoxication. wonder why. Nick
the landlord didn’t show (he was supposed to
have us sign lease on the new duplex) (this place
gonna be torn down). ate
a very delicious supper, ham-and-cheese
rarebit with cold broccoli and cold oregano’d
tomato, cooked by Mara. paperwork, played a
game of solitaire, harried by Sierra’s
new red car. dropped over then
to the Korner Bar, put up a poster under the phone sign, said hi
to a few folks and got halloo’d by this guy I’d
spoken to 2 months before, who’d said his high
school son adored me, but it might be thought improper
that I hang around, shoot pool in Korner Bar.
a beefy mid-30’s man, he bought me a beer, apologized and
told me of his luck: he’d won a thousand one-hundred eighty
dollars today betting on one horse at Fonner Park.
we talked of poetry, family, work — he mentioned Kilmer,
Stevenson, Nash and others, quoted verbatim
his own published poem on fire-fighting (he is the G.I.
fire-chief). his boyhood favorites, whom he reads all of
even now: Edgar Rice Burroughts and Jules Verne. his son,
though epileptic, does the high jump at the high school; he was
disturbed that it wasn’t the broad jump, in which he
himself still holds a record, set in 1959.
the taxes have jumped up like crazy on their nice
spread just inside the city limits. I got up and
slapped him on the back and left, stopping first to ask
Clark, standing end of the bar, what he knew
of me on Friday night at the Kyriss. I’d blanked out
completely (woke up in jail, ate
blue oatmeal). he said I’d just got drunk, he thought Rod
had taken me home. he said, at one point,
just waking up, I’d grabbed the edge of the table and
tilted it till the glasses all came sliding
down and almost off, then tilted it back till they
slid back to where they were, and never spilled a drop.
he said I’d bought some beers for him and Pat but
before they could get to them drank
them up myself. okay, Clark, you’re a good guy with your
black curly hair and toothless grin, and your wild life. I was just
wondering. check with Rod when have a chance. —
and off, through mud and occasionally-lighted puddles,
home, where Mara’s napping still and there are (were)
5 Lucky Bocks in the white (today!) icebox. 9:50.  
           (no. 2) 
after finishing that
(immediately after, during, in
fact) the
strange thing is there’s so much left out.
last night finished reading The Vicar of Wakefield. the bluejays and cardinals that called
on the way to school. my beard
suddenly seems soft (that thought
off some day-dreaming about talking to
poetry students). reread
(for the last “making” time) “the 14,” the magazine; it is
all set. the poems
there, here now, seemed so abstract,
compared with what I’m used to,
but that in a way intensely and properly shaking
feeling and talk, tonight. the
revolution
(Mara gets up, starts drinking Pepsi)
and all that. (yellow sweater).


^^EOP^^




There is another world,
but it is in this one.

                    Paul Eluard




First there were those who died
before I was born.
It was as if they had just left
and their shadows would
slip out after them
under the door so recently closed
the air in its path was still
swirling to rest.
Some of the furniture came from them,
I was told, and one day
I opened two chests
of drawers to learn what the dead kept. 
But it was when I learned to read
that I began always
to live among the dead.
I remember Rapunzel,
the improved animals
in the Just-So Stories, and a flock
of birds that saved themselves
from a hunter by flying in place
in the shape of a tree,
their wings imitating the whisk
of wind in the leaves. 
My sons and I are like some wine
the dead have already bottled.
They wish us well, but there is nothing
they can do for us.
Sebastian cries in his sleep,
I bring him into my bed,
talk to him, rub his back.
To help his sons live easily
among the dead is a father’s great work.
Now Sebastian drifts, soon he’ll sleep.
We can almost hear the dead
breathing. They sound like water
under a ship at sea. 
To love the dead is easy.
They are final, perfect.
But to love a child
is sometimes to fail at love
while the dead look on
with their abstract sorrow. 
To love a child is to turn
away from the patient dead.
It is to sleep carefully
in case he cries. 
Later, when my sons are grown
among their own dead, I can
dive easily into sleep and loll
among the coral of my dreams
growing on themselves
until at the end
I almost never dream of anyone,
except my sons,
who is still alive.


^^EOP^^




(We can succeed only by concert. . . . The dogmas of the quiet past are inadequate to the stormy present. The occasion is piled high with difficulty, and we must rise with the occasion. As our case is new so we must think anew and act anew. We must disenthrall ourselves. . . . December 1, 1862. The President’s Message to Congress.)



Be sad, be cool, be kind,
remembering those now dreamdust
hallowed in the ruts and gullies,
solemn bones under the smooth blue sea,
faces warblown in a falling rain. 
Be a brother, if so can be,
to those beyond battle fatigue
each in his own corner of earth
      or forty fathoms undersea
      beyond all boom of guns,
      beyond any bong of a great bell,
      each with a bosom and number,
      each with a pack of secrets,
each with a personal dream and doorway
and over them now the long endless winds
      with the low healing song of time,
      the hush and sleep murmur of time. 
Make your wit a guard and cover.
Sing low, sing high, sing wide.
Let your laughter come free
remembering looking toward peace:
“We must disenthrall ourselves.” 
Be a brother, if so can be,
to those thrown forward
for taking hardwon lines,
for holding hardwon points
      and their reward so-so,
little they care to talk about,
their pay held in a mute calm,
highspot memories going unspoken,
what they did being past words,
what they took being hardwon.
      Be sad, be kind, be cool.
          Weep if you must
      And weep open and shameless
          before these altars. 
There are wounds past words.
There are cripples less broken
than many who walk whole.
      There are dead youths
      with wrists of silence
      who keep a vast music
      under their shut lips,
what they did being past words,
their dreams like their deaths
beyond any smooth and easy telling,
having given till no more to give. 
      There is dust alive
with dreams of The Republic,
with dreams of the Family of Man
flung wide on a shrinking globe
      with old timetables,
      old maps, old guide-posts
      torn into shreds,
      shot into tatters
      burnt in a firewind,
      lost in the shambles,
      faded in rubble and ashes. 
      There is dust alive.
Out of a granite tomb,
Out of a bronze sarcophagus,
Loose from the stone and copper
Steps a whitesmoke ghost
Lifting an authoritative hand
In the name of dreams worth dying for,
In the name of men whose dust breathes
      of those dreams so worth dying for,
what they did being past words,
beyond all smooth and easy telling. 
Be sad, be kind, be cool,
remembering, under God, a dreamdust
hallowed in the ruts and gullies,
solemn bones under the smooth blue sea,
faces warblown in a falling rain. 
Sing low, sing high, sing wide.
Make your wit a guard and cover.
Let your laughter come free
like a help and a brace of comfort. 
      The earth laughs, the sun laughs
over every wise harvest of man,
over man looking toward peace
by the light of the hard old teaching:
      “We must disenthrall ourselves.”


^^EOP^^

They made a myth of you, professor,
     you of the gentle voice,
     the books, the specs,
     the furitive rabbit manners
     in the mortar-board cap
     and the medieval gown. 
They didn’t think it, eh professor?
On account of you’re so absent-minded,
you bumping into the tree and saying,
“Excuse me, I thought you were a tree,”
passing on again blank and absent-minded. 
Now it’s “Mr. Attila, how do you do?”
Do you pack wallops of wholesale death?
Are you the practical dynamic son-of-a-gun?
Have you come through with a few abstractions?
Is it you Mr. Attila we hear saying,
“I beg your pardon but we believe we have made some degree of progress on the residual qualities of the atom”?                                                                                   [August, 1945]


^^EOP^^




(for the ghost of Johann Sebastian Bach)



He was born to wonder about numbers. 
He balanced fives against tens
and made them sleep together
and love each other. 
He took sixes and sevens
and set them wrangling and fighting
over raw bones. 
He woke up twos and fours
out of baby sleep
and touched them back to sleep. 
He managed eights and nines,
gave them prophet beards,
marched them into mists and mountains. 
He added all the numbers he knew,
multiplied them by new-found numbers
and called it a prayer of Numbers. 
For each of a million cipher silences
he dug up a mate number
for a candle light in the dark. 
He knew love numbers, luck numbers,
how the sea and the stars
are made and held by numbers. 
He died from the wonder of numbering.
He said good-by as if good-by is a number.


^^EOP^^

Essentially, for some time, in an effort
to determine whether I loved you or not,
I've been praying to you, even though
the inside of the tabernacle, as I thought,
is empty: oxygen, carbon dioxide,
brass, nickel, and a sheet, a sheet
of gilded plywood. (And in the rectory,
the housekeeper is cooking pasta, stamped
in the shape of shells, all of a uniform size
and color.) In an effort to determine,
in an effort to determine whether I loved you,
whether I loved you or not,
I learned old lovers are christs or bodhisattvas.
Slowly at first, and then with greater skill,
in an effort to determine whether I loved you,
I loved you or not,
I've been praying without knowing it,
in the daylight, in the white afternoon,
and singing, and singing with records,
my head tilted up into the black walnut,
the windows alive with listening ravens
to whom I sing about your boxy feet
with rind of callus at the heel,
(as elsewhere noted), your smiting eyes,
your nose pugged slightly, like Socrates,
your dark skin, your dark.
Your voice like a woodwind, a basset clarinet;
the wind you went out on, the wind you came in on,
your hair the color of a violin,
the unambiguous quality of many of your pronouncements,
i.e., the time you said I was tortured by life,
your eyes boring through me, right
for the wrong reasons, again.
The time in New Orleans you were so angry,
I was so drunk, lurching in the curio shops full of shells.
A shell grows around itself, folding over
the first pattern, calcified into a whorled shape, not dissimilar
to the whorl on the top of our two heads,
the pattern of gorgeous irreplaceable error,
and for a while the only assurance we belonged,
we belonged to the same species.
And the joy was piercing, this piercing joy
came up in me, a whirring train, night,
on the way home, somewhere before Memphis.
The singing in my ears. A hurricane,
a hurricane outside to my right was photographed from a satellite
even as a criminal was being printed,
his thumb whorl down, twisted clockwise,
and the trees out in the dark strained,
growing, forming knots, their flesh burled in the timedrift.
I've wondered: does the twisting hurt them,
and did all your turnings and hidings wound you
as they did me, and did you notice my imprint,
my concealment in that fold of air beside you,
when into your boxy feet and brown hands
nails, nails were driven,
when you got into that car and went west,
when you sat under that tree almost forever?


^^EOP^^

‘That creep Tolstoy,’ she sobbed.
‘He. . . He. . . couldn’t even. . .’
Something about his brother dying. 
The serfs’ punishments
have not ceased to suppurate on their backs.
Woodlots. People. Someone crying 
under the yellow
autumn birchgrove drove him
wild: A new set of resolves: 
When gambling, that almost obsolete fever,
or three days with the gypsies
sparked him into pure ego, he could, 
just the same, write home, ‘Sell them.’
It’s true. ‘Still,’ (someone who loved her said,
cold and firm while she dissolved,  hypocrite, in self disgust, lectrice)
‘Still, he kept on. He wrote
all that he wrote; and seems to have understood 
better than most of us:
to be human isn’t easy. It’s not
easy to be a serf or a master and learn 
that art. It takes nerve. Bastard. Fink.
Yet the grief
trudging behind his funeral, he earned.’


^^EOP^^

Why & what is sweetness all alone?
Either that or it becomes, alas, fleeting,
Which actually helps, because of rhythm.
& there’s a pale intensity to truth, no matter
How pale it is on the levels we receive on.
I mean, the minute you invent a time interval
The more it seems to “jelly out” the excitation
Of accidents; zum Beispiel, “Saginaw, Michigan.”
            After a while, we almost expect him or her
To inveigle us into a cafe without bay-breasted warblers.
It’s almost like we have a streak of orange-smell
Which nobody’ll pay for because they can’t talk to it,
Although that’s probably all wrong, or at least falsified
By its very mention, like gravity. Do you agree?


^^EOP^^

Here comes the powdered milk I drank
as a child, and the money it saved.
Here come the papers I delivered,
the spotted dog in heat that followed me home 
and the dogs that followed her.
Here comes a load of white laundry
from basketball practice, and sheets
with their watermarks of semen. 
And here comes snow, a language
in which no word is ever repeated,
love is impossible, and remorse. . . .
Yet childhood doesn’t end, 
but accumulates, each memory
knit to the next, and the fields
become one field. If to die is to lose
all detail, then death is not 
so distinguished, but a profusion
of detail, a last gossip, character
passed wholly into fate and fate
in flecks, like dust, like flour, like snow.


^^EOP^^


   We had the new Chevrolet steel Idyll, sky-blue metal with the salmon interior, A Sunset On Wheels.

   We had silver moving clowns, the most famous of which resembled our worst villain, which confused us. Little toothbrush mustaches.

   We had an abundance, for once, of chocolate and tobacco, and nearly everyone drank a sweet bubbly beverage flavored by a South American plant. It somewhat burned our nose and throat.

   My mood was sweet and even, the rain was warm driving down the road with the radio on. It played some lovely exciting tune. Then, an unctuous voice with news of war.

   You drove to work with your coffee between your legs, the line ahead pink near the tree line, your dashboard with serene green lights. In the back seat was a Wild Bill Hickock coloring book and a small sneaker. It read Red Ball Jets.

   You stumbled into the cold green sea, enervated, with a dry mouth, afraid you might step in a hole and drown. You can’t swim. The beach is ahead, some palm fronds wave. It’s beautiful, like Bali Hai, but there are planes descending ack ack ack, making filmic little fountains of sand where they strafe the beach. Finally, reaching the woods, and separated from your company, you all asleep.

   Some of your son’s crayons melted in the back window. Remember to scrape those up, or melt it with wax paper and an iron, as the newspaper instructed.

   Bring home the Butternut Bread, Fred.

   We each had Rangoon Night Market Noodles. They were salty, with pieces of duck. Then we went to a movie. Someone sat on my homburg. When it was over, we walked out stunned and embarrassed. Even mediocre films communicate with one’s childhood. The line of people waiting to get in examined us carefully. And for an hour after this, every little sound was delicious: the keys in our pocket, the creak of our seats, the bedsprings when we crawled into bed, effects in a soundtrack. Our sex was a little melodramatic, with a loopy grandeur. And afterwards we were so thirsty.

   We watched the solar eclipse in Dad’s welding helmet, his crusader’s helm, wobbling and blind.

   Our tongue always smarted with the astringent mint of the toothpaste when we moved to the bed, and she was always burning holes in her nylons with those goddamn Pell Mells.

   Sunday night you were alone in the farmhouse, near sunset. It had been a hot day, with cicadas humming in the corn, the sound rising into the hot blue silver. You took a bath, and when you walked into the living room, still a little wet, the curtains planed horizontal, and you could hear distant thunder. The radio was low, playing classical music. The corn leaves were active, but discreet. That night you sat on the front porch steps drinking your son’s Hi-C citrus cooler. A special events floodlight examined the horizon.

   Under a sky thick and like pewter, lying there reading with the window open, you heard a Brooklyn catbird imitate a car alarm, the series of warbles and chirps identical, and in the same sequence. The famous Car Alarm Bird.

   You like the way the brushes sound over the car radio when the drummer plays with a small ensemble. As the station gets further away, the sound of the brushes mixes with static, as though some small bright particles were bunched there at the end of his hands. You worry about the car when you leave the tarmac because the bottom pings with small stones from the hardpan. The red radio towers blink far ahead, and off to the right. Soon you move up under them.
                

^^EOP^^

There is a wolf in me . . . fangs pointed for tearing gashes . . . a red tongue for raw meat . . . and the hot lapping of blood—I keep this wolf because the wilderness gave it to me and the wilderness will not let it go.    There is a fox in me . . . a silver-gray fox . . . I sniff and guess . . . I pick things out of the wind and air . . . I nose in the dark night and take sleepers and eat them and hide the feathers . . . I circle and loop and double-cross.There is a hog in me . . . a snout and a belly . . . a machinery for eating and grunting . . . a machinery for sleeping satisfied in the sun—I got this too from the wilderness and the wilderness will not let it go.There is a fish in me . . . I know I came from salt-blue water-gates . . . I scurried with shoals of herring . . . I blew waterspouts with porpoises . . . before land was . . . before the water went down . . . before Noah . . . before the first chapter of Genesis.There is a baboon in me . . . clambering-clawed . . . dog-faced . . . yawping a galoot’s hunger . . . hairy under the armpits . . . here are the hawk-eyed hankering men . . . here are the blonde and blue-eyed women . . . here they hide curled asleep waiting . . . ready to snarl and kill . . . ready to sing and give milk . . . waiting—I keep the baboon because the wilderness says so.There is an eagle in me and a mockingbird . . . and the eagle flies among the Rocky Mountains of my dreams and fights among the Sierra crags of what I want . . . and the mockingbird warbles in the early forenoon before the dew is gone, warbles in the underbrush of my Chattanoogas of hope, gushes over the blue Ozark foothills of my wishes—And I got the eagle and the mockingbird from the wilderness.O, I got a zoo, I got a menagerie, inside my ribs, under my bony head, under my red-valve heart—and I got something else: it is a man-child heart, a woman-child heart: it is a father and mother and lover: it came from God-Knows-Where: it is going to God-Knows-Where—For I am the keeper of the zoo: I say yes and no: I sing and kill and work: I am a pal of the world: I came from the wilderness.


^^EOP^^




(From tablet writing, Babylonian excavations of the 4th millennium B.C.)



Bilbea, I was in Babylon on Saturday night.I saw nothing of you anywhere.I was at the old place and the other girls were there, But no Bilbea.Have you gone to another house? or city?Why don’t you write?I was sorry. I walked home half-sick.Tell me how it goes.Send me some kind of a letter.And take care of yourself.


^^EOP^^

1 
                               THE GESTURE 
The question is: how does one hold an apple
Who likes apples 
And how does one handle
Filth? The question is 
How does one hold something
In the mind which he intends 
To grasp and how does the salesman
Hold a bauble he intends 
To sell? The question is
When will there not be a hundred 
Poets who mistake that gesture
For a style.  
2 
                           THE LITTLE HOLE 
The little hole in the eye
Williams called it, the little hole 
Has exposed us naked
To the world 
And will not close. 
Blankly the world
Looks in 
And we compose
Colors 
And the sense 
Of home
And there are those 
In it so violent
And so alone 
They cannot rest.  
3 
                                  THAT LAND 
Sing like a bird at the open
Sky, but no bird
Is a man— 
Like the grip
Of the Roman hand
On his shoulder, the certainties 
Of place
And of time 
Held him, I think
With the pain and the casual horror
Of the iron and may have left
No hope of doubt 
Whereas we have won doubt
From the iron itself 
And hope in death. So that
If a man lived forever he would outlive
Hope. I imagine open sky 
Over Gethsemane,
Surely it was this sky.  
4 
                                   PAROUSIA 
Impossible to doubt the world: it can be seen
And because it is irrevocable 
It cannot be understood, and I believe that fact is lethal 
And man may find his catastrophe,
His Millennium of obsession. 
                                            air moving,
a stone on a stone,
something balanced momentarily, in time might the lion 
Lie down in the forest, less fierce
And solitary 
Than the world, the walls
Of whose future may stand forever.  
5 
                               FROM VIRGIL 
I, says the buzzard,
I— 
Mind 
Has evolved
Too long 
If ‘life is a search
For advantage.’ 
‘At whose behest 
Does the mind think?’ Art
Also is not good 
For us
Unless like the fool 
Persisting
In his folly 
It may rescue us
As only the true 
Might rescue us, gathered
In the smallest corners 
Of man’s triumph. Parve puer . . . ‘Begin, 
O small boy,
To be born; 
On whom his parents have not smiled 
No god thinks worthy of his table,
No goddess of her bed’


^^EOP^^

Her arms around me—child—
Around my head, hugging with her whole arms,
Whole arms as if I were a loved and native rock,
The apple in her hand—her apple and her father,
                   and my nose pressed
Hugely to the collar of her winter coat—. There
                   in the photograph 
It is the child who is the branch
We fall from, where would be bramble,
Brush, bramble in the young Winter
With its blowing snow she must have thought
Was ours to give to her.


^^EOP^^

How much do you love me, a million bushels?Oh, a lot more than that, Oh, a lot more.And tomorrow maybe only half a bushel?Tomorrow maybe not even a half a bushel.And is this your heart arithmetic?This is the way the wind measures the weather.


^^EOP^^

Truth also is the pursuit of it:
Like happiness, and it will not stand. 
Even the verse begins to eat away
In the acid. Pursuit, pursuit; 
A wind moves a little,
Moving in a circle, very cold. 
How shall we say?
In ordinary discourse— 
We must talk now. I am no longer sure of the words,
The clockwork of the world. What is inexplicable 
Is the ‘preponderance of objects.’ The sky lights
Daily with that predominance 
And we have become the present. 
We must talk now. Fear
Is fear. But we abandon one another.


^^EOP^^

1 
There are things
We live among ‘and to see them
Is to know ourselves’. 
Occurrence, a part
Of an infinite series, 
The sad marvels; 
Of this was told
A tale of our wickedness.
It is not our wickedness. 
‘You remember that old town we went to, and we sat in the ruined window, and we tried to imagine that we belonged to those times—It is dead and it is not dead, and you cannot imagine either its life or its death; the earth speaks and the salamander speaks, the Spring comes and only obscures it—’  
2 
So spoke of the existence of things,
An unmanageable pantheon 
Absolute, but they say
Arid. 
A city of the corporations 
Glassed
In dreams 
And images— 
And the pure joy
Of the mineral fact 
Tho it is impenetrable 
As the world, if it is matter,
Is impenetrable.  
3 
The emotions are engaged
Entering the city
As entering any city. 
We are not coeval
With a locality
But we imagine others are, 
We encounter them. Actually
A populace flows
Thru the city. 
This is a language, therefore, of New York  
4 
For the people of that flow
Are new, the old 
New to age as the young
To youth 
And to their dwelling
For which the tarred roofs 
And the stoops and doors—
A world of stoops—
Are petty alibi and satirical wit
Will not serve.  
5 
The great stone
Above the river
In the pylon of the bridge 
‘1875’ 
Frozen in the moonlight
In the frozen air over the footpath, consciousness 
Which has nothing to gain, which awaits nothing,
Which loves itself  
6 
We are pressed, pressed on each other,
We will be told at once
Of anything that happens 
And the discovery of fact bursts
In a paroxysm of emotion
Now as always.   Crusoe 
We say was
‘Rescued’.
So we have chosen.  
7 
Obsessed, bewildered 
By the shipwreck
Of the singular 
We have chosen the meaning
Of being numerous.  
8  Amor fati
The love of fate 
For which the city alone
Is audience 
Perhaps blasphemous. 
Slowly over islands, destinies
Moving steadily pass
And change 
In the thin sky
Over islands 
Among days 
Having only the force
Of days 
Most simple
Most difficult  
9 
‘Whether, as the intensity of seeing increases, one’s distance from Them, the people, does not also increase’
I know, of course I know, I can enter no other place 
Yet I am one of those who from nothing but man’s way of thought and one of his dialects and what has happened to me
Have made poetry 
To dream of that beach
For the sake of an instant in the eyes, 
The absolute singular 
The unearthly bonds
Of the singular 
Which is the bright light of shipwreck  
10 
Or, in that light, New arts! Dithyrambic, audience-as-artists! But I will listen to a man, I will listen to a man, and when I speak I will speak, tho he will fail and I will fail. But I will listen to him speak. The shuffling of a crowd is nothing—well, nothing but the many that we are, but nothing. 
Urban art, art of the cities, art of the young in the cities—The isolated man is dead, his world around him exhausted 
And he fails! He fails, that meditative man! And indeed they cannot ‘bear’ it.  
11 
            it is that light
Seeps anywhere, a light for the times 
In which the buildings
Stand on low ground, their pediments
Just above the harbor 
Absolutely immobile, 
Hollow, available, you could enter any building,
You could look from any window
One might wave to himself
From the top of the Empire State Building—  
Speak  
If you can  
Speak  
Phyllis—not neo-classic,
The girl’s name is Phyllis— 
Coming home from her first job
On the bus in the bare civic interior
Among those people, the small doors
Opening on the night at the curb
Her heart, she told me, suddenly tight with happiness— 
So small a picture,
A spot of light on the curb, it cannot demean us 
I too am in love down there with the streets
And the square slabs of pavement— 
To talk of the house and the neighborhood and the docks 
And it is not ‘art’  
12 
‘In these explanations it is presumed that an experiencing subject is one occasion of a sensitive reaction to an actual world.’ 
the rain falls
that had not been falling
and it is the same world 
. . . 
They made small objects
Of wood and the bones of fish
And of stone. They talked,
Families talked,
They gathered in council
And spoke, carrying objects.
They were credulous,
Their things shone in the forest. 
They were patient
With the world.
This will never return, never,
Unless having reached their limits 
They will begin over, that is,
Over and over  
13 
           unable to begin
At the beginning, the fortunate
Find everything already here. They are shoppers,
Choosers, judges; . . . And here the brutal
is without issue, a dead end.
                                            They develop
Argument in order to speak, they become
unreal, unreal, life loses
solidity, loses extent, baseball’s their game
because baseball is not a game
but an argument and difference of opinion
makes the horse races. They are ghosts that endanger 
One’s soul. There is change
In an air
That smells stale, they will come to the end
Of an era
First of all peoples
And one may honorably keep 
His distance
If he can.  
14 
I cannot even now
Altogether disengage myself
From those men 
With whom I stood in emplacements, in mess tents,
In hospitals and sheds and hid in the gullies
Of blasted roads in a ruined country, 
Among them many men
More capable than I— 
Muykut and a sergeant
Named Healy,
That lieutenant also— 
How forget that? How talk
Distantly of ‘The People’ 
Who are that force
Within the walls
Of cities 
Wherein their cars 
Echo like history
Down walled avenues
In which one cannot speak.  
15 
Chorus (androgynous): ‘Find me
So that I will exist, find my navel
So that it will exist, find my nipples
So that they will exist, find every hair
Of my belly, I am good (or I am bad),
Find me.’  
16 
‘. . . he who will not work shall not eat,
and only he who was troubled shall find rest,
and only he who descends into the nether world shall rescue his beloved,
and only he who unsheathes his knife shall be given Isaac again. He who will not work shall not eat. . .
but he who will work shall give birth to his own father.’  
17 
The roots of words
Dim in the subways 
There is madness in the number
Of the living
‘A state of matter’ 
There is nobody here but us chickens 
Anti-ontology— 
He wants to say
His life is real,
No one can say why 
It is not easy to speak 
A ferocious mumbling, in public
Of rootless speech  
18 
It is the air of atrocity,
An event as ordinary
As a President. 
A plume of smoke, visible at a distance
In which people burn.  
19 
Now in the helicopters the casual will
Is atrocious 
Insanity in high places,
If it is true we must do these things
We must cut our throats 
The fly in the bottle 
Insane, the insane fly 
Which, over the city
Is the bright light of shipwreck  
20 
—They await 
War, and the news
Is war 
As always 
That the juices may flow in them
Tho the juices lie. 
Great things have happened
On the earth and given it history, armies
And the ragged hordes moving and the passions
Of that death. But who escapes
Death 
Among these riders
Of the subway, 
They know
But now as I know 
Failure and the guilt
Of failure.
As in Hardy’s poem of Christmas 
We might half-hope to find the animals
In the sheds of a nation
Kneeling at midnight, 
Farm animals,
Draft animals, beasts for slaughter
Because it would mean they have forgiven us,
Or which is the same thing,
That we do not altogether matter.  
21 
There can be a brick
In a brick wall
The eye picks 
So quiet of a Sunday
Here is the brick, it was waiting
Here when you were born 
Mary-Anne.  
22 
Clarity 
In the sense of transparence,
I don’t mean that much can be explained 
Clarity in the sense of silence.


^^EOP^^

The sea-wash never ends.The sea-wash repeats, repeats.Only old songs? Is that all the sea knows?             Only the old strong songs?             Is that all?The sea-wash repeats, repeats.


^^EOP^^

1  Moving over the hills, crossing the irrigation
canals perfect and profuse in the mountains the
streams of women and men walking under the high-
tension wires over the brown hills 
                  in the multiple world of the fly

^^EOP^^

5 
THE TRANSLUCENT MECHANICS 
Combed thru the piers the wind
Moves in the clever city
Not in the doors but the hinges
Finds the secret of motion
As tho the hollow ships moved in their voices,   murmurs
Flaws
In the wind
Fear        fear
At the lumber mastheads
And fetched a message out of the sea again 
Say angel                say powers 
Obscurely   ‘things
And the self’ 
Prosody 
Sings 
In the stones 
          to entrust
To a poetry of statement 
At close quarters 
A living mind
‘and that one’s own’ 
                  what then             what spirit 
Of the bent seas 
                  Archangel 
of the tide
brimming 
in the moon-streak 
                  comes in whose absence
earth crumbles  
6 
Silver as
The needle’s eye 
Of the horizon in the noise
Of their entrance row on row the waves
Move landward        conviction’s 
Net of branches
In the horde of events the sacred swarm avalanche
Masked in the sunset 
Needle after needle more numerous than planets 
Or the liquid waves
In the tide rips 
We believe       we believe 
Beyond the cable car streets
And the picture window 
Lives the glittering crumbling night
Of obstructions and the stark structures 
That carry wires over the mountain
One writes in the presence of something
Moving close to fear
I dare pity no one
Let the rafters pity
The air in the room
Under the rafters
Pity
In the continual sound
Are chords
Not yet struck
Which will be struck
Nevertheless yes  
7 
O withering seas
Of the doorstep and local winds unveil 
The face of art  Carpenter, plunge and drip in the sea       Art’s face
We know that face 
More blinding than the sea    a haunted house    a limited 
Consensus unwinding 
Its powers
Toward the thread’s end 
In the record of great blows   shocks
Ravishment   devastation   the wood splintered 
The keyboard gone in the rank grass swept her hand
Over the strings and the thing rang out 
Over the rocks and the ocean
Not my poem   Mr Steinway’s 
Poem   Not mine   A ‘marvelous’ object
Is not the marvel of things 
                twisting the new
Mouth   forcing the new
Tongue   But it rang  
8 
THE TASTE 
Old ships are preserved
For their queer silence of obedient seas
Their cutwaters floating in the still water
With their cozy black iron work
And Swedish seamen dead    the cabins
Hold the spaces of their deaths
And the hammered nails of necessity
Carried thru the oceans
Where the moon rises grandly
In the grandeur of cause
We have a taste for bedrock
Beneath this spectacle
To gawk at
Something is wrong with the antiques, a black fluid
Has covered them, a black splintering
Under the eyes of young wives
People talk wildly, we are beginning to talk wildly, the wind
At every summit
Our overcoats trip us
Running for the bus
Our arms stretched out
In a wind from what were sand dunes  
9 
THE IMPOSSIBLE POEM 
Climbing the peak of Tamalpais the loose
Gravel underfoot 
And the city shining with the tremendous wrinkles
In the hills and the winding of the bay
Behind it, it faces the bent ocean 
Streetcars
Rocked thru the city and the winds
Combed their clumsy sides 
In clumsy times 
Sierras withering
Behind the storefronts 
And sanity the roadside weed
Dreams of sports and sportsmanship 
In the lucid towns paralyzed
Under the truck tires
Shall we relinquish 
Sanity to redeem
Fragments and fragmentary
Histories in the towns and the temperate streets
Too shallow still to drown in or to mourn
The courageous and precarious children  
10 
BUT SO AS BY FIRE 
The darkness of trees
Guards this life
Of the thin ground
That covers the rock ledge 
Among the lanes and magic
Of the Eastern woods 
The beauty of silence
And broken boughs 
And the homes of small animals 
The green leaves
Of young plants
Above the dark green moss
In the sweet smell of rot 
The pools and the trickle of freshwater 
First life,   rotting life
Hidden starry life it is not yet 
A mirror
Like our lives 
We have gone
As far as is possible 
Whose lives reflect light
Like mirrors 
One had not thought
To be afraid 
Not of shadow but of light 
Summon one’s powers


^^EOP^^

‘out of poverty
to begin 
again’    impoverished 
of tone of pose that common
wealth 
of parlance   Who
so poor the words  would   with   and   take on substantial 
meaning   handholds   footholds 
to dig in one’s heels   sliding 
hands and heels beyond the residential
lots   the plots   it is a poem 
which may be sung
may well be sung


^^EOP^^

The dogs barked, the dogs scratched, the dogs got wet, the dogs shook, the dogs circled, the dogs slept, the dogs ate, the dogs barked; the rain fell down, the leaves fell down, the eggs fell down and cracked on the floor; the dust settled,  the wood floors were scratched, the cabinets sat without doors, the trim without paint, the stuff piled up; I loaded the dishwasher, I unloaded the dishwasher, I raked the leaves, I did the laundry, I took out the garbage, I took out the recycling, I took out the yard waste.  There was a bed, it was soft, there was a blanket, it was warm, there were dreams, they were good. The corn grew, the eggplant grew, the tomatoes grew, the lettuce grew, the strawberries grew, the blackberries grew; the tea kettle screamed, the computer keys clicked, the radio roared, the TV spoke. “Will they ever come home?” “Can’t I take a break?” “How do others keep their house clean?” “Will I remember this day in fifty years?” The sweet tea slipped down my throat, the brownies melted in my mouth. My mother cooked, the apple tree bloomed, the lilac bloomed, the mimosa bloomed, I bloomed. 


^^EOP^^

Operation Phantom Fury.  *       *       *  The full force   of the will to live   is fixed   on the next   occasion:  someone   coming with a tray,  someone   calling a number.  *       *       *  Each material   fact   is a pose,  an answer   waiting to be chosen.  "Just so," it says.  "Ask again!"


^^EOP^^

would be coming back from some war, sending back stuffed birds or handkerchiefs in navy blue with Love painted  on it. Some sent telegrams for birthdays, the pastel letters like jewels. The  magazines were full of fathers who were doing what had to be done, were serving,  were brave. Someone yelped there’d be confetti in the streets, maybe no school. That soon we’d have bananas. My father sat in the grey chair, war after war, hardly said a word. I wished he had gone away with the others so maybe he would be coming back to us 


^^EOP^^

“Son,” said my mother,
   When I was knee-high, 
“You’ve need of clothes to cover you,
   And not a rag have I.
 
“There’s nothing in the house
   To make a boy breeches,
Nor shears to cut a cloth with
   Nor thread to take stitches.
 
“There’s nothing in the house
   But a loaf-end of rye,
And a harp with a woman’s head
   Nobody will buy,”      And she began to cry.
 
That was in the early fall.
   When came the late fall, 
“Son,” she said, “the sight of you   
   Makes your mother’s blood crawl,—
 
“Little skinny shoulder-blades
   Sticking through your clothes!
And where you’ll get a jacket from
   God above knows.
 
“It’s lucky for me, lad,
   Your daddy’s in the ground,
And can’t see the way I let
   His son go around!”
   And she made a queer sound.
 
That was in the late fall.
   When the winter came,
I’d not a pair of breeches
   Nor a shirt to my name.
 
I couldn’t go to school,
   Or out of doors to play.
And all the other little boys
   Passed our way.
 
“Son,” said my mother,
   “Come, climb into my lap,
And I’ll chafe your little bones
   While you take a nap.”
 
And, oh, but we were silly
   For half an hour or more,
Me with my long legs
   Dragging on the floor,
 
A-rock-rock-rocking
   To a mother-goose rhyme!
Oh, but we were happy
   For half an hour’s time!
 
But there was I, a great boy,
   And what would folks say
To hear my mother singing me
   To sleep all day,
   In such a daft way?
 
Men say the winter
   Was bad that year;
Fuel was scarce,
   And food was dear.
 
A wind with a wolf’s head
   Howled about our door,
And we burned up the chairs
   And sat on the floor.
 
All that was left us
   Was a chair we couldn’t break,
And the harp with a woman’s head
   Nobody would take,
   For song or pity’s sake.
 
The night before Christmas
   I cried with the cold,
I cried myself to sleep
   Like a two-year-old.
 
And in the deep night
   I felt my mother rise,
And stare down upon me
   With love in her eyes.
 
I saw my mother sitting
   On the one good chair,
A light falling on her
   From I couldn’t tell where,
 
Looking nineteen,
   And not a day older,
And the harp with a woman’s head
   Leaned against her shoulder.
 
Her thin fingers, moving
   In the thin, tall strings,
Were weav-weav-weaving
   Wonderful things.
 
Many bright threads,
   From where I couldn’t see,
Were running through the harp-strings
  Rapidly,
 
And gold threads whistling
   Through my mother’s hand.
I saw the web grow,
   And the pattern expand.
 
She wove a child’s jacket,
   And when it was done
She laid it on the floor
   And wove another one.
 
She wove a red cloak
   So regal to see, 
“She’s made it for a king’s son,”
   I said, “and not for me.”
   But I knew it was for me.
 
She wove a pair of breeches
   Quicker than that!
She wove a pair of boots
   And a little cocked hat.
 
She wove a pair of mittens,
   She wove a little blouse,
She wove all night
   In the still, cold house.
 
She sang as she worked,
   And the harp-strings spoke;
Her voice never faltered,
   And the thread never broke.
   And when I awoke,—
 
There sat my mother
   With the harp against her shoulder
Looking nineteen
   And not a day older,
 
A smile about her lips,
   And a light about her head,
And her hands in the harp-strings
   Frozen dead.
 
And piled up beside her
   And toppling to the skies,
Were the clothes of a king’s son,
   Just my size.


^^EOP^^




                             Venice, December
 



                        Ours are the only mouths

                        to taste with this smothering slow

                        touch, and the only steps

                        to sink like bellsounds and cave

                        deep into the marble snow.

 

                        Women who go to the window

                        to push their arms out to the snow

                        and then bring the shutters back in

                        follow us as we fall

                        past their eyes where the black night lives.

 

                        We are snowflakes at last, as the thick

                        never locked, never closed doors

                        follow us through squares of light

                        their windows have left on the snow.

                        Once again, warmth that falls,

                        again, though our tracks fill and slow.


^^EOP^^

Vines, leaves, roots of darkness, growing,
now you are uncurled and cover our eyes
with the edge of winter sky
leaning over us in icy stars.
Vines, leaves, roots of darkness, growing,
come with your seasons, your fullness, your end.


^^EOP^^

From where I sit, I can see other
things: a silver porcupine, pins
standing upright. It is a vanished tale of a
vanished forest at the shore of a vanished ocean. 
I call the dead as often as I can. In the
vaults, among mummies—this is pure
memorial. I am the girl in whose
eyes the name is written. 
I feel as if veiled, as if soon I
shall get to know something. These are people
with encephalitis who cannot go
forward, but can go backward, and can dance. 
In this rough draft of my memoirs, my brother
comes toward me—frightened, skeletal—longing
for marvels. I cannot describe it better than by
comparing it to other figures, intoxication. 
Mere reflexes, as for instance breathing, can become
conscious. One of two rivals has his
ornamental tail bit off. In dying sounds, barely
reaching our ears, a melody continues. 
No end to it—an infinite progression. All this
love of a bygone age. Watch the track
of a concentrated sunbeam through our lake ice:
part of the beam is stopped, part goes through. 
Now the upper surface buckles, phantasmagoria of
unchained passion—under which the land
quakes, the ocean swells, and a myriad-years-
old forest snaps and cracks. 
Surpassing all forms of experience, the wide, deep,
freshwater lake—on which the city
is built—rises before us. Here a modern idea
interposes, a new body made from the elements. 
Then everything is forgotten. Sometimes thoughts
are cut off and sometimes they are the
blade which cuts. At the present gravel pit, electric
lights in the evening cast their magic blue sheen. 
There’s the sun, a crack above those
hills, breaking the day. If the door open, who
comes in? If it close, what will interrupt
my train? 
The staircase effect supplies strong evidence
for a subjective map. Downhill, the sun
trickles, unperturbed. Here trots a mammoth with
red wool, through the black yew forest. 
The tendency of elements to linger on: You say
I dream of what I want, but what I
want now is to dream. The cold rind
broken, the same wind blows. 
Through a lens of ice, the dark
heat of the sun burns wood, fires gunpowder, melts
lead. Perhaps a cloud of musk rises, such as
issues from a crocodile in passion. 
Unless light falls properly upon these
flowers, you cannot see them. All associations at
this level rain down from above. We
talk of word-pictures. 
We observe vertigo. We reach the cleft
by a steep gully or couloir—very dangerous, the
path from the heights, the glory of
the prospect, the insight gained. 
What I mean is a disturbance in
all the senses at once. You will not find
the flower confused. Facing a certain
wind, there is always danger.


^^EOP^^

                              Red 
Mupits’ breath, in moonlight, outside a child’s bedroom window 
Hunter’s bones scattered on the prairie 
Fragrance of Comanche gangstas who entered The Zoo Club
and assassinated the bosses of Underworld Seven,
a Navajo crime syndicate 
Little Stoney Burgess’s footprints after catching ghost sickness
by running through Post Oak Cemetery chased
by snot-nosed bully, Blender Plenty Bear  
                              Blue 
Lips of the poisoned tribal chairman collapsed on the buffet table
at the 1974 Comanche Nation Inaugural Dinner 
Silk handkerchief drawn over the stuffed owl used to converse
with the dead 
In the woods, it’s the laughter of Deer Woman as she stomps
her male victim to death 
Electric guitar distortion of the Messiah playing Jimi Hendrix’s Machine Gun as she strolls into the Indian bar  
                               Yellow 
Coyote’s eyes in the darkness of the backseat at midnight
as you speed down Mt. Scott, on a dare, with the headlights off 
Crushed buffalo kidney stones used in graffiti to magically
imprison the river-witch underneath the I-44 bridge 
Intricate beadwork on Lucifer’s cane
left at the funnel cake stand at Comanche Fair 
Flashing ignition light to the engines of the great abyss


^^EOP^^

Spanish captive, Hoahwah, married twin sisters.
The one wife called Double
turned into a snake
after eating a nest of glossy eggs.
Snake Woman still lives on Mt. Scott,
sleeps facing west.
The sun a white skull itself
bathes her on the cedar breaks.
In rectangular dreams
she calls the young men grandson. 
The other sister Tsi-yee, named after a war deed
(her father charged a cavalry office
knocked him off his horse then lanced him to the prairie)
bore three children: Tabe titah, Namnetse, and Sam Hoahwah. 
Lena, Sam Hoahwah’s favorite daughter
ran off with an Arapaho from Canton.
Sam sent his men after her
on horseback, their ranch-hand-shadows
overcast the Cheyenne and Arapaho Rez.
Lena said: I ain’t comin back.
She bled to death on a mattress after a miscarriage. 
Mother couldn’t remember Lena
just the car ride to Post Oak Cemetery
and watching wind in the pinwheels.
Mother died the same age, fish-tailing
into Comanche history
in a Chevy Z-28 without car insurance. 
Great grandfather Sam Hoahwah
first Indian in southwest Oklahoma to own a car
got run over with his own Model-T.
His Mexican cowboy-chauffeur
forgot to take it out of gear
when Sam crank-started the car. 
Not far from his own car, Uncle Fredrick
was found dead in the weeds of Cache Road,
keys missing.
He sang gospels in Comanche,
and backup on Robby Robertson’s Contact from the Underworld of RedBoy.
(Uncle liked Levon Helm better.) 
Frederick Jr. caught ghost sickness
bicycling across Post Oak Cemetery at night.
He looked past his shoulder
it twisted his face.
The moon mocks him now. 
After the incident, his girlfriend fell
in love with his cousin Rusty
nicknamed Rabbit
who loves fried baloney
and calls it Indian Steak. 
Rabbit’s younger brother
paints abstract horse murals
in empty swimming pools, 
and images of a 20 foot long red talking snake
who calls him grandson in his dreams.


^^EOP^^

Among other economies, I’m of two
minds, one possessed, the other
a deep peace. Violent trembling
seizes me, launched in the interval. 
Enemy of children, of quaint little
things, of jokes and pictures. Enemy
of comic papers and caricatures, of
water-drinking. Too short for tragedy. 
Rarely has a large or distant expedition
ever succeeded in its object, as may be
seen in the failure of foreign missions, of
human development, the immediate phenomena. 
Sympathy for the victors, who gallantly
perish. Collateral catastrophes, as if they
had a will. The more distinctive visual images
sail too long, relinquish, burst. 
The “inner voice” is playing a game. Eagerness
and obstinacy. A mysterious invisible
placed in the mouth. We know too well how
terrible it is to contend against personality. 
The whole idyll vanishes. Southward along
a coastline, down among cities. Across the
gulf to the promontory. Probably
astonished. Not without mistrust. 
You are now my prisoner. Physically I am
myself. Cultivated living, good manners, rich
food and drink, order and elegance in
my house. Erect military bearing.


^^EOP^^

. . . makes a noisy entry into Texas
like tumbling file cabinets. 
Four mountains
Four creeks
Four forts
Four suns
Four seasons
Four nations—Comanche, Kiowa, Cheyenne, Arapaho 
          * 
At Yellow House Canyon
the river turns tight.
Talons skim the water,
waves confirm dawn. 
With white sheets tied around their waists
Tonkawa scouts cannibalistically count out
a bag of children’s hands. 
Seated in a silver Concho saddle,
Death’s dirty sergeant lights up
his ceremonial breathing leaf. 
          * 
Where Cache Creek empties into the Red River
is a nerve center of war.
There Velroy fought the gruesome brotherhood:
Blue Corpse, Smallpox, and the Creeper, cruel 300 lb nymphs.
They tried to strip his body of Carbon-14 atoms. 
Velroy, knowledgeable in the Flying Crane Technique
of Kung-Fu,
drop-kicked Blue Corpse in the windpipe
simultaneously breaking his neck
in three places. 
He tricked The Creeper with his own taboo.
By passing wolf’s milk and tequila
through a hole in an oak tree,
it made The Creeper vomit up his own stomach.
Velroy quickly buried it,
turning him into a tree. 
Smallpox challenged Velroy
to a dance-off.
It took place on top of the creek.
While Smallpox was doing a head spin,
Velroy pulled the cardboard out from under him.
Smallpox dropped into the water and drowned. 
          * 
Snake Woman sits in the deep,
a cinema of silver scales.
Her hair moves like meadow grass in flood water. 
          * 
Members of the Black Knife Society
crossed the south fork of the river
on horseback in a V-formation.
They possess gear
simultaneously musical and military:
a stretched skin to serve as
both shield and drum,
and a club, sword, or lance
that is also a drumstick. 
          * 
At the Red River
Ute chief cuts my guitar strings
Ute women love Punk


^^EOP^^

                    
                    
                    after this, the cold more intense, and the night comes rapidly up
.
angels in the fall
.
around a tongue of land, free from trees
.
awakened by feeling a heavy weight on your feet, something that seems inert and motionless
.
awestruck manner, as though you expected to find some strange presence behind you
.
coming through the diamond-paned bay window of your sanctum
.
a crimson-flowered silk dressing gown, the folds of which I could now describe
.
deathly pallor overspreading
.
describing the exact nature of your nightly troubles
.
discomfort at seeing a surface spoiled
.
echo and foretaste
.
the entrance blocked, not only by brambles and nettles, which have to be beaten aside, but by piles of faggots, old boxes, and even refuse
.
expecting every moment to see the door open and give admission to the original of my detested portrait
.
fantastic wigs, costumes, other disguises
.
filling up the width of the street
.
frequent tussles
.
the glitter of silver and glass and the subdued lights and cackle of conversation around the dinner table
.
high-backed carved oak chair
.
I have omitted in my narration . . .
.
in a great raftered hall
.
in a tableau vivant, as an angel, sewn up in tights, with wings on your back
.
light your candle and  open the window
.
lines of your dress, with a hint of underthings
.
looking up, our problem still unsolved
.
luxurious with heavy silk and rich rococo furniture, all of it much soiled with age
.
many questions about the stars, of which you gave me my first intelligent idea
.
meanwhile, the snow, with ominous steadiness, and the wind falls
.
my weakness for the Ypsilanti Waltz, which I did regard as the most wonderful of compositions
.
neat strip of fine turf edging the road and running back until the poison of the dead beech leaves kills it under the trees
.
never venturing farther than a sandy beach, but losing everything at sea
.
not crawling or creeping, but spreading
.
not just out of repair, but in a condition of decay
.
only a foul trick after all
.
on the face of the judge in the picture, a malignant smile
.
profound impressions of unearthly horror
.
rambles and adventures among the rocky banks
.
the rope of the great alarm bell on the roof, which hangs down
.
rough horseplay and quarrels
.
sashes that splinter at a touch
.
the serpentlike form of the seraphim
.
something uncertain at work among the monuments
.
the thing on the bed, slowly shifting
.
till this particular day has passed through all the seasons of the year
.
the vicar, who used to tell us the story of Robinson Crusoe
.
waves and their whelps
.
while with a sickening revulsion after my terror, I drop half fainting across the end of the bed
.
with a pair of great greenish eyes shining dimly out within the lattice fronts
.
with painted carvings of saints and devils, a small galvanic battery, and a microscope
                

^^EOP^^

I  
Fate is cleverer than the king
of Babylon. Shadow of yew
fall through windows onto 
the floor of the nave and
touch the pillars with tattered
shade. You claim the dearest wish of your 
life is to sink into a soul-freezing
situation of horror.  The music of a crash
caught in the hollow of a wooded hillside.   
2  
Grave, questioning sweep—chiefly the weird
that arouses our keenest hopes. The garden of
dreams contains a summerhouse, hazy 
period of my growth. There are bodies,
not greatly extended, called seas nevertheless,
because of their depth and 
violence. I’ve some little
doubt about this ceremony entirely
embedded in a cup of grassy hills.   
3  
Pardon me for loitering. I was sleeping
soundly when I was roused by the loud
clang of what turned out to be 
a large brass candlestick, flung
against the banister. Unprotected,
destitute of the means of self-defense, you 
hug to yourself the consciousness of
vanished beauty. The sea is un-
certain, on the main and also along the coast.   
4  
Strange rooms. Through these experimental
years, who can describe beauty
in the dead of night? Complain of 
frivolity or of portraits exactly
like ghosts. The waters of the great
surrounding sea will completely 
evaporate when the sun opens the fifth
of its seven eyes. Oh yes, I take
pleasure in backgrounds, bringing them forward.   
5  
These are only a few of many
legendary details, called from the distant
future where each thing has its 
end, including sea, sun, the eyes.
You live in another season—even now I
feel acrobatic instincts. Large strange 
rooms. A silver cup from his household
plate, a sky of the same
gray tones, a great wilderness of books.   
6  
When the sea subsides into utter
calm, changing clouds caught in its
clarity, then fishermen say the sea 
is thinking about itself. A dark back
room, looking down upon a narrow
courtyard—waking out of some 
dreams of specters, bellowing the most
frightful shrieks, forgetting only
at the sound of somebody’s voice.   
7  
You light me to bed with your light, and
never a night but I am
prey to ghostly visions—a tenderness 
no usual in my family. The lion
pauses a certain space of time, amid
a sea of divers thoughts, choppy half 
desires, memoranda of search
and hunger, very peculiar
ideas of the world.


^^EOP^^

Afterward, to tell how it was possible to
identify absolute space, a matter of great
difficulty, keeping in mind always
that not all old music is beautiful and
therefore it’s necessary to choose. Ice
loading and unloading as the ice caps
wax and wither. Brutal and uncouth from the beginning
even unto time, space, place, motion. 
How are we to obtain true motion? I
predict a fiasco—and a fiasco
with catcalls. Wind circulation in the
case of plants, predators in the case
of animals, affecting their distribution on
the ancient land masses. And
who will conduct the chorus and
orchestra? Many things exist at once. 
Predilection and preference. Begin
with the storm. A very agile, beautiful
voice. With tremendous temperament. The earth’s
magnetic field weakening. Even the princess
is drawn into the violence of the action,
extremes of joy, mad ravings, almost
requiring the conventions of opera. Thus,
thus; we parted, thus to meet again. 
Thus in a ship, under sail, since the sun
itself is moving, supposing Infinite
Space to be (as it were) Sensorium
of the Omnipresent. Reduced to a
few feet of ground, we begin with great
delight to plant a garden. The Czar is in
that garden. Quiet eruptions, safe enough to attract
tourists. We suppose other bodies annihilated. 
Upon any conditions supposed, taught to describe
accurately, I detest everything that smells
of theory. If we look at similar
coral reefs, the past location of the same
precise environment can be traced. But
there the comparison breaks. And from these
relative motions will arise the relative
motion of a body on the earth.


^^EOP^^

A great crime: she has
plunged a dagger into the heart
of her mother.  Strange. 
The strangest thing: a mocking little pride with
a sinister click as of a fitting together of bad
pieces.  Beyond knowing. The mesmerist’s only
child. A certain indication of anemia, too much
candy, and her charming eyes. 
A privilege to be near her. My
inspiriation. I risk an approach, what I call “the light of
day.” Movements, with perfect indifference, turn
place and shrink. One
might have seen less:

^^EOP^^

children grown—dust accumulateson half the kitchen table


^^EOP^^

Sleep is 20
                    remembering the
insignificant flamenco dancer
in Granada
                    who became
important as you watched
the mountain ridge
                    the dry hills 
What an idiotic number! 
Sleep is twenty 
it certainly isn’t twenty sheep
there weren’t that many in the herd
under the cold crest of Sierra Nevada 
It’s more like 20 Madison Ave. buses
while I go droning away at my dream life
Each episode is important
that’s what it is! Sequences —
I’ve got going a twenty-act drama
the theatre of the active
the critics are surely there
even the actors
even the flowers presented onstage
even the wild flowers
picked by the wife of the goatherd
each morning early (while I sleep)
under the snow cone
of Sierra Nevada 
                    yellow caps like castanets
                    I reach into my bouquet
                    half-dreaming
                    and count twenty
                    yellow capped heads 
flowers clicking twenty times
because they like to repeat themselves 
as I do as does the morning
or the drama one hopes
will be acted many times 
As even these dreams in similar
people’s heads 
                         20
     
                     castanets


^^EOP^^




Y otras pasan; y viéndome tan triste,
toman un poquito de ti
en la abrupta arruga de mi hondo dolor.
                                   Cesar Vellejo




I won’t let anybody
take a drink
out of this barrel of tears
I’ve collected from you. 
Least of all another woman. 
I see her coming along.
I know the type.
I can tell you what she’ll
be wearing. 
I know the type
I won’t like it. 
She’ll look at that barrel
she’s had a few in her day. 
Not that she’s ever filled one. 
She’ll remark casually,
“Sweet water,
good to wash my hair.” 
And who doesn’t know
tears are purer
than rain water
and softer on the hair. 
Just as she steps toward it
and makes for the cup,
I’ll see phantom you
and what you were
brought up by the sea. 
And scraps of paper
from this ditch of my brain
will float on the water
and choke her.


^^EOP^^

Bending, I bow my head
and lay my hands upon
her hair, combing, and think
how women do this for
each other. My daughter’s hair
curls against the comb,
wet and fragrant— orange
parings. Her face, downcast,
is quiet for one so young. 
I take her place. Beneath
my mother’s hands I feel
the braids drawn up tight
as piano wires and singing,
vinegar-rinsed. Sitting
before the oven I hear
the orange coils tick
the early hour before school. 
She combed her grandmother
Mathilda’s hair using
a comb made out of bone.
Mathilda rocked her oak wood
chair, her face downcast,
intent on tearing rags
in strips to braid a cotton
rug from bits of orange
and brown. A simple act
Preparing hair. Something
women do for each other,
plaiting the generations.


^^EOP^^




for Elizabeth Bishop



You said to me that day,
“There’s nothing you can do,”
and spoke of Auden’s line:
“Poetry makes nothing happen.”
And though I honor you,
especially your poems,
the objects you dipped in light,
then, left in the rainbow,
let slip from our sight,
I admitted, diving out of self,
a sweet woman’s white caress,
the hundreds of lives and places
in books, failed to counter confusion. 
You did agree that it
was Socrates who said
to his Athenian friends
that governments are only
governments with many heads
and cannot think as one.
That history continues to show
how they swing from war
to peace and back again,
in one wide gallow-sweep
just as the pendulum
of the world’s clocks
returned its towns to craters. 
Now I must ask myself,
fifteen cobalt-blue years later,
if the dust of each new war
that settles in our bones,
and deadens a generation,
is no more than negatives
of the Kennedys, King, and Lennon,
has less weight than what
we felt the day the Apollo
spaceship landed on the moon,
and Auden’s line is true,
then why did you to the end,
live with the dark,
sing into your ruin?


^^EOP^^

Raven steals your name for an autumn joke:
buries you along with it under
the thickest hemlock known to chipmunks.
Too bad you were awake for the event.
He accuses you of asking all
the wrong questions over and over.
You attempt revolt to prove his medicine
wheel is cracked and filling up its own pit. 
He hollers your face is unmasked and madness
has found a home. All stink and rotten fur,
he says to you, claims you had a choice
and forgot what it was. Now he says
your pain must run for the river,
the river for the wind.
He chuckles and the dark chatters, turning
you around until your shadow is the earth’s.


^^EOP^^

Since I’ve decided to revolutionize my life
                       since
                                  ”
                       decided
                                           ”
                       revolutionize
                                           ”
                       life       
                                           ”
                                      
How early it is! It is eight o’clock in the morning.
Well, the pigeons were up earlier
Did you eat all your egg?
Now we shall go for a long walk.
Now? There is too much winter.
I am going to admire the snow on your coat.
Time for hot soup, already?
You have worked for three solid hours.
I have written forty-eight, no forty-nine,
no fifty-one poems.
How many states are there?
I cannot remember what is uniting America.
It is then time for your nap.
What a lovely, pleasant dream I just had.
But I like waking up better.
I do admire reality like snow on my coat.
Would you take cream or lemon in your tea?
No sugar?
And no cigarettes.
Daytime is good, but evening is better.
I do like our evening discussions.
Yesterday we talked about Kant.
Today let’s think about Hegel.
In another week we shall have reached Marx.
Goody.
Life is a joy if one has industrious hands.
Supper? Stew and well-cooked. Delicious.
Well, perhaps just one more glass of milk.
Nine o’clock! Bath time!
Soap and a clean rough towel.
Bedtime!
The Red Army is marching tonight.
They shall march through my dreams
in their new shiny leather boots,
their freshly laundered shirts.
All those ugly stains of caviar and champagne
and kisses
have been rubbed away.
They are going to the barracks.
They are answering hundreds of pink
and yellow and blue and white telephones.
How happy and contented and well-fed they look
lounging on their fur divans,
chanting, “Russia how kind you are to us.
How kind you are to everybody.
We want to live forever.”
Before I wake up they will throw away
their pistols, and magically
factories will spring up where once
there was rifle fire, a roulette factory,
where once a body fell from an open window.
Hurry dear dream
I am waiting for you
under the eiderdown.
And tomorrow will be more real, perhaps,
than yesterday.


^^EOP^^

Where do you want my heart now? 
Placed next to yours
on your pale skin
so that I will fall
in love with your sweaty pain 
I have heard
your bones crack the dry cement
that leafed the frenzied spirit within 
I witnessed its wildness escape into your body
screaming kissy words
while your fingers plucked at my guitar 
your eyes were Koyoti’s & Ska-la-la’s
trying to rip a path to my soul 
& I froze there in my manly state
knowing there’s nothing that I can do


^^EOP^^

I certainly know who I am . . . 
I can get away with being politically incorrect.
I am the ambassador to First Nations’ poetic expressions
& as Kinsella pompously put it straight
“I have the license to do so.” 
what a magical way to escape tyranny!
just like Trudeau & Chrétien hiding beneath cowboy hats 
nevertheless & back to the point, 
call me cowboy
call me First Nations
call me aboriginal
call me native
call me chug
call me skin 
if you must,
but never call me Indian.
I call myself that! 
& if you feel guilty when I say so,
this is not about postcolonial rhetoric
it is about an identity crisis


^^EOP^^

The twilight of your face,
the unknown bird in your voice,
draws me again to your eyes’ green vision, 
your song about that longest
moment, a moon vulnerability,
a Natalie I saw alone, 
at Carolyn’s party years ago,
where you called me to your side,
and I held my heart, cupped in shadow, 
as an offering to your smile,
our soft-spoken isolation.


^^EOP^^

Velroy de-jays the séance-turntables,
spinning black water,
scratching out full moons
with red and blue curves of hip hop.
In the dance club, bodies are a collection
of sunrise songs in reverse. 
Corey wears her cat-eye contacts
and no panties.
There’s the bathroom-stall
eagle medicine with Ecstasy placed on the tongue.
She handles the lace like a Kiowa church hymn. 
Dee is Cheyenne, Arapaho, Comanche,
Kiowa, and Fort Sill Apache.
He couldn’t enroll into any tribe
but he can grass dance, bump and grind,
and do the Jerry Lewis.
Black girls love him. 
Stoney has four wives, Indian way.
He has ghost medicine
and carries a small white ball of clay.
He sells peyote and coke to the white boys. 
I have a southern accent.
I killed a Lakota man,
he was a Rollin ’20.
It was with a shotgun.
It was powwow season,
I fancy danced.


^^EOP^^

The stars grow lemon
in the field, spread
like tea leaves in
a cup; red-wing
blackbirds fold themselves
into the fence,
corn dreamers. 
The sky undulating
with clouds returns
gold-throated arpeggios
to the one walking
at sunrise, sunfall. 
Light as the air
I sit on my
cottage steps;
a tom cat come
home to die for
the day.


^^EOP^^

The hotel bar downstairs
was dirty and dark and almost empty
except for him whom I didn’t know 
I lost my balance
because evil is aroused by absence  
Outside on the island
a brick city had grown up and old 
A person could only nibble on its shadows  
Where was my beloved? 
The cornerstone was familiar
but unrecognizable
and I didn’t understand why infinity 
was seeping into my hair   
Somebody said:
“He’s out of his bottle” 
I guess it meant
Temporarily out of service and empty. 
But then there was Arsene
beside the last remaining cabin
wandering with his eyes on the camera  
Dynamite in his pocket
and a piece of thread 
to trap a rabbit.  
Evil is a growing thing
It has its own gravity
and never answers to its name
It is a hole into chaos. It is real 
Arsene held me in his arms
He was drunk as usual
and his nipple smelled of rum 
But still I loved him—
loved him madly!—
as if he was the one


^^EOP^^




for John Coltrane




Words
      after all
are syllables just
and you put them
     in their place
     notes
     sounds
a painter using his stroke
     so the spot
where the article
     an umbrella
     a knife
we could find
     in its most intricate
     hiding
slashed as it was with color
     called “being”
     or even “it”  Expressions 
For the moment just
     when the syllables
     out of their webs float 
We were just
     beginning to hear
like a crane hoisted into
     the fine thin air
that had a little ache (or soft crackle) 
     golden staffed edge of
     quick Mercury
     the scale runner  Envoi 
     C’est juste
     your umbrella colorings
dense as telephone
     voice
     humming down the line
     polyphonic 
Red plumaged birds
     not so natural
     complicated wings
                              French! 
Sweet difficult passages
                              on your throats
there just there
                              caterpillar edging
                              to moth
Midnight
                              in the chrome attic


^^EOP^^

O Ancient One,
your web hangs down from the pines.
I am of the Owl clan.
I have been to water,
my dress is of red clay.
He moves at the edge of you,
binds us with your threads.
The center of his soul shall be my soul’s center.
Our paths shall be white forever.
Where we move the paths from every direction
shall recognize each other.
We are one never to be parted.


^^EOP^^

That is why I am herenot among the ibises. Whythe permanent city parasolcovers even me.             It was the rainsin the occult season. It was the snowson the lower slopes. It was waterand cold in my mouth.            A lack of shoeson what appeared to be cobbleswhich were still antique           Well wild wild whateverin wild more silent blue            the vase grips the stemspetals fall    the chrysanthemum darkens           Sometimes this mustard feelingclutches me also. My sleep is reckoned in straws            Yet I wake upand am followed into the street.


^^EOP^^

They inherit a packet of earth
hear its coins clank in a tin box 
push them aside
reap thick strands of night from thinning black hair. 
They climb the staircase clenching branches of pens filled with ducks’ blood 
and follow the butcher’s bed into this room—
          goose feathers thorning out of their eyes. 
They promise to never look down again
down is just a speck of globe dust 
                                          just coins clanking in the tin box.


^^EOP^^

What happened is, we grew lonely
living among the things,
so we gave the clock a face,
the chair a back,
the table four stout legs
which will never suffer fatigue. 
We fitted our shoes with tongues
as smooth as our own
and hung tongues inside bells
so we could listen
to their emotional language, 
and because we loved graceful profiles
the pitcher received a lip,
the bottle a long, slender neck. 
Even what was beyond us
was recast in our image;
we gave the country a heart,
the storm an eye,
the cave a mouth
so we could pass into safety.


^^EOP^^

O now you come in rut,
in rank and black desire,
to beat the brush, to lash
the wind with your long hair.
Ha! I am afraid,
exceedingly afraid.
But see? her path goes there,
along the swaying tops
of trees, up to the hills.
Too long she is alone.
Bypass our fields, and mount
your ravages of fire
and rain on higher trails.
You shall have her lying down
upon the smoking mountains.


^^EOP^^

Never reaching the promised land in Canada,
HIN-MAH-TOO-YAH-LAT-KET:
“Thunder-rolling-in-the-mountins,”
the fugitive chief sits in a corner
of the prison car headed for Oklahoma,
chained to his warriors,
a featherless hawk in exile. 
He sees out the window
geese rise from the storm’s center
and knows more men died
by snow blizzard
than by cavalry shot. 
Still his father’s shield
of Wallowa Valley deer and elk
flashes in his eyes
and coyote runs the circles
and a cricket swallows the dark. 
How many songs this elder
sang to break the cycle
of cold weather and disease
his people coughed and breathed
in this land of drifting ice. 
Now sleepless as the door-guard,
the train rattles like dirt in his teeth,
straw in his eyes. 
Holding rage in the palm of his fist,
his people’s future spirals to red-forest dust,
leaves his bones on the track,
his soul in the whistle.


^^EOP^^

What land have you cast from the blotted-out region of your face?

What nation stung by watermarks was filmed out of extinction and brought forth resembling frost?

What offspring must jump through the eye of birth to be winked at when covered with brick sweat?

What ache piled its planks on the corner pier, now crumbles onto motionless water, sniffed at by forest smoke?

What makes this song a string of beads seized by cement cracks when the camera climbs through the basement window—winter clouds coiling through its speckled lens?

What season cannot locate an eye in the dark of the sound of the sun gyrating into red ocher after I thought you noticed my language was half wren, half pigeon and, together, we spoke a wing pattern on the wall that was raised to keep “us” out, there where “calling” became “culling,” “distance” distanced, in a mere scrape of enamel on yellow teeth?

What father woke, turned over his wife, she didn’t want to, but he pushed until the baby leapt through, now, now, now, strummed into a chorus of burn marks on ceilings where police sirens fruit magpie skulls on trees of monsoon lightning?

What, what, what—is how that song chimed in wilderness.


^^EOP^^

When I see the cradle rocking What is it that I see?I see a rood on the hilltop        Of Calvary.When I hear the cattle lowing What is it that they say?They say that shadows feasted        At Tenebrae.When I know that the grave is empty,Absence eviscerates me,And I dwell in a cavernous, constant        

^^EOP^^

Am I lovely? Of course!Breathlessly I tastethe subtle compliment of a handmade caress.Chop me into tiny bits,caress and tame my soul, that godly swallowyou love to no end.

^^EOP^^

Cleanse me of my iniquityand wash away my sins.

^^EOP^^

Hunched in the bath, four ibuprofen gulped         too late to dull the muscle cramping         

^^EOP^^

I’ve never seen the landof milk and honey, but at the Iowa State Fair I glimpseda cow fashioned of butter.It lived behind a window in an icy room, beneath klieg lights.I filed past as one filespast a casket at a wake.It was that sad: a butter cowwithout a butter calf. Nearby I spieda butter motorcycle, motorcycle-sized, a mechanical afterthoughtI thought the cow might have liked to ride.You don’t drive a motorcycle; you ride it.But not if you’re a butter cow, notif you’re a butter cow who’s seen, ifnot the land of milk and honey, the landof milk, and dwelled within it.It had a short life span, the butter cow.Before it died, I lookeddeep into its butter eyes. It sawmy butter soul. I couldhave wept, or spread myself, for nobody, across dry toast.

^^EOP^^

At sixteen he dismisses his mother with contempt. She hears with dread the repulsive wave’s approachand her fifty-year-old body smothers under water.An old man loses half his weight, as if by stealth,but finds in his shed his great-grandfather’s knobbly cane, and hobbles toward youth beside the pond’s swart water.She listens to the dun-colored whippoorwill’sthree-beat before dawn, and again when duskenters the cornfield parched and wanting water.He imagines but cannot bring himself to believethat the dead woman enters his house disguised or that the young rabbi made 

^^EOP^^

Now She knows what it feels like

^^EOP^^

He marked the page with a matchand fell asleep in mid-kiss,while I, a queen beein a disturbed hive, stay up and buzz:half a kingdom for a honey drop,half a lifetime for a tender word!His face, half turned.Half past midnight. Half past one.

^^EOP^^




When I fall into the abyss, I go straight into it, head down and heels up, and I'm even pleased that I'm falling in just such a humiliating position, and for me I find it beautiful. And so in that very shame I suddenly begin a hymn.          —Fyodor Dostoevsky



I traveled to the page where scripture meets fiction.The paper slept but the night in me woke up.Black letters were now aliveand collectible in a material crawl.I could not decipher their intentions anymore.To what end did their shapes come forth?To seduce or speak truth?While birds swept over the water like pot-bellied angels beautiful bells rang to assist the hoist.Up they went to slake their thirst, drinking from the mistfor the sound of bells seemed to freeas well as hold them.Then down to scavenge the surfand eat the innocent.“I love God and the ferry too,” wrote Kerouac.Only that which exists can be spoken of. *     *     * I wonder, will our imagination remain a temple burning with candlesagainst all odds? Behind a nipple and a bone?The simplest of glands laid in a circle around skin and liquidthat stirs up imagerywinged and prismed, as if bloodwere a wine inducing visions *     *     * Some people cry when the characters die. Then they kill themselves offstage, away from the pagesthat they are turning in the night.Some people sacrifice themselves on a whimand regret it later on paper. Now I see you in the window.Are you in the book I was looking for? The one who traveled back to the happy dayswhen she could jump on a moving busand swing in the open airclutching a worn novel in her purse . . . ?A curtain, a knife, adoring eyes? *     *     * I watched the children runningand turned to Alyosha for a blessing.He was sunk in the morassof rural lifeI like to sit with him in the grass.Then we see the same thing at the same time,and are one mind.We two masses, one a book, one a hand.When Alyosha spoke to the boys at the endI anticipated their next question and his answerFor they formed a single gestureof kindness.“Will we?” “We will.” *     *     * It seemed evil to read about peoplewe would never meet.We tested their fortitude as if in sleep.They generally failed the challengebeing strangers in a strange brain.They were baffled by the toolshanded to them and by the traffic’s direction.Frankly in a dream or story,the goal is absolutely hiddenfrom the one to whom it matters. *     *     * Eons of lily-building emerged in that one flower.Eons, eons. Pinsand wool, thread and needle,all materialmade of itself and circumstance.It was a terrible century:consisting of blastedoil refineries and stuck ducks,fish with their lips sealed by plasticand tar in the hair of cooks.Filth had penetrated the vents.Institutions moan.Balls of used cottonfrom the hospital dumpster, redden.Yawning on obsolescencethe computer wonderswho punched in such poor grammar.First-padded virginsgraduate to this suffering dramaall by her-selves.Who once were cells. *     *     * History is more than just another surmisinggrandmother at a window or a reminiscence twisted in the scrim of translation.Some long-ago light is pulsating in a trout’s heart on a laboratory dish. That light has entered all the holes,no matter how small, because it is the light that wants to live. *     *     * Still waiting for you my sunshineof justice and mercy.If west is east of Moscow,depending where you’re goingthen will you ever find mecoming from a northerly direction? Are you even looking at the earth?Remember the map is flat but everything else is not.Is the newest child the oldest body in creation?Does he carry more information than his mother?Does her mother, his grandmother, do I seem redundantby having arrived with less, though first?Is that why I read at night with my lips compressed? *     *     * The fact is, I never knew if anyone felt methe way Nijinsky knew how to feel.Or Nastasya. Nothing could shock that womanwho had done so much wrong.As if trained in a theater, multiple personalitiesstreamed from her tongue.This made her an exemplar for our time.She knew how others felt and became each one,forgetting who she was before.I remember her as a child. Her skirt got tangled upin a thorn bush when she watched the sky.Shaking herself free,she had to see the spiders, ants and dirtaround her skirt, It was like peering into her own bodyand she screamed in horror.Later, consolationwould be extended by a man dark and handsome: It came with his semen(when she wanted hibernation).She didn’t commit suicide this time, but randown Nevsky Prospekt as it began to rain,and paused to lift her umbrella. For this momentwe were in our soul a childrushing home to granny five floors up.  *     *     * I dropped the book, wept and went to the movies.It is here where I can forgive someone for his crime.Poisoning babies for profit. Harry Lime.I can actually forgive it when he is crawling in shit.Otherwise we will stand on the ferris wheel together foreverstuck in the fog and iron.I just a witness to his ironic story He will be a mix between Paul Celan and Oscar Levantwhen we are at our happiestand no forgiveness is asked.Neurotic, pale, and drawn to the canals,we will lean over the embankment like sister and brotherwho are tempted to be actors.It is here that his shoes and catwill converge in the dark. Like fish in a secular cityflipping through sewers for a flash of Christ.


^^EOP^^

I am in love, hence free to liveby heart, to ad lib as I caress.A soul is light when full,heavy when vacuous.My soul is light. She is not afraidto dance the agony alone,for I was born wearing your shirt,will come from the dead with that shirt on.

^^EOP^^

Cirrus dispersed. As a black night grew colder,clearer, I spied the binary in the handleof the Big Dipper dangling above my shoulder,a pinprick twinkling by a blinding candle.Absent the moon, its boreal corona,I watched the stars rise east of Ellendale,Guelph and Ludden, then wheel above Veronaand sleeping friends who farm near Englevale.A thousand miles of road: I’d shunned the pavementwhich bears the burdens I no longer ferry,the cargo of material enslavement.Six eagles hunted small game on the prairie.An Arab prince’s fortunes once were measuredby blooded foals, by sons his wives could dandle,by tributary quatrains to be treasuredand his eyesight: a pinprick by a candle.

^^EOP^^

Multiplying in a column M by F do we get one or two as a result?May the body stay glued to the soul,may the soul fear the body.Do I ask too much? I only wish  the crucible of tenderness would meltmemories, and I would sleep, my cheekpressed against your back, as on a motorbike

^^EOP^^

Only she who has breast-fedknows how beautiful the ear is.Only they who have been breast-fedknow the beauty of the clavicle.Only to humans the Creator has given the earlobe.The humans, through clavicles slightly resembling birds, entwined in caresses flyto the place at night where, rocking the cradle of cradles, the babe is wailing, where on a pillow of air the stars nestle like toys.And some of them speak.

^^EOP^^




For Stuart Longtin



Heavy and gray now, dressed in deacon’s robes—I see you in your Speedo at Floyd Lake,its nylon clinging to those golden globesyou exercised for Moorhead football’s sake.We hiked the Black Trail to Itasca Park,but now I see a deacon hard at workexplicating the Gospel of St. Mark,our high school quarterback become a clerk—in the high sense. A boy with such good looks,you could have run to Hollywood and whoredbut turned to mastery of sacred booksand the manly mimesis of our Lord.Lifesaver, that was your job at Wilderness,teaching tenderfoot farm boys how to swim.Soulsaver, I would call you now and blessany man who preaches Saint Mark to Tim.We take our coffee outside for the view,patrol the walk-about with twelve-foot meshwhere drunks can smoke. What has become of Stu?The Word. Not on the page but in the flesh.

^^EOP^^




. . . mangiavano le rose.



Because I do not knowwhat a hendecasyllable isand words is all I haveto transubstantiate and give,within me I hunger for a tongueof my own, unpronounceableflavors worth a thousand madeleines(Monsieur P.) as hunting-horns spiralthrough my belly and I say:

^^EOP^^

She stands at the top of the stairas childless Tom                         saw her weep.Fatherless in red Spyders elsewhererich daughters whiz through Parisor cruise the Greek Islands as non-daddy leaps in grasshopper fashionon a merry-go-round. Tall and bonythey’re properly married, endowed.Spared such a fate, the richly poorcountry girl sometimes resentedher tattered state. Having to seektreasures in a briar patch, shefound daffodils and violetsin dewy meadows mid-March.Now late in the years, the wind laysburnished gold leaves                                    on her feet.

^^EOP^^

Those who are asleep in the earthhave an avian sense of the way.Gone, they sleep with shoes on,ready to rise and goto the pink, dispensable, barefooted insomniacswho had laced up for them  the last pair of shoes.

^^EOP^^

To converse with the greatsby trying their blindfolds on;to correspond with booksby rewriting them;to edit holy edicts,and at the midnight hourto talk with the clock by tapping a wallin the solitary confinement of the universe.

^^EOP^^




For Harry Cobb



Soon I’ll move to Norway.If that’s a bitter pill,well, swill, swallow. I’m going,and I won’t wallow, not in Norway,where they’re so beyondslave labor, with laws that saya clerk must work within fivemeters of a window throughwhich she can see a treeand by that tree be seen.My mind’s made up. I will be Norwegian with Norwegiantrees. I’ll be seer and be seen.It’s a scenic scene, it’s how it goes, I’m going.Tell the top brass, ifthey ask, I don’t givea damn about their asses.But I will miss the beeches and the ashes.It’s not their fault I’m leaving.They’re only trees, and leaving, I’m Norwegian.

^^EOP^^

When the very last griefdeadens all our pain,I will follow you thereon the very next train,not because I lack strength to ponder the end result,but maybe you forgot to bringpills, a necktie, razor blades

^^EOP^^

Through the bedroom window a February sunrise, fog suspended between pines. Intricate crystals— hoarfrost lace on a cherry tree. My son calls out, awake. We sway, blanket-wrapped, his head nuzzling my neck. Hoarfrost, tree—I point, shaping each word. Favorable conditions: a toddler’s brain, hard data-mining, a system’s approach. Hoar, he hears. His hand reaches to the wallpaper lion. Phenomena converge: warmth, humidity, temperature’s sudden plunge;  a child’s brain, objects, sound. Eyes widening, he opens his mouth and roars. 


^^EOP^^

Seems lak to me de stars don't shine so bright,   
Seems lak to me de sun done loss his light,   
Seems lak to me der's nothin' goin' right,
      Sence you went away. 
Seems lak to me de sky ain't half so blue,   
Seems lak to me dat eve'ything wants you,   
Seems lak to me I don't know what to do,
      Sence you went away. 
Seems lak to me dat eve'ything is wrong,   
Seems lak to me de day's jes twice ez long,   
Seems lak to me de bird's forgot his song,
      Sence you went away. 
Seems lak to me I jes can't he’p but sigh,   
Seems lak to me ma th’oat keeps gittin’ dry,   
Seems lak to me a tear stays in ma eye,
      Sence you went away.


^^EOP^^

’Twas the night before Christmas, when all thro’ the house,Not a creature was stirring, not even a mouse;The stockings were hung by the chimney with care,In hopes that St. Nicholas soon would be there;The children were nestled all snug in their beds,While visions of sugar plums danc’d in their heads,And Mama in her ‘kerchief, and I in my cap,Had just settled our brains for a long winter’s nap —When out on the lawn there arose such a clatter,I sprang from the bed to see what was the matter.Away to the window I flew like a flash,Tore open the shutters, and threw up the sash.The moon on the breast of the new fallen snow,Gave the lustre of mid-day to objects below;When, what to my wondering eyes should appear,But a miniature sleigh, and eight tiny rein-deer,With a little old driver, so lively and quick,I knew in a moment it must be St. Nick.More rapid than eagles his coursers they came,And he whistled, and shouted, and call’d them by name:“Now! Dasher, now! Dancer, now! Prancer, and Vixen,“On! Comet, on! Cupid, on! Dunder and Blixem;“To the top of the porch! to the top of the wall!“Now dash away! dash away! dash away all!”As dry leaves before the wild hurricane fly,When they meet with an obstacle, mount to the sky;So up to the house-top the coursers they flew,With the sleigh full of Toys — and St. Nicholas too:And then in a twinkling, I heard on the roofThe prancing and pawing of each little hoof.As I drew in my head, and was turning around,Down the chimney St. Nicholas came with a bound:He was dress’d all in fur, from his head to his foot,And his clothes were all tarnish’d with ashes and soot;A bundle of toys was flung on his back,And he look’d like a peddler just opening his pack:His eyes — how they twinkled! his dimples how merry,His cheeks were like roses, his nose like a cherry;His droll little mouth was drawn up like a bow.And the beard of his chin was as white as the snow;The stump of a pipe he held tight in his teeth,And the smoke it encircled his head like a wreath.He had a broad face, and a little round bellyThat shook when he laugh’d, like a bowl full of jelly:He was chubby and plump, a right jolly old elf,And I laugh’d when I saw him in spite of myself;A wink of his eye and a twist of his headSoon gave me to know I had nothing to dread.He spoke not a word, but went straight to his work,And fill’d all the stockings; then turn’d with a jerk,And laying his finger aside of his noseAnd giving a nod, up the chimney he rose.He sprung to his sleigh, to his team gave a whistle,And away they all flew, like the down of a thistle:But I heard him exclaim, ere he drove out of sight —Happy Christmas to all, and to all a good night.


^^EOP^^

Dear love, where the red lillies blossomed and grew,The white snows are falling;And all through the wood, where I wandered with you,The loud winds are calling;And the robin that piped to us tune upon tune,Neath the elm—you remember,Over tree-top and mountain has followed the June,And left us—December.Has left, like a friend that is true in the sun,And false in the shadows.He has found new delights, in the land where he's gone,Greener woodlands and meadows.What care we? let him go! let the snow shroud the lea,Let it drift on the heather!We can sing through it all; I have you—you have me,And we’ll laugh at the weather.The old year may die, and a new one be bornThat is bleaker and colder;But it cannot dismay us; we dare it—we scorn,For love makes us bolder.Ah Robin! sing loud on the far-distant lea,Thou friend in fair weather;But here is a song sung, that’s fuller of glee,By two warm hearts together.


^^EOP^^

In the bleak midwinter, frosty wind made moan,Earth stood hard as iron, water like a stone;Snow had fallen, snow on snow, snow on snow,In the bleak midwinter, long ago.Our God, Heaven cannot hold Him, nor earth sustain;Heaven and earth shall flee away when He comes to reign.In the bleak midwinter a stable place sufficedThe Lord God Almighty, Jesus Christ.Enough for Him, whom cherubim, worship night and day,Breastful of milk, and a mangerful of hay;Enough for Him, whom angels fall before,The ox and ass and camel which adore.Angels and archangels may have gathered there,Cherubim and seraphim thronged the air;But His mother only, in her maiden bliss,Worshipped the beloved with a kiss.What can I give Him, poor as I am?If I were a shepherd, I would bring a lamb;If I were a Wise Man, I would do my part;Yet what I can I give Him: give my heart.


^^EOP^^

The Poetry of earth is never dead:      When all the birds are faint with the hot sun,      And hide in cooling trees, a voice will run    From hedge to hedge about the new-mown mead;    That is the Grasshopper’s—he takes the lead         In summer luxury,—he has never done      With his delights; for when tired out with fun    He rests at ease beneath some pleasant weed.    The poetry of earth is ceasing never:      On a lone winter evening, when the frost          Has wrought a silence, from the stove there shrills    The Cricket’s song, in warmth increasing ever,      And seems to one in drowsiness half lost,        The Grasshopper’s among some grassy hills.


^^EOP^^

Christmas Eve, and twelve of the clock.“Now they are all on their knees,”An elder said as we sat in a flockBy the embers in hearthside ease.We pictured the meek mild creatures whereThey dwelt in their strawy pen,Nor did it occur to one of us thereTo doubt they were kneeling then.So fair a fancy few would weaveIn these years! Yet, I feel,If someone said on Christmas Eve,“Come; see the oxen kneel,“In the lonely barton by yonder coombOur childhood used to know,”I should go with him in the gloom,Hoping it might be so.


^^EOP^^

    See, Winter comes to rule the varied year,Sullen and sad, with all his rising train—Vapours, and clouds, and storms. Be these my theme,These, that exalt the soul to solemn thoughtAnd heavenly musing. Welcome, kindred glooms!Congenial horrors, hail! With frequent foot,Pleas’d have I, in my cheerful morn of life,When nurs’d by careless solitude I liv’dAnd sung of Nature with unceasing joy,Pleas’d have I wander’d through your rough domain;Trod the pure virgin-snows, myself as pure;Heard the winds roar, and the big torrent burst;Or seen the deep-fermenting tempest brew’dIn the grim evening-sky. Thus pass’d the time,Till through the lucid chambers of the southLook’d out the joyous Spring—look’d out and smil’d.     Now, when the cheerless empire of the skyTo Capricorn the Centaur-Archer yields,And fierce Aquarius stains th’ inverted year,Hung o’er the farthest verge of heaven, the sunScarce spreads o’er ether the dejected day.Faint are his gleams, and ineffectual shootHis struggling rays in horizontal linesThrough the thick air; as cloth’d in cloudy storm,Weak, wan, and broad, he skirts the southern sky;And, soon descending, to the long dark night,Wide-shading all, the prostrate world resigns.Nor is the night unwish’d; while vital heat,Light, life, and joy the dubious day forsake.Meantime, in sable cincture, shadows vast,Deep-ting’d and damp, and congregated clouds,And all the vapoury turbulence of heavenInvolve the face of things. Thus Winter falls,A heavy gloom oppressive o’er the world,Through Nature shedding influence malign,And rouses up the seeds of dark disease.The soul of man dies in him, loathing life,And black with more than melancholy views.The cattle droop; and o’er the furrow’d land,Fresh from the plough, the dun discolour’d flocks,Untended spreading, crop the wholesome root.Along the woods, along the moorish fens,Sighs the sad genius of the coming storm;And up among the loose disjointed cliffsAnd fractur’d mountains wild, the brawling brookAnd cave, presageful, sends a hollow moan,Resounding long in listening Fancy’s ear.     Nature! great parent! whose unceasing handRolls round the seasons of the changeful year,How mighty, how majestic are thy works!With what a pleasing dread they swell the soul,That sees astonish’d, and astonish’d sings!Ye too, ye winds! that now begin to blowWith boisterous sweep, I raise my voice to you.Where are your stores, ye powerful beings! say,Where your a{:e}rial magazines reserv’d,To swell the brooding terrors of the storm?In what far-distant region of the sky,Hush’d in deep silence, sleep you when ‘tis calm?     When from the pallid sky the sun descends,With many a spot, that o’er his glaring orbUncertain wanders, stain’d; red fiery streaksBegin to flush around. The reeling cloudsStagger with dizzy poise, as doubting yetWhich master to obey; while, rising slow,Blank in the leaden-colour’d east, the moonWears a wan circle round her blunted horns.Seen through the turbid, fluctuating air,The stars obtuse emit a shivering ray;Or frequent seem to shoot athwart the gloom,And long behind them trail the whitening blaze.Snatch’d in short eddies, plays the wither’d leaf;And on the flood the dancing feather floats.With broaden’d nostrils to the sky upturn’d,The conscious heifer snuffs the stormy gale.Even as the matron, at her nightly task,With pensive labour draws the flaxen thread,The wasted taper and the crackling flameForetell the blast. But chief the plumy race,The tenants of the sky, its changes speak.Retiring from the downs, where all day longThey pick’d their scanty fare, a black’ning trainOf clamorous rooks thick-urge their weary flight,And seek the closing shelter of the grove.Assiduous, in his bower, the wailing owlPlies his sad song. The cormorant on highWheels from the deep, and screams along the land.Loud shrieks the soaring hern; and with wild wingThe circling sea-fowl cleave the flaky clouds.Ocean, unequal press’d, with broken tideAnd blind commotion heaves; while from the shore,Eat into caverns by the restless wave,And forest-rustling mountain comes a voiceThat, solemn-sounding, bids the world prepare.Then issues forth the storm with sudden burst,And hurls the whole precipitated airDown in a torrent. On the passive mainDescends th’ ethereal force, and with strong gustTurns from its bottom the discolour’d deep.Through the black night that sits immense around,Lash’d into foam, the fierce-conflicting brineSeems o’er a thousand raging waves to burn.Meantime the mountain-billows, to the cloudsIn dreadful tumult swell’d, surge above surge,Burst into chaos with tremendous roar,And anchor’d navies from their stations drive,Wild as the winds across the howling wasteOf mighty waters: now th’ inflated waveStraining they scale, and now impetuous shootInto the secret chambers of the deep,The wintry Baltic thund’ring o’er their head.Emerging thence again, before the breathOf full-exerted heaven they wing their course,And dart on distant coasts, if some sharp rockOr shoal insidious break not their career,And in loose fragments fling them floating round.     Nor less at hand the loosen’d tempest reigns.The mountain thunders, and its sturdy sonsStoop to the bottom of the rocks they shade.Lone on the midnight steep, and all aghast,The dark wayfaring stranger breathless toils,And, often falling, climbs against the blast.Low waves the rooted forest, vex’d, and shedsWhat of its tarnish’d honours yet remain;Dash’d down and scatter’d, by the tearing wind’sAssiduous fury, its gigantic limbs.Thus struggling through the dissipated grove,The whirling tempest raves along the plain;And, on the cottage thatch’d or lordly roof,Keen-fastening, shakes them to the solid base.Sleep frighted flies; and round the rocking dome,For entrance eager, howls the savage blast.Then too, they say, through all the burden’d airLong groans are heard, shrill sounds, and distant sighs,That, utter’d by the demon of the night,Warn the devoted wretch of woe and death.     Huge uproar lords it wide. The clouds, commix’dWith stars swift-gliding, sweep along the sky.All Nature reels: till Nature’s King, who oftAmid tempestuous darkness dwells alone,And on the wings of the careering windWalks dreadfully serene, commands a calm;Then straight air, sea, and earth are hush’d at once.     As yet ‘tis midnight deep. The weary clouds,Slow-meeting, mingle into solid gloom.Now, while the drowsy world lies lost in sleep,Let me associate with the serious Night,And Contemplation, her sedate compeer;Let me shake off th’ intrusive cares of day,And lay the meddling senses all aside.     Where now, ye lying vanities of life!Ye ever-tempting, ever-cheating train!Where are you now? and what is your amount?Vexation, disappointment, and remorse.Sad, sick’ning thought! and yet deluded man,A scene of crude disjointed visions past,And broken slumbers, rises still resolv’d,With new-flush’d hopes, to run the giddy round.     Father of light and life! thou Good Supreme!O teach me what is good! teach me Thyself!Save me from folly, vanity, and vice,From every low pursuit; and feed my soulWith knowledge, conscious peace, and virtue pure,Sacred, substantial, never-fading bliss!     The keener tempests come; and, fuming dunFrom all the livid east or piercing north,Thick clouds ascend, in whose capacious wombA vapoury deluge lies, to snow congeal’d.Heavy they roll their fleecy world along,And the sky saddens with the gather’d storm.Through the hush’d air the whitening shower descends,At first thin-wavering; till at last the flakesFall broad and wide and fast, dimming the dayWith a continual flow. The cherish’d fieldsPut on their winter robe of purest white.‘Tis brightness all; save where the new snow meltsAlong the mazy current. Low the woodsBow their hoar head; and, ere the languid sun,Faint from the west, emits his evening ray,Earth’s universal face, deep-hid and chill,Is one wild dazzling waste, that buries wideThe works of man. Drooping, the labourer-oxStands cover’d o’er with snow, and then demandsThe fruit of all his toil. The fowls of heaven,Tam’d by the cruel season, crowd aroundThe winnowing store, and claim the little boonWhich Providence assigns them. One alone,The redbreast, sacred to the household gods,Wisely regardful of th’ embroiling sky,In joyless fields and thorny thickets leavesHis shivering mates, and pays to trusted manHis annual visit. Half-afraid, he firstAgainst the window beats; then, brisk, alightsOn the warm hearth; then hopping o’er the floor,Eyes all the smiling family askance,And pecks, and starts, and wonders where he is;Till, more familiar grown, the table-crumbsAttract his slender feet. The foodless wildsPour forth their brown inhabitants. The hare,Though timorous of heart, and hard besetBy death in various forms, dark snares, and dogs,And more unpitying men, the garden seeks,Urg’d on by fearless want. The bleating kindEye the bleak heaven, and next the glistening earth,With looks of dumb despair; then, sad-dispers’d,Dig for the wither’d herb through heaps of snow.     Now, shepherds, to your helpless charge be kind;Baffle the raging year, and fill their pensWith food at will; lodge them below the storm,And watch them strict: for, from the bellowing east,In this dire season, oft the whirlwind’s wingSweeps up the burden of whole wintry plainsIn one wide waft, and o’er the hapless flocks,Hid in the hollow of two neighbouring hills,The billowy tempest whelms; till, upward urg’d,The valley to a shinning mountain swells,Tipp’d with a wreath high-curling in the sky.     Ah! little think the gay licentious proud,Whom pleasure, power, and affluence surround—They, who their thoughtless hours in giddy mirth,And wanton, often cruel, riot waste—Ah! little think they, while they dance along,How many feel, this very moment, deathAnd all the sad variety of pain;How many sink in the devouring flood,Or more devouring flame; how many bleed,By shameful variance betwixt man and man;How many pine in want, and dungeon-glooms,Shut from the common air and common useOf their own limbs; how many drink the cupOf baleful grief, or eat the bitter breadOf misery; sore pierc’d by wintry winds,How many shrink into the sordid hutOf cheerless poverty; how many shakeWith all the fiercer tortures of the mind,Unbounded passion, madness, guilt, remorse;Whence, tumbled headlong from the height of life,They furnish matter for the tragic muse.Even in the vale, where wisdom loves to dwell,With friendship, peace, and contemplation join’d,How many, rack’d with honest passions, droopIn deep retir’d distress, how many standAround the death-bed of their dearest friends,And point the parting anguish! Thought fond manOf these, and all the thousand nameless illsThat one incessant struggle render life,One scene of toil, of suffering, and of fate,Vice in his high career would stand appall’d,And heedless rambling Impulse learn to think;The conscious heart of Charity would warm,And her wide wish Benevolence dilate;The social tear would rise, the social sigh;And, into clear perfection, gradual bliss,Refining still, the social passions work.     Now, all amid the rigours of the year,In the wild depth of winter, while withoutThe ceaseless winds blow ice, be my retreat,Between the groaning forest and the shore,Beat by the boundless multitude of waves,A rural, shelter’d, solitary scene;Where ruddy fire and beaming tapers joinTo cheer the gloom. There studious let me sit,And hold high converse with the mighty dead:Sages of ancient time, as gods rever’d,As gods beneficent, who bless’d mankindWith arts and arms, and humaniz’d a world.Rous’d at th’ inspiring thought, I throw asideThe long-liv’d volume, and deep-musing hailThe sacred shades that slowly rising passBefore my wandering eyes. First Socrates,Who, firmly good in a corrupted state,Against the rage of tyrants single stoodInvincible! calm reason’s holy law,That voice of God within th’ attentive mind,Obeying, fearless or in life or death:Great moral teacher! wisest of mankind!Solon the next, who built his commonwealOn equity’s wide base; by tender lawsA lively people curbing, yet undamp’dPreserving still that quick peculiar fire,Whence in the laurel’d field of finer arts,And of bold freedom, they unequal’d shone,The pride of smiling Greece and human-kind.Lycurgus then, who bow’d beneath the forceOf strictest discipline, severely wise,All human passions. Following him I see,As at Thermopylae he glorious fell,The firm devoted chief, who prov’d by deedsThe hardest lesson which the other taught.Then Aristides lifts his honest front;Spotless of heart, to whom th’ unflattering voiceOf freedom gave the noblest name of Just;In pure majestic poverty rever’d;Who, ev’n his glory to his country’s wealSubmitting, swell’d a haughty rival’s fame.Rear’d by his care, of softer ray appearsCimon, sweet-soul’d; whose genius, rising strong,Shook off the load of young debauch; abroadThe scourge of Persian pride, at home the friendOf every worth and every splendid art;Modest and simple in the pomp of wealth.     Of rougher front, a mighty people come,A race of heroes! in those virtuous timesWhich knew no stain, save that with partial flameTheir dearest country they too fondly lov’d.Her better founder first, the Light of Rome,Numa, who soften’d her rapacious sons;Servius the king, who laid the solid baseOn which o’er earth the vast republic spread.Then the great consuls venerable rise:The public father who the private quell’d,As on the dread tribunal, sternly sad;He, whom his thankless country could not lose,Camillus, only vengeful to her foes;Fabricius, scorner of all-conquering gold,And Cincinnatus, awful from the plough;Thy willing victim, Carthage! bursting looseFrom all that pleading Nature could oppose,From a whole city’s tears, by rigid faithImperious call’d, and honour’s dire command;Scipio, the gentle chief, humanely brave,Who soon the race of spotless glory ran,And, warm in youth, to the poetic shadeWith friendship and philosophy retir’d;Tully, whose powerful eloquence a whileRestrain’d the rapid fate of rushing Rome;Unconquer’d Cato, virtuous in extreme;And thou, unhappy Brutus, kind of heart,Whose steady arm, by awful virtue urg’d,Lifted the Roman steel against thy friend.Thousands besides the tribute of a verseDemand; but who can count the stars of heaven.Who sing their influence on this lower world?     Behold, who yonder comes! in sober state,Fair, mild, and strong as is a vernal sun:‘Tis Phoebus’ self, or else the Mantuan swain!Great Homer too appears, of daring wing,Parent of song! and equal by his side,The British Muse; join’d hand in hand they walk,Darkling, full up the middle steep to fame.Nor absent are those shades, whose skilful handPathetic drew th’ impassion’d heart, and charm’dTransported Athens with the moral scene;Nor those who, tuneful, wak’d th’ enchanting lyre.     First of your kind! society divine!Still visit thus my nights, for you reserv’d,And mount my soaring soul to thoughts like yours.Silence, thou lonely power! the door be thine;See on the hallow’d hour that none intrude,Save a few chosen friends, that sometimes deignTo bless my humble roof, with sense refin’d,Learning digested well, exalted faith,Unstudied wit, and humour ever gay.Or from the Muses’ hill will Pope descend,To raise the sacred hour, to bid it smile,And with the social spirit warm the heart;For, though not sweeter his own Homer sings,Yet is his life the more endearing song.     The city swarms intense. The public haunt,Full of each theme and warm with mix’d discourse,Hums indistinct. The sons of riot flowDown the loose stream of false enchanted joyTo swift destruction. On the rankled soulThe gaming fury falls; and in one gulfOf total ruin, honour, virtue, peace,Friends, families, and fortune headlong sink.Up-springs the dance along the lighted dome,Mix’d and evolv’d a thousand sprightly ways.The glitt’ring court effuses every pomp;The circle deepens; beam’d with gaudy robes,Tapers, and sparkling gems, and radiant eyes,A soft effulgence o’er the palace waves:While a gay insect in his summer shine,The fop, light-flutt’ring, spreads his mealy wings.     Dread o’er the scene the ghost of Hamlet stalks;Othello rages; poor Monimia mourns;And Belvidera pours her soul in love.Deep-thrilling terror shakes; the comely tearSteals o’er the cheek: or else the comic museHolds to the world a picture of itself,And raises sly the fair impartial laugh.Sometimes she lifts her strain, and paints the scenesOf beauteous life; whate’er can deck mankind,Or charm the heart, in generous Bevil show’d.     O thou, whose wisdom, solid yet refin’d,Whose patriot virtues, and consummate skillTo touch the finer springs that move the world,Join’d to whate’er the graces can bestow,And all Apollo’s animating fire,Give thee with pleasing dignity to shineAt once the guardian, ornament, and joyOf polish’d life; permit the rural muse,O Chesterfield, to grace thee with her song.Ere to the shades again she humbly flies,Indulge her fond ambition, in thy train(For every muse has in thy train a place)To mark thy various full-accomplish’d mind,To mark that spirit which with British scornRejects th’ allurements of corrupted power;That elegant politeness which excels,Ev’n in the judgment of presumptuous France,The boasted manners of her shining court;That wit, the vivid energy of sense,The truth of nature, which, with Attic pointAnd kind well-temper’d satire, smoothly keen,Steals through the soul and without pain corrects.Or, rising thence with yet a brighter flame,O let me hail thee on some glorious day,When to the listening senate ardent crowdBritannia’s sons to hear her pleaded cause!Then, dress’d by thee, more amiably fair,Truth the soft robe of mild persuasion wears;Thou to assenting reason giv’st againHer own enlighten’d thoughts; call’d from the heart,Th’ obedient passions on thy voice attend;     And ev’n reluctant party feels a whileThy gracious power, as through the varied mazeOf eloquence, now smooth, now quick, now strong,Profound and clear, you roll the copious flood.     To thy lov’d haunt return, my happy muse:For now, behold! the joyous Winter days,Frosty, succeed; and through the blue serene,For sight too fine, th’ ethereal nitre flies,Killing infectious damps, and the spent airStoring afresh with elemental life.Close crowds the shining atmosphere; and bindsOur strengthen’d bodies in its cold embrace,Constringent; feeds, and animates our blood;Refines our spirits, through the new-strung nervesIn swifter sallies darting to the brain;Where sits the soul, intense, collected, cool,Bright as the skies, and as the season keen.All nature feels the renovating forceOf Winter, only to the thoughtless eyeIn ruin seen. The frost-concocted glebeDraws in abundant vegetable soul,And gathers vigour for the coming year;A stronger glow sits on the lively cheekOf ruddy fire; and luculent alongThe purer rivers flow: their sullen deeps,Transparent, open to the shepherd’s gaze,And murmur hoarser at the fixing frost.     What art thou, frost? and whence are thy keen storesDeriv’d, thou secret all-invading power,Whom ev’n th’ illusive fluid cannot fly?Is not thy potent energy, unseen,Myriads of little salts, or hook’d, or shap’dLike double wedges, and diffus’d immenseThrough water, earth, and ether? Hence at eve,Steam’d eager from the red horizon round,With the fierce rage of Winter deep suffus’d,An icy gale, oft shifting, o’er the poolBreathes a blue film, and in its mid-careerArrests the bickering stream. The loosen’d ice,Let down the flood and half dissolv’d by day,Rustles no more; but to the sedgy bankFast grows, or gathers round the pointed stone,A crystal pavement, by the breath of heavenCemented firm; till, seiz’d from shore to shore,The whole imprison’d river growls below.Loud rings the frozen earth, and hard reflectsA double noise; while, at his evening watch,The village-dog deters the nightly thief;The heifer lows, the distant waterfallSwells in the breeze; and with the hasty treadOf traveller the hollow-sounding plainShakes from afar. The full ethereal round,Infinite worlds disclosing to the view,Shines out intensely keen, and, all one copeOf starry glitter, glows from pole to pole.From pole to pole the rigid influence fallsThrough the still night, incessant, heavy, strong,And seizes nature fast. It freezes on,Till morn, late-rising o’er the drooping world,Lifts her pale eye unjoyous. Then appearsThe various labour of the silent night:Prone from the dripping eave, and dumb cascade,Whose idle torrents only seem to roar,The pendant icicle; the frost-work fair,Where transient hues and fancy’d figures rise;Wide-spouted o’er the hill the frozen brook,A livid tract, cold-gleaming on the morn;The forest bent beneath the plumy wave;And by the frost refin’d the whiter snowIncrusted hard, and sounding to the treadOf early shepherd, as he pensive seeksHis pining flock, or from the mountain top,Pleas’d with the slippery surface, swift descends.     ‘Tis done! Dread Winter spreads his latest glooms,And reigns tremendous o’er the conquer’d year.How dead the vegetable kingdom lies!How dumb the tuneful! Horror wide extendsHis melancholy empire. Here, fond man!Behold thy pictur’d life; pass some few years,Thy flowering Spring, thy Summer’s ardent strength,Thy sober Autumn fading into age,And pale concluding Winter comes at lastAnd shuts the scene. Ah! whither now are fledThose dreams of greatness? those unsolid hopesOf happiness? those longings after fame?Those restless cares? those busy bustling days?Those gay-spent festive nights? those veering thoughts,Lost between good and ill, that shared thy life?All now are vanish’d! Virtue sole survives,Immortal, never-failing friend of man,His guide to happiness on high. And see!‘Tis come, the glorious morn! the second birthOf heaven and earth! awakening nature hearsThe new-creating word, and starts to lifeIn every heighten’d form, from pain and deathFor ever free. The great eternal scheme,Involving all, and in a perfect wholeUniting, as the prospect wider spreads,To reason’s eye refin’d clears up apace.Ye vainly wise! ye blind presumptuous! now,Confounded in the dust, adore that PowerAnd Wisdom oft arraign’d: see now the causeWhy unassuming worth in secret liv’dAnd died neglected: why the good man’s shareIn life was gall and bitterness of soul:Why the lone widow and her orphans pin’dIn starving solitude; while luxuryIn palaces lay straining her low thoughtTo form unreal wants: why heaven-born truthAnd moderation fair wore the red marksOf superstition’s scourge; why licens’d pain,That cruel spoiler, that embosom’d foe,Embitter’d all our bliss. Ye good distress’d!Ye noble few! who here unbending standBeneath life’s pressure, yet a little while,And what your bounded view, which only sawA little part, deem’d evil is no more:The storms of wintry time will quickly pass,And one unbounded Spring encircle all.


^^EOP^^

Januarie. Ægloga prima. ARGVMENT.    IN this fyrst Æglogue Colin clout a shepheardes boy complaineth him of his vnfortunate loue, being but newly (as semeth) enamoured of a countrie lasse called Rosalinde: with which strong affection being very sore traueled, he compareth his carefull case to the sadde season of the yeare, to the frostie ground, to the frosen trees, and to his owne winterbeaten flocke. And lastlye, fynding himselfe robbed of all former pleasaunce and delights, hee breaketh his Pipe in peeces, and casteth him selfe to the ground.COLIN Cloute.A Shepeheards boye (no better doe him call) when Winters wastful spight was almost spent, All in a sunneshine day, as did befall, Led forth his flock, that had been long ypent. So faynt they woxe, and feeble in the folde, That now vnnethes their feete could them vphold. All as the Sheepe, such was the shepeheards looke, For pale and wanne he was, (alas the while,) May seeme he lovd, or els some care he tooke: Well couth he tune his pipe, and frame his stile. Tho to a hill his faynting flocke he ledde, And thus him playnd, the while his shepe there fedde. Ye gods of loue, that pitie louers payne, (if any gods the paine of louers pitie:) Looke from aboue, where you in ioyes remaine, And bowe your eares vnto my doleful dittie. And Pan thou shepheards God, that once didst loue, Pitie the paines, that thou thy selfe didst proue. Thou barrein ground, whome winters wrath hath wasted, Art made a myrrhour, to behold my plight: Whilome thy fresh spring flowrd, and after hasted Thy sommer prowde with Daffadillies dight. And now is come thy wynters stormy state, Thy mantle mard, wherein thou mas-kedst late. Such rage as winters, reigneth in my heart, My life bloud friesing wtih vnkindly cold: Such stormy stoures do breede my balefull smarte, As if my yeare were wast, and woxen old. And yet alas, but now my spring begonne, And yet alas, yt is already donne. You naked trees, whose shady leaves are lost, Wherein the byrds were wont to build their bowre: And now are clothd with mosse and hoary frost, Instede of bloosmes, wherwith your buds did flowre: I see your teares, that from your boughes doe raine, Whose drops in drery ysicles remaine. All so my lustfull leafe is drye and sere, My timely buds with wayling all are wasted: The blossome, which my braunch of youth did beare, With breathed sighes is blowne away, & blasted, And from mine eyes the drizling teares descend, As on your boughes the ysicles depend. Thou feeble flocke, whose fleece is rough and rent, Whose knees are weak through fast and evill fare: Mayst witnesse well by thy ill gouernement, Thy maysters mind is ouercome with care. Thou weak, I wanne: thou leabe, I quite forlorne: With mourning pyne I, you with pyning mourne. A thousand sithes I curse that carefull hower, Wherein I longd the neighbour towne to see: And eke tenne thousand sithes I blesse the stoure, Wherein I sawe so fayre a sight, as shee. Yet all for naught: snch [such] sight hath bred my bane. Ah God, that loue should breede both ioy and payne. It is not Hobbinol, wherefore I plaine, Albee my loue he seeke with dayly suit: His clownish gifts and curtsies I disdaine, His kiddes, his cracknelles, and his early fruit. Ah foolish Hobbinol, thy gyfts bene vayne: Colin them gives to Rosalind againe. I loue thilke lasse, (alas why doe I loue?) And am forlorne, (alas why am I lorne?) Shee deignes not my good will, but doth reproue, And of my rurall musick holdeth scorne. Shepheards deuise she hateth as the snake, And laughes the songes, that Colin Clout doth make. Wherefore my pype, albee rude Pan thou please, Yet for thou pleasest not, where most I would: And thou vnlucky Muse, that wontst to ease My musing mynd, yet canst not, when thou should: Both pype and Muse, shall sore the while abye. So broke his oaten pype, and downe dyd lye. By that, the welked Phoebus gan availe, His weary waine, and nowe the frosty Night Her mantle black through heauen gan overhaile. Which seene, the pensife boy halfe in despight Arose, and homeward drove his sonned sheepe, Whose hanging heads did seeme his carefull case to weepe.


^^EOP^^

      I Throughout the afternoon I watched them there, Snow-fairies falling, falling from the sky, Whirling fantastic in the misty air, Contending fierce for space supremacy. And they flew down a mightier force at night, As though in heaven there was revolt and riot, And they, frail things had taken panic flight Down to the calm earth seeking peace and quiet. I went to bed and rose at early dawn To see them huddled together in a heap, Each merged into the other upon the lawn, Worn out by the sharp struggle, fast asleep. The sun shone brightly on them half the day, By night they stealthily had stol’n away.      II And suddenly my thoughts then turned to you Who came to me upon a winter’s night, When snow-sprites round my attic window flew, Your hair disheveled, eyes aglow with light. My heart was like the weather when you came, The wanton winds were blowing loud and long; But you, with joy and passion all aflame, You danced and sang a lilting summer song. I made room for you in my little bed, Took covers from the closet fresh and warm, A downful pillow for your scented head, And lay down with you resting in my arm. You went with Dawn. You left me ere the day, The lonely actor of a dreamy play. 


^^EOP^^

The wintry west extends his blast,And hail and rain does blaw;Or, the stormy north sends driving forthThe blinding sleet and snaw:While tumbling brown, the burn comes down,And roars frae bank to brae;And bird and beast in covert rest,And pass the heartless day.The sweeping blast, the sky o’ercast,The joyless winter-day,Let others fear, to me more dearThan all the pride of May:The tempest’s howl, it soothes my soul,My griefs it seems to join;The leafless trees my fancy please,Their fate resembles mine!Thou Pow’r Supreme, whose mighty schemeThese woes of mine fulfil,Here, firm, I rest, they must be best,Because they are Thy will!Then all I want (O, do Thou grantThis one request of mine!)Since to enjoy Thou dost deny,Assist me to resign.


^^EOP^^

Came the dread Archer up yonder lawn —Night is the time for the old to die —But woe for an arrow that smote the fawn,When the hind that was sick unscathed went by.Father lay moaning, Her fault was sore(Night is the time when the old must die),Yet, ah to bless her, my child, once more,For heart is failing: the end is nigh.Daughter, my daughter, my girl, I cried(Night is the time for the old to die)Woe for the wish if till morn ye bide —Dark was the welkin and wild the sky.Heavily plunged from the roof the snow —(Night is the time when the old will die),She answered, My mother, 'tis well, I go.Sparkled the north star, the wrack flew high.First at his head, and last at his feet(Night is the time when the old should die),Kneeling I watched till his soul did fleet,None else that loved him, none else were nigh.I wept in the night as the desolate weep(Night is the time for the old to die),Cometh my daughter? the drifts are deep,Across the cold hollows how white they lie.I sought her afar through the spectral trees(Night is the time when the old must die),The fells were all muffled, the floods did freeze,And a wrathful moon hung red in the sky.By night I found her where pent waves steal(Night is the time when the old should die),But she lay stiff by the locked mill-wheel,And the old stars lived in their homes on high.


^^EOP^^

I went out at night alone; The young blood flowing beyond the seaSeemed to have drenched my spirit’s wings— I bore my sorrow heavily.But when I lifted up my head From shadows shaken on the snow,I saw Orion in the east Burn steadily as long ago.From windows in my father’s house, Dreaming my dreams on winter nights,I watched Orion as a girl Above another city’s lights.Years go, dreams go, and youth goes too, The world’s heart breaks beneath its wars,All things are changed, save in the east The faithful beauty of the stars.


^^EOP^^

The high school kids are so beautiful in their lavender blouses and crisp white shirts.  They open their mouths to sing with that far-off stare they had looking out from the crib.  Their voices lift up from the marble bed of the high altar to the blue endless ceiling  of heaven as depicted in the cloudy dome— and we—as the parents—crane our necks  to see our children and what is above us— and ahead of us—until the end when we  are invited up to sing with them—sopranos and altos—tenors and basses—to sing the great  Hallelujah Chorus—and I’m standing with the other stunned and gray fathers—holding our sheet music—  searching for our parts—and we realize— our voices are surprisingly rich—experienced—  For the Lord God omnipotent reigneth— and how do we all know to come in  at exactly the right moment?—Forever and ever— and how can it not seem that we shall reign  forever and ever—in one voice with our beautiful children—looking out into all those lights. 


^^EOP^^

The food is on the table. Turkey tanned to a cowboy boot luster, potatoes mashed and mounded in a bowl whose lip is lined with blue flowers linked by grey vines faded from washing. Everyone’s heads have turned to elongate the table’s view—a last supper twisted toward a horizon where the Christmas tree, crowned by a window, sets into itself half inclined.   Each belly cries. Each pair of eyes admonished by Aunt Photographer. Look up. You’re wined and dined for the older folks who’ve pined to see your faces, your lives, lightly framed in this moment’s flash. Parents are moved, press their children’s heads up from the table, hide their hunger by rubbing lightly wrinkled hands atop their laps. They’ll hold the image as long as need be, seconds away from grace. 


^^EOP^^

Water rocks the hull of the ship and the dark night comes on the waves
    against the dark wood taken from the forests on the island
the people sleep or fight to sleep or smoke the coarse-leaved tobacco
    with cans of saltwater at hand nearby for threat of fire
the people dream of rich goods and silk and land and sea
    slender bars of chocolate hidden in the trunk with jewelry
stuffed below the bed the people dream of fire and awake
    to the damp air salt in the throat and cough to awake
to the dark night that comes on the waves against the dark wood
    taken from the hands of the people from the forest on the Island
as the ship moves East leaving the water of the Islands bays rocks and close current
    into open sea along the Black Current the Black Sivo the current
that runs along the Islands of the North and takes the ship
    into the waters of open sea  
On the boats come the goods that cross the waters
    like veins and blood rushing
the goods cross the waters
 
raw silk in bundles the fineness of two strands
thin untwisted silk
white scarlet blue mustard wound in small skeins
quantities of velvets gold embroidered with gold woven and brocades
silver thread upon silk in patterns detailed and rich
damasks satin taffetas linen from the grass called lencesuelo
musk benzoin ivory metal basins copper cast iron pots
bed ornaments hangings coverlets tapestries of different shades
horse-trappings finished with glass beads seed-pearls rubies sapphires
crystals nails sheet-iron tin lead salt petre
gunpowder wheat flour preserves of orange peach pear nectarine plums
cherries nutmeg pepper ginger salt pork chestnuts walnuts chicueyes
thread needles thimbles cushions pins boxes
writing cases engraved with scenes of bamboo and waves
moons and mist
beds chairs gilded benches buffalos geese swans horses males asses
caged birds that sing birds that talk
birds the color of ash the color of sunrise  
rum is the cane’s sugar water
invented from smart mouths of slaves
discarded impurities boiled to a bitter blackness
rough as gravel
so unwanted they lined the lips of rain ditches
calcium rich tips
of animal hooves
mixing with rain dirt and mud
old leaves fiber and mangrove
the unwanted collected
yet
in the rich dirt purity of need
a sweetness beyond sweetness
the seven o clock sweat
of an unwashed neck
hair fibers and cane pulp
    the foaming rush of juice and song
        beaten into barefoot psalms
the simple chemistry of this
distillation of a kiss
thirst
and a word like rum 
and a word like rum 
and a word like…  
achuete
atole
avocado
balsa
banqueta
cachuete
calabaza
camachile
camote
calachuche
chico
chocolate
coyote
nanay
tatay
tiangui
tocayo
zacate
zapote 
On the boats come the blood that cross the waters
    like veins and goods the blood comes
crossing the waters 
Blanco y India = Mestizo
Mestizo y Mestiza = Mulato
Blanca y Mulata = Terceron, Morisco
Indio y Torna-atras = Lobo
Indio y Negra = Zambo
Indio y No te entiendo = Ahi te estas
Indio y Coyota = Chamiso
Indio y Loba = Grifo
Negro y Mulato = Galfaro
Negro y Zamba = Zambo prieto
Mulato y Barzina = Coyote
Mulato (o Chino) y Loba = Jibaro
Mulato y Tente en el aire = No te entiendo 
On the boats come the blood
the blood
the blood 
a shadow of water
dampens
the curling script of graffiti 
a swirling necklage
of smooth-abdomened ants
carry blond eggs
on their backs
the plumb jaws of larvae
undulating
green tufts of grass
shoulder concrete
exhaling in small shatterings
the day’s weightlessness 
the sky
the revolting face
of an enraged
and tender lover
promises a flashing echo
and wind 
when the rain comes again
you will remember
a certain origin
a canopy of molecules and mist
you will forget to want yourself
a different shade a different shape
instead
another bed
of injury and faith
a quiet quiet some
thing
no stronger than a leaf
or a wave
taking shape 
Water rocks the hull of the ship and the dark night comes on the waves
    against the dark wood taken from the forests on the island
the people sleep or fight to sleep or smoke the coarse-leaved tobacco
    with cans of saltwater at hand nearby for threat of fire
the people dream of rich goods and silk and land and sea
    slender bars of chocolate hidden in the trunk with jewelry
stuffed below the bed the people dream of fire and awake
    to the damp air salt in the throat and cough to awake
to the dark night that comes on the waves against the dark wood
    taken from the hands of the people from the forest on the Island
as the ship moves East leaving the water of the Islands bays rocks and close current
    into open sea along the Black Current the Black Sivo the current
that runs along the Islands of the North and takes the ship
    into the waters of open sea


^^EOP^^

Out in the yard, my sister and I tore thread from century plants to braid into bracelets, ate chalky green bananas, threw coconuts onto the sidewalk to crack their hard, hairy skulls.  The world had begun to happen, but not time. We would live forever, sunburnt and pricker-stuck, our promises written in blood. Not yet  would men or illness distinguish us, our thoughts cleave us in two. If she squeezed sour calamondins into a potion, I drank it. When I jumped from the fig tree, she jumped.


^^EOP^^

In the middle of Decemberto start overto assume againan orderat the endof wonderto conjureand then to keepslow dirty sleetwithin its streetlight

^^EOP^^

I miss the moshpit pushed to the side of the bed.The hard and fast rules, the business,Walking across town the baby’s hand in mineGave me anxiety Rosado barely mellowed.Who doesn’t love to hear about anxiety.You wouldn’t be too wrong to wake from dreamingInto an amusement park sluice of RiojaEau de post-Auden thanks a lot Timex hubbub.Those feelings are in their way good luck.I don’t even need a communion waferTo feel the need to broadcast imprecationsFade like a docent as the hedge fund falls.

^^EOP^^

              the plates are broken after just one meal: plates that mimic lily pads or horseshoe crabs,              swifts’ wings, golden koi, whirlpools, blowholes in rictus:               all smashed against the table’s edge—

^^EOP^^

a woman moves through dog rose and juniper bushes,a pussy clean and folded between her legs,breasts like the tips of her festive shoesshine silently in her heavy armoire.one blackbird, one cow, one horse.the sea beats against the wall of the waterless. she walks to a phone booth that waitsa fair distance from all three villages.it’s a game she could have heard on the radio:a question, a number, an answer, a prize.her pussy reaches up and turns on the light in her womb.  

^^EOP^^

I’m not interested in sadness,just a yard as elder earth,a library of sunflowersbattered by the night’s rain.When sliced wide, halved at dawn,I can see how you exist, O satellite town, your bright possibility born again in drywall and the diary with the trick lock.Hardly held, for years I sleptwith my window wide open,wanting screen-cut threads of rain.Blind suburb, dear untruth,you who already know what I meanwhen I praise every spared copse,you were my battery, my sad clue,but after I mowed the lawnand watched robins chestingfor seeds I couldn’t resistwhat hung in the toolshed, where, with a pair of garden shearsI cut all the hair from my arms. That need,that scared need to whitenor clean a surface: plywood or lawn,and the spywall behind which I stood,stock-still, and sinned againstthe fly’s flyness. Though you liveinside me, though you laid eggsin the moisture at the cornersof my eyes, I still dream aboutyour sinking empire twenty feet abovesea level, and the many thingsyou never see: beautiful bleachedgas can, tomato posts bent into art,

^^EOP^^

It’s true I never write, but I would gladly die with you.

^^EOP^^

Such green, such green,this apple-, pea- and celadon,this emerald and pine and limeunsheathed to makea miser weep, to make his punybunions shrink; these seasand seas of peony, these showytons of roseto urge a musted monk disrobe,an eremitic nun unfold;such breathy, breathy mothand wasp, such gleeful,greedy bee to bidthe bully hearts of copsand bosses sob,to tell a stubby root unstub, a rustedhinge unrust, the slug unsalt;to stir the fustedlungs to brim, the skin to sting,the dormant,tinning tongue to singe and hymn.

^^EOP^^

The heat so peaked tonightthe moon can’t coola scum-mucked swimmingpool, or breezeemerge to lift the frowsyruff of owls too hotto hoot, (the mouse and brownbarn rat astuteenough to know to dropand dash) whileon the bunched up,corkscrewed sheets of cotsand slumped brass beds,the fitful twistand kink and plead to dreama dream of airas bitter cruel as wintergale that scrapes and blowsand gusts the grateto luffthe whitened ashes from the coal.

^^EOP^^

Less a nip than gnaw,the way a goat,tethered, will ruminatea rope; the wayeach 

^^EOP^^

This is the house of the very rich.You can tell because it’s taken allThe colors and left only the spacesBetween colors where the absenceOf rage and hunger survives. If you couldGet close you could touch the embersOf red, the tiny beaks of yellow,

^^EOP^^

In their excess, their blowsy dreamingand King Solomon-like tempers, the cloudspossess the grandeur of eighteenth-century oils,when a painter earned his professionas an anatomist. Those artists of verdigris and gamboge, too gorged on joy, perhaps,treated that blank pasture of the “heavens”like something that had lived. Their crawly undoings remind usof the mean curiosities of sheep, the sea’s half-remembered boil, or a few twisted bolls of cotton—the morning phosphorescentor sunset a dull, worn-out gilt.The nights there were scumbled with light.How could we ever have taken themfor the abstinence of art?

^^EOP^^

When working on a small scaleHe is practicing a gesture.So much of life is practicing gestures.So much of living is evaluatingThose around you for signs of damage.Now it is night, morning’s a blink away.Sleep is sometimes thought ofAs an avalanche of repair gnomesThat attends your pit stop.Would that we were sleeping now!Viable alternatives will be reviledUntil the point of no return is passed.The only reasonable course of actionIs to look for sizeable flotsam,Redo the resume, learn a martial art.

^^EOP^^

It isn’t me, he’d say,
stepping out of a landscape
that offered, he’d thought, the backdrop
to a plausible existence
until he entered it; it’s just not me,
he’d murmur, walking away.  It’s not quite me, he’d explain,
apologetic but firm,
leaving some job they’d found him.
They found him others: he’d go,
smiling his smile, putting
his best foot forward, till again 
he’d find himself reluctantly concluding
that this, too, wasn’t him.
He wanted to get married, make a home,
unfold a life among his neighbors’ lives,
branching and blossoming like a tree,
but when it came to it, it isn’t me 
was all he seemed to learn
from all his diligent forays outward.
And why it should be so hard
for someone not so different from themselves,
to find what they’d found, barely even seeking;
what gift he’d not been given, what forlorn 
charm of his they’d had the luck to lack,
puzzled them—though not unduly:
they lived inside their lives so fully
they couldn’t, in the end, believe in him,
except as some half-legendary figure
destined, or doomed, to carry on his back 
the weight of their own all-but-weightless, stray
doubts and discomforts. Only sometimes,
alone in offices or living rooms,
they’d hear that phrase again: it isn’t me,
and wonder, briefly, what they were, and where,
and feel the strangeness of being there.


^^EOP^^

it begins with your face of a stonewhere lips repose like two sealsin a coastal mist of cigarette smokeyou move through the streets—listing themis as useless as naming waves.

^^EOP^^

So when you go wherever it is you will gotake the moon with you and make it wear that democratic white shroud,pocketless, since rich and poor, we take nothing with us, save a small stick or dowelin the casket, so we can allburrow through the earth to the Holy Landwhen the time is right.Please forgive that I confessed your amusement at Shakespeare’s “mewling and puking”in my eulogy. 

^^EOP^^

We shall not come again, not to this wet           and summer day, nor to the waylaid placewhere you laid waste to me and I to you,           and where we reminisced recalling whodid what to whom. We shall not come again.          Not to the bed we thrashed nor to the memoryof the way I brushed my hair back, nights,          nor to the air we dared to share to breathe,or couldn’t quite. We shall not come again.          No more, my face seen round your corner, oryour briefcase found beneath my table. We          weren’t able, apt or sane. We shall not comeagain. Nor cry nor clutch, not even once          again. We shall not cover up in quiltsor bear the beast of one another’s guilts          or sit in silences made saddest bywhat 

^^EOP^^

A clementineOf inclement climateGrows tart.A crocusToo stoic to open,Won’t.Like an oysterThat cloisters a spoil of pearls,Untouched—The heart that’s hadEnoughStays shut.

^^EOP^^

Such pejorative deformities of soundWithout meaningful speech or musical equipoise,Annoyances none but 

^^EOP^^

If there’s pee on the seat it’s my pee, battery’s dead I killed it, canary at the bottom 

^^EOP^^

Or how, when last sun,

^^EOP^^

Before you were I loved youand when you were bornand when you took your first stepAlthough I did not knowgood luck I want to saylone penguin keep sturdily waddlingin the direction of those frozen mountains sisterof desolate sanctityI want to screamAlthough I did not know youI loved you later onas just a weedy thinga little skeleton I lovedBoth long pre-you a child myselfand as a man in retrospectI loved and I was therewhile they were raping youI loved althoughlike God

^^EOP^^

Off rows of windshieldsin the Amtrak lotrain in suddenclumps like jacks. Parked carswith people in themawaiting people they imaginehurtling through suburbsof silver woods awaiting them. Truelove needs interference,a certain blizzard distance,for the words to worm through.Remember Iowa?August storms that would self-sparkas if our fights could tripthe finest wire beneath the sidewalk.And the sunlight, harder after.

^^EOP^^

Let us tunnel Through the rubble,Through the thrum. Let us rut through the sum Of who we were, Or are,Or will be in the years to come: A couple Of someones Who used to be in love.

^^EOP^^




For Naomi Ginsberg, 1894—1956



I
Strange now to think of you, gone without corsets & eyes, while I walk on the sunny pavement of Greenwich Village.
downtown Manhattan, clear winter noon, and I’ve been up all night, talking, talking, reading the Kaddish aloud, listening to Ray Charles blues shout blind on the phonograph
the rhythm the rhythm—and your memory in my head three years after—And read Adonais’ last triumphant stanzas aloud—wept, realizing how we suffer—
And how Death is that remedy all singers dream of, sing, remember, prophesy as in the Hebrew Anthem, or the Buddhist Book of Answers—and my own imagination of a withered leaf—at dawn—
Dreaming back thru life, Your time—and mine accelerating toward Apocalypse,
the final moment—the flower burning in the Day—and what comes after,   
looking back on the mind itself that saw an American city
a flash away, and the great dream of Me or China, or you and a phantom Russia, or a crumpled bed that never existed—
like a poem in the dark—escaped back to Oblivion—
No more to say, and nothing to weep for but the Beings in the Dream, trapped in its disappearance,
sighing, screaming with it, buying and selling pieces of phantom, worshipping each other,
worshipping the God included in it all—longing or inevitability?—while it lasts, a Vision—anything more?
It leaps about me, as I go out and walk the street, look back over my shoulder, Seventh Avenue, the battlements of window office buildings shouldering each other high, under a cloud, tall as the sky an instant—and the sky above—an old blue place.
or down the Avenue to the south, to—as I walk toward the Lower East Side—where you walked 50 years ago, little girl—from Russia, eating the first poisonous tomatoes of America—frightened on the dock—
then struggling in the crowds of Orchard Street toward what?—toward Newark—
toward candy store, first home-made sodas of the century, hand-churned ice cream in backroom on musty brownfloor boards—
Toward education marriage nervous breakdown, operation, teaching school, and learning to be mad, in a dream—what is this life?
Toward the Key in the window—and the great Key lays its head of light on top of Manhattan, and over the floor, and lays down on the sidewalk—in a single vast beam, moving, as I walk down First toward the Yiddish Theater—and the place of poverty
you knew, and I know, but without caring now—Strange to have moved
thru Paterson, and the West, and Europe and here again,
with the cries of Spaniards now in the doorstoops doors and dark boys on the street, fire escapes old as you
-Tho you’re not old now, that’s left here with me—
Myself, anyhow, maybe as old as the universe—and I guess that dies with us—enough to cancel all that comes—What came is gone forever every time—
That’s good! That leaves it open for no regret—no fear radiators, lacklove, torture even toothache in the end—
Though while it comes it is a lion that eats the soul—and the lamb, the soul, in us, alas, offering itself in sacrifice to change’s fierce hunger—hair and teeth—and the roar of bonepain, skull bare, break rib, rot-skin, braintricked Implacability.
Ai! ai! we do worse! We are in a fix! And you’re out, Death let you out, Death had the Mercy, you’re done with your century, done with God, done with the path thru it—Done with yourself at last—Pure—Back to the Babe dark before your Father, before us all—before the world—
There, rest. No more suffering for you. I know where you’ve gone, it’s good.
No more flowers in the summer fields of New York, no joy now, no more fear of Louis,
and no more of his sweetness and glasses, his high school decades, debts, loves, frightened telephone calls, conception beds, relatives, hands—
No more of sister Elanor,.—she gone before you—we kept it secret—you killed her—or she killed herself to bear with you—an arthritic heart—But Death’s killed you both—No matter—
Nor your memory of your mother, 1915 tears in silent movies weeks and weeks—forgetting, aggrieve watching Marie Dressler address humanity, Chaplin dance in youth,
or Boris Godunov, Chaliapin’s at the Met, hailing his voice of a weeping Czar—by standing room with Elanor & Max—watching also the Capitalists take seats in Orchestra, white furs, diamonds,
with the YPSL’s hitch-hiking thru Pennsylvania, in black baggy gym skirts pants, photograph of 4 girls holding each other round the waste, and laughing eye, too coy, virginal solitude of 1920
all girls grown old, or dead, now, and that long hair in the grave—lucky to have husbands later—
You made it—I came too—Eugene my brother before (still grieving now and will gream on to his last stiff hand, as he goes thru his cancer—or kill—later perhaps—soon he will think—)
And it’s the last moment I remember, which I see them all, thru myself, now—tho not you
I didn’t foresee what you felt—what more hideous gape of bad mouth came first—to you—and were you prepared?
To go where? In that Dark—that—in that God? a radiance? A Lord in the Void? Like an eye in the black cloud in a dream? Adonoi at last, with you?
Beyond my remembrance! Incapable to guess! Not merely the yellow skull in the grave, or a box of worm dust, and a stained ribbon—Deathshead with Halo? can you believe it?
Is it only the sun that shines once for the mind, only the flash of existence, than none ever was?
Nothing beyond what we have—what you had—that so pitiful—yet Triumph,
to have been here, and changed, like a tree, broken, or flower—fed to the ground—but mad, with its petals, colored, thinking Great Universe, shaken, cut in the head, leaf stript, hid in an egg crate hospital, cloth wrapped, sore—freaked in the moon brain, Naughtless.
No flower like that flower, which knew itself in the garden, and fought the knife—lost
Cut down by an idiot Snowman’s icy—even in the Spring—strange ghost thought—some Death—Sharp icicle in his hand—crowned with old roses—a dog for his eyes—cock of a sweatshop—heart of electric irons.
All the accumulations of life, that wear us out—clocks, bodies, consciousness, shoes, breasts—begotten sons—your Communism—‘Paranoia’ into hospitals.
You once kicked Elanor in the leg, she died of heart failure later. You of stroke. Asleep? within a year, the two of you, sisters in death. Is Elanor happy?
Max grieves alive in an office on Lower Broadway, lone large mustache over midnight Accountings, not sure. l His life passes—as he sees—and what does he doubt now? Still dream of making money, or that might have made money, hired nurse, had children, found even your Immortality, Naomi?
I’ll see him soon. Now I’ve got to cut through—to talk to you—as I didn’t when you had a mouth.
Forever. And we’re bound for that, Forever—like Emily Dickinson’s horses—headed to the End.
They know the way—These Steeds—run faster than we think—it’s our own life they cross—and take with them. 
       Magnificent, mourned no more, marred of heart, mind behind, married dreamed, mortal changed—Ass and face done with murder.
       In the world, given, flower maddened, made no Utopia, shut under pine, almed in Earth, balmed in Lone, Jehovah, accept.
       Nameless, One Faced, Forever beyond me, beginningless, endless, Father in death. Tho I am not there for this Prophecy, I am unmarried, I’m hymnless, I’m Heavenless, headless in blisshood I would still adore
       Thee, Heaven, after Death, only One blessed in Nothingness, not light or darkness, Dayless Eternity—
       Take this, this Psalm, from me, burst from my hand in a day, some of my Time, now given to Nothing—to praise Thee—But Death
       This is the end, the redemption from Wilderness, way for the Wonderer, House sought for All, black handkerchief washed clean by weeping—page beyond Psalm—Last change of mine and Naomi—to God’s perfect Darkness—Death, stay thy phantoms!   II
       Over and over—refrain—of the Hospitals—still haven’t written your history—leave it abstract—a few images
       run thru the mind—like the saxophone chorus of houses and years—remembrance of electrical shocks.
       By long nites as a child in Paterson apartment, watching over your nervousness—you were fat—your next move—
       By that afternoon I stayed home from school to take care of you—once and for all—when I vowed forever that once man disagreed with my opinion of the cosmos, I was lost—
       By my later burden—vow to illuminate mankind—this is release of particulars—(mad as you)—(sanity a trick of agreement)—
       But you stared out the window on the Broadway Church corner, and spied a mystical assassin from Newark,
       So phoned the Doctor—‘OK go way for a rest’—so I put on my coat and walked you downstreet—On the way a grammarschool boy screamed, unaccountably—‘Where you goin Lady to Death’? I shuddered—
       and you covered your nose with motheaten fur collar, gas mask against poison sneaked into downtown atmosphere, sprayed by Grandma—
       And was the driver of the cheesebox Public Service bus a member of the gang? You shuddered at his face, I could hardly get you on—to New York, very Times Square, to grab another Greyhound—
       where we hung around 2 hours fighting invisible bugs and jewish sickness—breeze poisoned by Roosevelt—
       out to get you—and me tagging along, hoping it would end in a quiet room in a Victorian house by a lake.
       Ride 3 hours thru tunnels past all American industry, Bayonne preparing for World War II, tanks, gas fields, soda factories, diners, loco-motive roundhouse fortress—into piney woods New Jersey Indians—calm towns—long roads thru sandy tree fields—
       Bridges by deerless creeks, old wampum loading the streambeddown there a tomahawk or Pocahontas bone—and a million old ladies voting for Roosevelt in brown small houses, roads off the Madness highway—
       perhaps a hawk in a tree, or a hermit looking for an owl-filled branch—
       All the time arguing—afraid of strangers in the forward double seat, snoring regardless—what busride they snore on now?
       ‘Allen, you don’t understand—it’s—ever since those 3 big sticks up my back—they did something to me in Hospital, they poisoned me, they want to see me dead—3 big sticks, 3 big sticks—
       ‘The Bitch! Old Grandma! Last week I saw her, dressed in pants like an old man, with a sack on her back, climbing up the brick side of the apartment
       ‘On the fire escape, with poison germs, to throw on me—at night—maybe Louis is helping her—he’s under her power—
       ‘I’m your mother, take me to Lakewood’ (near where Graf Zeppelin had crashed before, all Hitler in Explosion) ‘where I can hide.’
       We got there—Dr. Whatzis rest home—she hid behind a closet—demanded a blood transfusion.
       We were kicked out—tramping with Valise to unknown shady lawn houses—dusk, pine trees after dark—long dead street filled with crickets and poison ivy—
       I shut her up by now—big house REST HOME ROOMS—gave the landlady her money for the week—carried up the iron valise—sat on bed waiting to escape—
       Neat room in attic with friendly bedcover—lace curtains—spinning wheel rug—Stained wallpaper old as Naomi. We were home.
       I left on the next bus to New York—laid my head back in the last seat, depressed—the worst yet to come?—abandoning her, rode in torpor—I was only 12.
       Would she hide in her room and come out cheerful for breakfast? Or lock her door and stare thru the window for sidestreet spies? Listen at keyholes for Hitlerian invisible gas? Dream in a chair—or mock me, by—in front of a mirror, alone?
       12 riding the bus at nite thru New Jersey, have left Naomi to Parcae in Lakewood’s haunted house—left to my own fate bus—sunk in a seat—all violins broken—my heart sore in my ribs—mind was empty—Would she were safe in her coffin—
       Or back at Normal School in Newark, studying up on America in a black skirt—winter on the street without lunch—a penny a pickle—home at night to take care of Elanor in the bedroom—
       First nervous breakdown was 1919—she stayed home from school and lay in a dark room for three weeks—something bad—never said what—every noise hurt—dreams of the creaks of Wall Street—
       Before the gray Depression—went upstate New York—recovered—Lou took photo of her sitting crossleg on the grass—her long hair wound with flowers—smiling—playing lullabies on mandolin—poison ivy smoke in left-wing summer camps and me in infancy saw trees—
       or back teaching school, laughing with idiots, the backward classes—her Russian specialty—morons with dreamy lips, great eyes, thin feet & sicky fingers, swaybacked, rachitic—
       great heads pendulous over Alice in Wonderland, a blackboard full of C A T.
       Naomi reading patiently, story out of a Communist fairy book—Tale of the Sudden Sweetness of the Dictator—Forgiveness of Warlocks—Armies Kissing—
       Deathsheads Around the Green Table—The King & the Workers—Paterson Press printed them up in the ’30s till she went mad, or they folded, both.
       O Paterson! I got home late that nite. Louis was worried. How could I be so—didn’t I think? I shouldn’t have left her. Mad in Lakewood. Call the Doctor. Phone the home in the pines. Too late.
       Went to bed exhausted, wanting to leave the world (probably that year newly in love with R         my high school mind hero, jewish boy who came a doctor later—then silent neat kid—
       I later laying down life for him, moved to Manhattan—followed him to college—Prayed on ferry to help mankind if admitted—vowed, the day I journeyed to Entrance Exam—
       by being honest revolutionary labor lawyer—would train for that—inspired by Sacco Vanzetti, Norman Thomas, Debs, Altgeld, Sand-burg, Poe—Little Blue Books. I wanted to be President, or Senator.
       ignorant woe—later dreams of kneeling by R’s shocked knees declaring my love of 1941—What sweetness he’d have shown me, tho, that I’d wished him & despaired—first love—a crush—
       Later a mortal avalanche, whole mountains of homosexuality, Matterhorns of cock, Grand Canyons of asshole—weight on my melancholy head—
       meanwhile I walked on Broadway imagining Infinity like a rubber ball without space beyond—what’s outside?—coming home to Graham Avenue still melancholy passing the lone green hedges across the street, dreaming after the movies—)
       The telephone rang at 2 A.M.—Emergency—she’d gone mad—Naomi hiding under the bed screaming bugs of Mussolini—Help! Louis! Buba! Fascists! Death!—the landlady frightened—old fag attendant screaming back at her—
       Terror, that woke the neighbors—old ladies on the second floor recovering from menopause—all those rags between thighs, clean sheets, sorry over lost babies—husbands ashen—children sneering at Yale, or putting oil in hair at CCNY—or trembling in Montclair State Teachers College like Eugene—
       Her big leg crouched to her breast, hand outstretched Keep Away, wool dress on her thighs, fur coat dragged under the bed—she barricaded herself under bedspring with suitcases.
       Louis in pajamas listening to phone, frightened—do now?—Who could know?—my fault, delivering her to solitude?—sitting in the dark room on the sofa, trembling, to figure out—
       He took the morning train to Lakewood, Naomi still under bed—thought he brought poison Cops—Naomi screaming—Louis what happened to your heart then? Have you been killed by Naomi’s ecstasy?
       Dragged her out, around the corner, a cab, forced her in with valise, but the driver left them off at drugstore. Bus stop, two hours’ wait.
       I lay in bed nervous in the 4-room apartment, the big bed in living room, next to Louis’ desk—shaking—he came home that nite, late, told me what happened.
       Naomi at the prescription counter defending herself from the enemy—racks of children’s books, douche bags, aspirins, pots, blood—‘Don’t come near me—murderers! Keep away! Promise not to kill me!’   
       Louis in horror at the soda fountain—with Lakewood girlscouts—Coke addicts—nurses—busmen hung on schedule—Police from country precinct, dumbed—and a priest dreaming of pigs on an ancient cliff?
       Smelling the air—Louis pointing to emptiness?—Customers vomiting their Cokes—or staring—Louis humiliated—Naomi triumphant—The Announcement of the Plot. Bus arrives, the drivers won’t have them on trip to New York.
       Phonecalls to Dr. Whatzis, ‘She needs a rest,’ The mental hospital—State Greystone Doctors—‘Bring her here, Mr. Ginsberg.’
       Naomi, Naomi—sweating, bulge-eyed, fat, the dress unbuttoned at one side—hair over brow, her stocking hanging evilly on her legs—screaming for a blood transfusion—one righteous hand upraised—a shoe in it—barefoot in the Pharmacy—
       The enemies approach—what poisons? Tape recorders? FBI? Zhdanov hiding behind the counter? Trotsky mixing rat bacteria in the back of the store? Uncle Sam in Newark, plotting deathly perfumes in the Negro district? Uncle Ephraim, drunk with murder in the politician’s bar, scheming of Hague? Aunt Rose passing water thru the needles of the Spanish Civil War?
       till the hired $35 ambulance came from Red Bank——Grabbed her arms—strapped her on the stretcher—moaning, poisoned by imaginaries, vomiting chemicals thru Jersey, begging mercy from Essex County to Morristown—
       And back to Greystone where she lay three years—that was the last breakthrough, delivered her to Madhouse again—
       On what wards—I walked there later, oft—old catatonic ladies, gray as cloud or ash or walls—sit crooning over floorspace—Chairs—and the wrinkled hags acreep, accusing—begging my 13-year-old mercy—
       ‘Take me home’—I went alone sometimes looking for the lost Naomi, taking Shock—and I’d say, ‘No, you’re crazy Mama,—Trust the Drs.’— 
       And Eugene, my brother, her elder son, away studying Law in a furnished room in Newark—
       came Paterson-ward next day—and he sat on the broken-down couch in the living room—‘We had to send her back to Greystone’—
       —his face perplexed, so young, then eyes with tears—then crept weeping all over his face—‘What for?’ wail vibrating in his cheekbones, eyes closed up, high voice—Eugene’s face of pain.
       Him faraway, escaped to an Elevator in the Newark Library, his bottle daily milk on windowsill of $5 week furn room downtown at trolley tracks—
       He worked 8 hrs. a day for $20/wk—thru Law School years—stayed by himself innocent near negro whorehouses.
       Unlaid, poor virgin—writing poems about Ideals and politics letters to the editor Pat Eve News—(we both wrote, denouncing Senator Borah and Isolationists—and felt mysterious toward Paterson City Hall—
       I sneaked inside it once—local Moloch tower with phallus spire & cap o’ ornament, strange gothic Poetry that stood on Market Street—replica Lyons’ Hotel de Ville—
       wings, balcony & scrollwork portals, gateway to the giant city clock, secret map room full of Hawthorne—dark Debs in the Board of Tax—Rembrandt smoking in the gloom—
       Silent polished desks in the great committee room—Aldermen? Bd of Finance? Mosca the hairdresser aplot—Crapp the gangster issuing orders from the john—The madmen struggling over Zone, Fire, Cops & Backroom Metaphysics—we’re all dead—outside by the bus stop Eugene stared thru childhood—
       where the Evangelist preached madly for 3 decades, hard-haired, cracked & true to his mean Bible—chalked Prepare to Meet Thy God on civic pave—
       or God is Love on the railroad overpass concrete—he raved like I would rave, the lone Evangelist—Death on City Hall—)
       But Gene, young,—been Montclair Teachers College 4 years—taught half year & quit to go ahead in life—afraid of Discipline Problems—dark sex Italian students, raw girls getting laid, no English, sonnets disregarded—and he did not know much—just that he lost—
       so broke his life in two and paid for Law—read huge blue books and rode the ancient elevator 13 miles away in Newark & studied up hard for the future
       just found the Scream of Naomi on his failure doorstep, for the final time, Naomi gone, us lonely—home—him sitting there—
       Then have some chicken soup, Eugene. The Man of Evangel wails in front of City Hall. And this year Lou has poetic loves of suburb middle age—in secret—music from his 1937 book—Sincere—he longs for beauty—
       No love since Naomi screamed—since 1923?—now lost in Greystone ward—new shock for her—Electricity, following the 40 Insulin.   
       And Metrazol had made her fat. 
       So that a few years later she came home again—we’d much advanced and planned—I waited for that day—my Mother again to cook & —play the piano—sing at mandolin—Lung Stew, & Stenka Razin, & the communist line on the war with Finland—and Louis in debt—,uspected to he poisoned money—mysterious capitalisms
       —& walked down the long front hall & looked at the furniture. She
never remembered it all. Some amnesia. Examined the doilies—and the dining room set was sold—
       the Mahogany table—20 years love—gone to the junk man—we still had the piano—and the book of Poe—and the Mandolin, tho needed some string, dusty—
       She went to the backroom to lie down in bed and ruminate, or nap, hide—I went in with her, not leave her by herself—lay in bed next to her—shades pulled, dusky, late afternoon—Louis in front room at desk, waiting—perhaps boiling chicken for supper—
       ‘Don’t be afraid of me because I’m just coming back home from the mental hospital—I’m your mother—’
       Poor love, lost—a fear—I lay there—Said, ‘I love you Naomi,’—stiff, next to her arm. I would have cried, was this the comfortless lone union?—Nervous, and she got up soon.
       Was she ever satisfied? And—by herself sat on the new couch by the front windows, uneasy—cheek leaning on her hand—narrowing eye—at what fate that day—
       Picking her tooth with her nail, lips formed an O, suspicion—thought’s old worn vagina—absent sideglance of eye—some evil debt written in the wall, unpaid—& the aged breasts of Newark come near—
       May have heard radio gossip thru the wires in her head, controlled by 3 big sticks left in her back by gangsters in amnesia, thru the hospital—caused pain between her shoulders—
       Into her head—Roosevelt should know her case, she told me—Afraid to kill her, now, that the government knew their names—traced back to Hitler—wanted to leave Louis’ house forever. 
       One night, sudden attack—her noise in the bathroom—like croaking up her soul—convulsions and red vomit coming out of her mouth—diarrhea water exploding from her behind—on all fours in front of the toilet—urine running between her legs—left retching on the tile floor smeared with her black feces—unfainted—
       At forty, varicosed, nude, fat, doomed, hiding outside the apartment door near the elevator calling Police, yelling for her girlfriend Rose to help—
       Once locked herself in with razor or iodine—could hear her cough in tears at sink—Lou broke through glass green-painted door, we pulled her out to the bedroom.
       Then quiet for months that winter—walks, alone, nearby on Broadway, read Daily Worker—Broke her arm, fell on icy street—
       Began to scheme escape from cosmic financial murder-plots—later she ran away to the Bronx to her sister Elanor. And there’s another saga of late Naomi in New York.
       Or thru Elanor or the Workmen’s Circle, where she worked, ad-dressing envelopes, she made out—went shopping for Campbell’s tomato soup—saved money Louis mailed her—
       Later she found a boyfriend, and he was a doctor—Dr. Isaac worked for National Maritime Union—now Italian bald and pudgy old doll—who was himself an orphan—but they kicked him out—Old cruelties—
       Sloppier, sat around on bed or chair, in corset dreaming to herself—‘I’m hot—I’m getting fat—I used to have such a beautiful figure before I went to the hospital—You should have seen me in Woodbine—’ This in a furnished room around the NMU hall, 1943.
       Looking at naked baby pictures in the magazine—baby powder advertisements, strained lamb carrots—‘I will think nothing but beautiful thoughts.’
       Revolving her head round and round on her neck at window light in summertime, in hypnotize, in doven-dream recall—
       ‘I touch his cheek, I touch his cheek, he touches my lips with his hand, I think beautiful thoughts, the baby has a beautiful hand.’—
       Or a No-shake of her body, disgust—some thought of Buchenwald—some insulin passes thru her head—a grimace nerve shudder at Involuntary (as shudder when I piss)—bad chemical in her cortex—‘No don’t think of that. He’s a rat.’
       Naomi: ‘And when we die we become an onion, a cabbage, a carrot, or a squash, a vegetable.’ I come downtown from Columbia and agree. She reads the Bible, thinks beautiful thoughts all day.
       ‘Yesterday I saw God. What did he look like? Well, in the afternoon I climbed up a ladder—he has a cheap cabin in the country, like Monroe, N.Y. the chicken farms in the wood. He was a lonely old man with a white beard.
       ‘I cooked supper for him. I made him a nice supper—lentil soup, vegetables, bread & butter—miltz—he sat down at the table and ate, he was sad.
       ‘I told him, Look at all those fightings and killings down there, What’s the matter? Why don’t you put a stop to it?
       ‘I try, he said—That’s all he could do, he looked tired. He’s a bachelor so long, and he likes lentil soup.’
       Serving me meanwhile, a plate of cold fish—chopped raw cabbage dript with tapwater—smelly tomatoes—week-old health food—grated beets & carrots with leaky juice, warm—more and more disconsolate food—I can’t eat it for nausea sometimes—the Charity of her hands stinking with Manhattan, madness, desire to please me, cold undercooked fish—pale red near the bones. Her smells—and oft naked in the room, so that I stare ahead, or turn a book ignoring her.
       One time I thought she was trying to make me come lay her—flirting to herself at sink—lay back on huge bed that filled most of the room, dress up round her hips, big slash of hair, scars of operations, pancreas, belly wounds, abortions, appendix, stitching of incisions pulling down in the fat like hideous thick zippers—ragged long lips between her legs—What, even, smell of asshole? I was cold—later revolted a little, not much—seemed perhaps a good idea to try—know the Monster of the Beginning Womb—Perhaps—that way. Would she care? She needs a lover.
       Yisborach, v’yistabach, v’yispoar, v’yisroman, v’yisnaseh, v’yishador, v’yishalleh, v’yishallol, sh’meh d’kudsho, b’rich hu.
       And Louis reestablishing himself in Paterson grimy apartment in negro district—living in dark rooms—but found himself a girl he later married, falling in love again—tho sere & shy—hurt with 20 years Naomi’s mad idealism.
       Once I came home, after longtime in N.Y., he’s lonely—sitting in the bedroom, he at desk chair turned round to face me—weeps, tears in red eyes under his glasses—
       That we’d left him—Gene gone strangely into army—she out on her own in N.Y., almost childish in her furnished room. So Louis walked downtown to postoffice to get mail, taught in highschool—stayed at poetry desk, forlorn—ate grief at Bickford’s all these years—are gone.
       Eugene got out of the Army, came home changed and lone—cut off his nose in jewish operation—for years stopped girls on Broadway for cups of coffee to get laid—Went to NYU, serious there, to finish Law.—
       And Gene lived with her, ate naked fishcakes, cheap, while she got crazier—He got thin, or felt helpless, Naomi striking 1920 poses at the moon, half-naked in the next bed.
       bit his nails and studied—was the weird nurse-son—Next year he moved to a room near Columbia—though she wanted to live with her children—
       ‘Listen to your mother’s plea, I beg you’—Louis still sending her checks—I was in bughouse that year 8 months—my own visions unmentioned in this here Lament—
       But then went half mad—Hitler in her room, she saw his mustache in the sink—afraid of Dr. Isaac now, suspecting that he was in on the Newark plot—went up to Bronx to live near Elanor’s Rheumatic Heart—
       And Uncle Max never got up before noon, tho Naomi at 6 A.M. was listening to the radio for spies—or searching the windowsill,
       for in the empty lot downstairs, an old man creeps with his bag stuffing packages of garbage in his hanging black overcoat.
       Max’s sister Edie works—17 years bookkeeper at Gimbels—lived downstairs in apartment house, divorced—so Edie took in Naomi on Rochambeau Ave—
       Woodlawn Cemetery across the street, vast dale of graves where Poe once—Last stop on Bronx subway—lots of communists in that area.
       Who enrolled for painting classes at night in Bronx Adult High School—walked alone under Van Cortlandt Elevated line to class—paints Naomiisms—
       Humans sitting on the grass in some Camp No-Worry summers yore—saints with droopy faces and long-ill-fitting pants, from hospital—
       Brides in front of Lower East Side with short grooms—lost El trains running over the Babylonian apartment rooftops in the Bronx—
       Sad paintings—but she expressed herself. Her mandolin gone, all strings broke in her head, she tried. Toward Beauty? or some old life Message?
       But started kicking Elanor, and Elanor had heart trouble—came upstairs and asked her about Spydom for hours,—Elanor frazzled. Max away at office, accounting for cigar stores till at night.
       ‘I am a great woman—am truly a beautiful soul—and because of that they (Hitler, Grandma, Hearst, the Capitalists, Franco, Daily News, the ’20s, Mussolini, the living dead) want to shut me up—Buba’s the head of a spider network—’
       Kicking the girls, Edie & Elanor—Woke Edie at midnite to tell her she was a spy and Elanor a rat. Edie worked all day and couldn’t take it—She was organizing the union.—And Elanor began dying, upstairs in bed.
       The relatives call me up, she’s getting worse—I was the only one left—Went on the subway with Eugene to see her, ate stale fish—
       ‘My sister whispers in the radio—Louis must be in the apartment—his mother tells him what to say—LIARS!—I cooked for my two children—I played the mandolin—’
       Last night the nightingale woke me / Last night when all was still / it sang in the golden moonlight / from on the wintry hill. She did.
       I pushed her against the door and shouted ‘DON’T KICK ELANOR!’—she stared at me—Contempt—die—disbelief her sons are so naive, so dumb—‘Elanor is the worst spy! She’s taking orders!’
       ‘—No wires in the room!’—I’m yelling at her—last ditch, Eugene listening on the bed—what can he do to escape that fatal Mama—‘You’ve been away from Louis years already—Grandma’s too old to walk—’
       We’re all alive at once then—even me & Gene & Naomi in one mythological Cousinesque room—screaming at each other in the Forever—I in Columbia jacket, she half undressed.
       I banging against her head which saw Radios, Sticks, Hitlers—the gamut of Hallucinations—for real—her own universe—no road that goes elsewhere—to my own—No America, not even a world—
       That you go as all men, as Van Gogh, as mad Hannah, all the same—to the last doom—Thunder, Spirits, lightning!
       I’ve seen your grave! O strange Naomi! My own—cracked grave! Shema Y’Israel—I am Svul Avrum—you—in death? 
       Your last night in the darkness of the Bronx—I phonecalled—thru hospital to secret police
       that came, when you and I were alone, shrieking at Elanor in my ear—who breathed hard in her own bed, got thin—
       Nor will forget, the doorknock, at your fright of spies,—Law advancing, on my honor—Eternity entering the room—you running to the bathroom undressed, hiding in protest from the last heroic fate—
       staring at my eyes, betrayed—the final cops of madness rescuing me—from your foot against the broken heart of Elanor,
       your voice at Edie weary of Gimbels coming home to broken radio—and Louis needing a poor divorce, he wants to get married soon—Eugene dreaming, hiding at 125 St., suing negroes for money on crud furniture, defending black girls—
       Protests from the bathroom—Said you were sane—dressing in a cotton robe, your shoes, then new, your purse and newspaper clippingsno—your honesty—
       as you vainly made your lips more real with lipstick, looking in the mirror to see if the Insanity was Me or a earful of police.
       or Grandma spying at 78—Your vision—Her climbing over the walls of the cemetery with political kidnapper’s bag—or what you saw on the walls of the Bronx, in pink nightgown at midnight, staring out the window on the empty lot—
       Ah Rochambeau Ave.—Playground of Phantoms—last apartment in the Bronx for spies—last home for Elanor or Naomi, here these communist sisters lost their revolution—
       ‘All right—put on your coat Mrs.—let’s go—We have the wagon downstairs—you want to come with her to the station?’
       The ride then—held Naomi’s hand, and held her head to my breast, I’m taller—kissed her and said I did it for the best—Elanor sick—and Max with heart condition—Needs—
       To me—‘Why did you do this?’—‘Yes Mrs., your son will have to leave you in an hour’—The Ambulance
       came in a few hours—drove off at 4 A.M. to some Bellevue in the night downtown—gone to the hospital forever. I saw her led away—she waved, tears in her eyes. 
       Two years, after a trip to Mexico—bleak in the flat plain near Brentwood, scrub brush and grass around the unused RR train track to the crazyhouse—
       new brick 20 story central building—lost on the vast lawns of madtown on Long Island—huge cities of the moon.
       Asylum spreads out giant wings above the path to a minute black hole—the door—entrance thru crotch—
       I went in—smelt funny—the halls again—up elevator—to a glass door on a Women’s Ward—to Naomi—Two nurses buxom white—They led her out, Naomi stared—and I gaspt—She’d had a stroke—
       Too thin, shrunk on her bones—age come to Naomi—now broken into white hair—loose dress on her skeleton—face sunk, old! withered—cheek of crone—
       One hand stiff—heaviness of forties & menopause reduced by one heart stroke, lame now—wrinkles—a scar on her head, the lobotomy—ruin, the hand dipping downwards to death— 
       O Russian faced, woman on the grass, your long black hair is crowned with flowers, the mandolin is on your knees—
       Communist beauty, sit here married in the summer among daisies, promised happiness at hand—
       holy mother, now you smile on your love, your world is born anew, children run naked in the field spotted with dandelions,
       they eat in the plum tree grove at the end of the meadow and find a cabin where a white-haired negro teaches the mystery of his rainbarrel—
       blessed daughter come to America, I long to hear your voice again, remembering your mother’s music, in the Song of the Natural Front—
       O glorious muse that bore me from the womb, gave suck first mystic life & taught me talk and music, from whose pained head I first took Vision—
       Tortured and beaten in the skull—What mad hallucinations of the damned that drive me out of my own skull to seek Eternity till I find Peace for Thee, O Poetry—and for all humankind call on the Origin
       Death which is the mother of the universe!—Now wear your nakedness forever, white flowers in your hair, your marriage sealed behind the sky—no revolution might destroy that maidenhood—
       O beautiful Garbo of my Karma—all photographs from 1920 in Camp Nicht-Gedeiget here unchanged—with all the teachers from Vewark—Nor Elanor be gone, nor Max await his specter—nor Louis retire from this High School— 
       Back! You! Naomi! Skull on you! Gaunt immortality and revolution come—small broken woman—the ashen indoor eyes of hospitals, ward grayness on skin—
       ‘Are you a spy?’ I sat at the sour table, eyes filling with tears—‘Who are you? Did Louis send you?—The wires—’
       in her hair, as she beat on her head—‘I’m not a bad girl—don’t murder me!—I hear the ceiling—I raised two children—’
       Two years since I’d been there—I started to cry—She stared—nurse broke up the meeting a moment—I went into the bathroom to hide, against the toilet white walls
       ‘The Horror’ I weeping—to see her again—‘The Horror’—as if she were dead thru funeral rot in—‘The Horror!’
       I came back she yelled more—they led her away—‘You’re not Allen—’ I watched her face—but she passed by me, not looking—
       Opened the door to the ward,—she went thru without a glance back, quiet suddenly—I stared out—she looked old—the verge of the grave—‘All the Horror!’ 
       Another year, I left N.Y.—on West Coast in Berkeley cottage dreamed of her soul—that, thru life, in what form it stood in that body, ashen or manic, gone beyond joy—
       near its death—with eyes—was my own love in its form, the Naomi, my mother on earth still—sent her long letter—& wrote hymns to the mad—Work of the merciful Lord of Poetry.
       that causes the broken grass to be green, or the rock to break in grass—or the Sun to be constant to earth—Sun of all sunflowers and days on bright iron bridges—what shines on old hospitals—as on my yard—
       Returning from San Francisco one night, Orlovsky in my room—Whalen in his peaceful chair—a telegram from Gene, Naomi dead—
       Outside I bent my head to the ground under the bushes near the garage—knew she was better—
       at last—not left to look on Earth alone—2 years of solitude—no one, at age nearing 60—old woman of skulls—once long-tressed Naomi of Bible—
       or Ruth who wept in America—Rebecca aged in Newark—David remembering his Harp, now lawyer at Yale
       or Srul Avrum—Israel Abraham—myself—to sing in the wilderness toward God—O Elohim!—so to the end—2 days after her death I got her letter—
       Strange Prophecies anew! She wrote—‘The key is in the window, the key is in the sunlight at the window—I have the key—Get married Allen don’t take drugs—the key is in the bars, in the sunlight in the window.
                                                       Love,
                                                               your mother’
       which is Naomi— 
Hymmnn 
In the world which He has created according to his will Blessed Praised
Magnified Lauded Exalted the Name of the Holy One Blessed is He!
In the house in Newark Blessed is He! In the madhouse Blessed is He! In the house of Death Blessed is He!
Blessed be He in homosexuality! Blessed be He in Paranoia! Blessed be He in the city! Blessed be He in the Book!
Blessed be He who dwells in the shadow! Blessed be He! Blessed be He!
Blessed be you Naomi in tears! Blessed be you Naomi in fears! Blessed Blessed Blessed in sickness!
Blessed be you Naomi in Hospitals! Blessed be you Naomi in solitude! Blest be your triumph! Blest be your bars! Blest be your last years’ loneliness!
Blest be your failure! Best be your stroke! Blest be the close of your eye! Blest be the gaunt of your cheek! Blest be your withered thighs!
Blessed be Thee Naomi in Death! Blessed be Death! Blessed be Death!
Blessed be He Who leads all sorrow to Heaven! Blessed be He in the end!
Blessed be He who builds Heaven in Darkness! Blessed Blessed Blessed be He! Blessed be He! Blessed be Death on us All!  III
Only to have not forgotten the beginning in which she drank cheap sodas in the morgues of Newark,
only to have seen her weeping on gray tables in long wards of her universe
only to have known the weird ideas of Hitler at the door, the wires in her head, the three big sticks
rammed down her back, the voices in the ceiling shrieking out her ugly early lays for 30 years,
only to have seen the time-jumps, memory lapse, the crash of wars, the roar and silence of a vast electric shock,
only to have seen her painting crude pictures of Elevateds running over the rooftops of the Bronx
her brothers dead in Riverside or Russia, her lone in Long Island writing a last letter—and her image in the sunlight at the window
‘The key is in the sunlight at the window in the bars the key is in the sunlight,’
only to have come to that dark night on iron bed by stroke when the sun gone down on Long Island
and the vast Atlantic roars outside the great call of Being to its own
to come back out of the Nightmare—divided creation—with her head lain on a pillow of the hospital to die
—in one last glimpse—all Earth one everlasting Light in the familiar black-out—no tears for this vision—
But that the key should be left behind—at the window—the key in the sunlight—to the living—that can take
that slice of light in hand—and turn the door—and look back see
Creation glistening backwards to the same grave, size of universe,
size of the tick of the hospital's clock on the archway over the white door—  IV 
O mother
what have I left out
O mother
what have I forgotten
O mother
farewell
with a long black shoe
farewell
with Communist Party and a broken stocking
farewell
with six dark hairs on the wen of your breast
farewell
with your old dress and a long black beard around the vagina
farewell
with your sagging belly
with your fear of Hitler
with your mouth of bad short stories
with your fingers of rotten mandolins
with your arms of fat Paterson porches
with your belly of strikes and smokestacks
with your chin of Trotsky and the Spanish War
with your voice singing for the decaying overbroken workers
with your nose of bad lay with your nose of the smell of the pickles of Newark
with your eyes
with your eyes of Russia
with your eyes of no money
with your eyes of false China
with your eyes of Aunt Elanor
with your eyes of starving India
with your eyes pissing in the park
with your eyes of America taking a fall
with your eyes of your failure at the piano
with your eyes of your relatives in California
with your eyes of Ma Rainey dying in an aumbulance
with your eyes of Czechoslovakia attacked by robots
with your eyes going to painting class at night in the Bronx
with your eyes of the killer Grandma you see on the horizon from the Fire-Escape
with your eyes running naked out of the apartment screaming into the hall
with your eyes being led away by policemen to an aumbulance
with your eyes strapped down on the operating table
with your eyes with the pancreas removed
with your eyes of appendix operation
with your eyes of abortion
with your eyes of ovaries removed
with your eyes of shock
with your eyes of lobotomy
with your eyes of divorce
with your eyes of stroke
with your eyes alone
with your eyes
with your eyes
with your Death full of Flowers  V 
Caw caw caw crows shriek in the white sun over grave stones in Long Island
Lord Lord Lord Naomi underneath this grass my halflife and my own as hers
caw caw my eye be buried in the same Ground where I stand in Angel
Lord Lord great Eye that stares on All and moves in a black cloud
caw caw strange cry of Beings flung up into sky over the waving trees
Lord Lord O Grinder of giant Beyonds my voice in a boundless field in Sheol
Caw caw the call of Time rent out of foot and wing an instant in the universe
Lord Lord an echo in the sky the wind through ragged leaves the roar of memory
caw caw all years my birth a dream caw caw New York the bus the broken shoe the vast highschool caw caw all Visions of the Lord
Lord Lord Lord caw caw caw Lord Lord Lord caw caw caw Lord
                                                                      Paris, December 1957—New York, 1959


^^EOP^^

The rooster pushes his head high among the hens, trying to be what he feels he must be, here in the confines of domesticity. Before the tall legs of my presence, he bristles and shakes his ruby comb.  Little man, I want to say the hens know who they are. I want to ease his mistaken burden, want him to crow with the plain ecstasy of morning light as it finds its winter way above the woods.  Poor outnumbered fellow, how did he come to believe that on his plumed shoulders lay the safety of an entire flock? I run my hand down the rippled brindle of his back, urge him to relax, drink in the female pleasures that surround him, of egg laying, of settling warm-breasted in the nest of this brief and feathered time. 


^^EOP^^

1. 
I am thirty this November.
You are still small, in your fourth year.
We stand watching the yellow leaves go queer,
flapping in the winter rain,
falling flat and washed. And I remember
mostly the three autumns you did not live here.
They said I’d never get you back again.
I tell you what you’ll never really know:
all the medical hypothesis
that explained my brain will never be as true as these
struck leaves letting go. 
I, who chose two times
to kill myself, had said your nickname
the mewling months when you first came;
until a fever rattled
in your throat and I moved like a pantomime
above your head. Ugly angels spoke to me. The blame,
I heard them say, was mine. They tattled
like green witches in my head, letting doom
leak like a broken faucet;
as if doom had flooded my belly and filled your bassinet,
an old debt I must assume. 
Death was simpler than I’d thought.
The day life made you well and whole
I let the witches take away my guilty soul.
I pretended I was dead
until the white men pumped the poison out,
putting me armless and washed through the rigamarole
of talking boxes and the electric bed.
I laughed to see the private iron in that hotel.
Today the yellow leaves
go queer. You ask me where they go. I say today believed
in itself, or else it fell. 
Today, my small child, Joyce,
love your self’s self where it lives.
There is no special God to refer to; or if there is,
why did I let you grow
in another place. You did not know my voice
when I came back to call. All the superlatives
of tomorrow’s white tree and mistletoe
will not help you know the holidays you had to miss.
The time I did not love
myself, I visited your shoveled walks; you held my glove.
There was new snow after this.  
2. 
They sent me letters with news
of you and I made moccasins that I would never use.
When I grew well enough to tolerate
myself, I lived with my mother. Too late,
too late, to live with your mother, the witches said.
But I didn’t leave. I had my portrait
done instead. 
Part way back from Bedlam
I came to my mother’s house in Gloucester,
Massachusetts. And this is how I came
to catch at her; and this is how I lost her.
I cannot forgive your suicide, my mother said.
And she never could. She had my portrait
done instead. 
I lived like an angry guest,
like a partly mended thing, an outgrown child.
I remember my mother did her best.
She took me to Boston and had my hair restyled.
Your smile is like your mother’s, the artist said.
I didn’t seem to care. I had my portrait
done instead. 
There was a church where I grew up
with its white cupboards where they locked us up,
row by row, like puritans or shipmates
singing together. My father passed the plate.
Too late to be forgiven now, the witches said.
I wasn’t exactly forgiven. They had my portrait
done instead.  
3. 
All that summer sprinklers arched
over the seaside grass.
We talked of drought
while the salt-parched
field grew sweet again. To help time pass
I tried to mow the lawn
and in the morning I had my portrait done,
holding my smile in place, till it grew formal.
Once I mailed you a picture of a rabbit
and a postcard of Motif number one,
as if it were normal
to be a mother and be gone. 
They hung my portrait in the chill
north light, matching
me to keep me well.
Only my mother grew ill.
She turned from me, as if death were catching,
as if death transferred,
as if my dying had eaten inside of her.
That August you were two, but I timed my days with doubt.
On the first of September she looked at me
and said I gave her cancer.
They carved her sweet hills out
and still I couldn’t answer.  
4. 
That winter she came
part way back
from her sterile suite
of doctors, the seasick
cruise of the X-ray,
the cells’ arithmetic
gone wild. Surgery incomplete,
the fat arm, the prognosis poor, I heard
them say. 
During the sea blizzards
she had her
own portrait painted.
A cave of mirror
placed on the south wall;
matching smile, matching contour.
And you resembled me; unacquainted
with my face, you wore it. But you were mine
after all. 
I wintered in Boston,
childless bride,
nothing sweet to spare
with witches at my side.
I missed your babyhood,
tried a second suicide,
tried the sealed hotel a second year.
On April Fool you fooled me. We laughed and this
was good.  
5. 
I checked out for the last time
on the first of May;
graduate of the mental cases,
with my analyst’s okay,
my complete book of rhymes,
my typewriter and my suitcases. 
All that summer I learned life
back into my own
seven rooms, visited the swan boats,
the market, answered the phone,
served cocktails as a wife
should, made love among my petticoats 
and August tan. And you came each
weekend. But I lie.
You seldom came. I just pretended
you, small piglet, butterfly
girl with jelly bean cheeks,
disobedient three, my splendid 
stranger. And I had to learn
why I would rather
die than love, how your innocence
would hurt and how I gather
guilt like a young intern
his symptoms, his certain evidence. 
That October day we went
to Gloucester the red hills
reminded me of the dry red fur fox
coat I played in as a child; stock-still
like a bear or a tent,
like a great cave laughing or a red fur fox. 
We drove past the hatchery,
the hut that sells bait,
past Pigeon Cove, past the Yacht Club, past Squall’s
Hill, to the house that waits
still, on the top of the sea,
and two portraits hung on the opposite walls.  
6. 
In north light, my smile is held in place,
the shadow marks my bone.
What could I have been dreaming as I sat there,
all of me waiting in the eyes, the zone
of the smile, the young face,
the foxes’ snare. 
In south light, her smile is held in place,
her cheeks wilting like a dry
orchid; my mocking mirror, my overthrown
love, my first image. She eyes me from that face,
that stony head of death
I had outgrown. 
The artist caught us at the turning;
we smiled in our canvas home
before we chose our foreknown separate ways.
The dry red fur fox coat was made for burning.
I rot on the wall, my own
Dorian Gray. 
And this was the cave of the mirror,
that double woman who stares
at herself, as if she were petrified
in time — two ladies sitting in umber chairs.
You kissed your grandmother
and she cried.  
7. 
I could not get you back
except for weekends. You came
each time, clutching the picture of a rabbit
that I had sent you. For the last time I unpack
your things. We touch from habit.
The first visit you asked my name.
Now you stay for good. I will forget
how we bumped away from each other like marionettes
on strings. It wasn’t the same
as love, letting weekends contain
us. You scrape your knee. You learn my name,
wobbling up the sidewalk, calling and crying.
You call me mother and I remember my mother again,
somewhere in greater Boston, dying. 
I remember we named you Joyce
so we could call you Joy.
You came like an awkward guest
that first time, all wrapped and moist
and strange at my heavy breast.
I needed you. I didn’t want a boy,
only a girl, a small milky mouse
of a girl, already loved, already loud in the house
of herself. We named you Joy.
I, who was never quite sure
about being a girl, needed another
life, another image to remind me.
And this was my worst guilt; you could not cure
nor soothe it. I made you to find me.


^^EOP^^

My dear, it was a moment
to clutch at for a moment
so that you may believe in it
and believing is the act of love, I think,
even in the telling, wherever it went. 
In the false New England forest
where the misplanted Norwegian trees
refused to root, their thick synthetic
roots barging out of the dirt to work on the air,
we held hands and walked on our knees.
Actually, there was no one there. 
For forty years this experimental
woodland grew, shaft by shaft in perfect rows
where its stub branches held and its spokes fell.
It was a place of parallel trees, their lives
filed out in exile where we walked too alien to know
our sameness and how our sameness survives. 
Outside of us the village cars followed
the white line we had carefully walked
two nights before toward our single beds.
We lay halfway up an ugly hill and if we fell
it was here in the woods where the woods were caught
in their dying and you held me well. 
And now I must dream the forest whole
and your sweet hands, not once as frozen
as those stopped trees, nor ruled, nor pale,
nor leaving mine. Today, in my house, I see
our house, its pillars a dim basement of men
holding up their foreign ground for you and me. 
My dear, it was a time,
butchered from time
that we must tell of quickly
before we lose the sound of our own
mouths calling mine, mine, mine.


^^EOP^^

Somebody left this white T-shirt
like a hangman’s hood on the new parking meter—
the magic marks upon its back say: I QUIT METH 4-EVER. 
A declaration to the sky, whose angels all wear seagull wings
swooping over this street with its torn scratch tickets
and Big Gulp cups dropped by the curb. 
Extra large, it has been customized
with a pocketknife or a canine tooth
to rough the armholes where my boobs wobble out
as I roam these rooms lit by twilight’s bulb,
feeling half like Bette Davis in a wheelchair
and half like that Hell’s Angels kingpin with the tracheotomy. 
Dear reader, do you know that guy?
I didn’t think so. If only we could all watch the same TV.
But no doubt you have seen the gulls flying,
and also the sinister bulked-up crows
carrying white clouds of hotdog buns in their beaks:
you can promise them you’ll straighten up, but they are such big cynics. 
I should have told you My lotto #’s 2-11-19-23-36
is what’s written in front, beside the silk screen
for Listerine Cool Mint PocketPaks™—
which means you can’t hijack my name;
no, you have to go find your own, like a Hopi brave.
You might have to sit in a sweat lodge until you pass out 
or eat a weird vine and it will not be pleasant. Your pulse
goes staccato like a Teletype machine— then blam
you’ll be transformed into your post-larval being.
Maybe swallowtail, maybe moth: trust me, I know
because once I was a baby blue convertible
but now I’m this black hot rod painted with flames.


^^EOP^^

Sirs, when you are in your last extremity,
When your admirals are drowning in the grass-green sea,
When your generals are preparing the total catastrophe—
I just want you to know how you can not count on me. 
      I have ridden to hounds through my ancestral halls,
      I have picked the eternal crocus on the ultimate hill,
      I have fallen through the window of the highest room,
      But don’

^^EOP^^

                    
                    
                    A million years ago the earth grew cold. Iowa was covered by twenty-five hundred feet of ice. No one knows why the glaciers formed and spread, or why they eventually retreated.

I blinked and you were gone.

As a boy, he loved the idea of the ice age. Lumbering woolly mammoths and giant sloths. Outside, a vast white edict erasing the landscape. Inside his head, cave paintings of bison leapt in the firelight, their horns spiraling upward, the tips smoking.

Men on skis came to dig you out. Though they worked all night, they were too late.

Waking every day the frost reasserts itself. Its relentlessness a tedium, a closure. The earth must have looked more familiar when all was water. We don’t recognize ourselves amidst this overwhelming winter: static that censors newscasts, cold that burns, incessant dripping as icicles perfect themselves. The night skies are a riot of Chinese silk: bolts of crimson and shadow-blue. The radio crackles faintly.

Medical refuse litters the beaches, spews into the water from a backed up sewer under the pier. Bacteria cavort in the seawater. The weather’s gone haywire all over the globe. The more sensitive you are the earlier you’ll die. Just hold your breath a little longer, dear.

Once you start this medication, you can’t stop. Your life changes. You decide, based on a dearth of information, which force you want to submit to: nature, now less maternal than ever, or her idiot son—modern medicine.

You make an effort to find some grand design in this blindness. If you can’t see well enough anymore to edit your film, perhaps you can still do the music. You set an example.

Lemme outa here.

As a boy, before his mother found out and made him stop, he’d bury the frozen birds he found on the porch after big storms by warming the earth first with his father’s blowtorch.

Being human, we can’t help attempting to arrange events into patterns—the way a sick man sees faces in the stains on his bedroom ceiling. He names them. Months later, they all converse.

The men in the ice-covered radio station play cards and drink bourbon.

What defense can one mount against an avalanche?

Spotless beakers, pipettes, rows of small cages. Welcome to the lab. Here’s the chamber where we run preliminary screenings. Better don these gloves. Why not use two pair, like me? The new man on the night shift nods off over his work, with the radio playing. Its tinny strands of music enter his dream disguised as a dead friend’s hair. He had short coarse hair, like a terrier’s, pleasantly stiff to the touch. The lab is brightly lit to ward off the backwash of night. Under the table the research assistant’s feet twitch spasmodically in his sleep.

A series of blurry black-and-white newsreels flickers on the screen. Martian canals overflow their banks. A lake in Africa exhales a cloud of poison gas, killing thousands of villagers on its shores. Venice sinks. Anchorage, Alaska, is leveled by earthquakes. Pompeii is breaded and fried by its volcano. The swamp swallows another sand bar, then coughs up a tiny island. Subzero temperatures paralyze Acapulco. There have been several ice ages, a female narrator intones. The most recent lasted 90,000 years. A timer goes off and the lab assistant jerks awake. In about the time it takes to drink a glass of water, he remembers where he is.

“This is probably the last time I will write to you . . .”   

The rocks applaud. Summers turn short and cool. The world remakes itself without us now.
                

^^EOP^^

Gardens are also good places
to sulk. You pass beds of
spiky voodoo lilies   
and trip over the roots   
of a sweet gum tree,   
in search of medieval   
plants whose leaves,   
when they drop off   
turn into birds
if they fall on land,
and colored carp if they   
plop into water. 
Suddenly the archetypal   
human desire for peace   
with every other species   
wells up in you. The lion   
and the lamb cuddling up. 

^^EOP^^

1. 
Betrayed by his five mechanic agents, falling
Captive to consciousness, he summons light
To all its duties, and assumes the world
Like a common penance. Rust on the green tongue burns
Like history’s corrosive on his living tree.
But all the monsters of his sleep’s dark sea
Are tame familiars in the morning sun. 
2. 
He sees the nation browse across burnt miles
Of toast, toward the time-clock. Deafened, hears
A Gettysburg of breakfast food explode
Against the surd tympanum of the air.
The roads outside to No-and-Any Where
Trigger all space-time to a zero Now.
The punctual goddess blossoms on his brow—
Pragmatic emblem of the daylit need. 
3. 
Now with his thought the rank and maundy world
(That lost between quanta and mechanic wave
All pulp and passion sprawls around the globe).
He stiffens, as a hand informs a glove,
And drags each lank potential into form.
Thus the hieratic arrow of his glance
Creates St. Sebastian Avenue Street Place—
All of sublunary circumstance
Crowds on the casual platform of his gaze. 
4. 
Like money sealed in a pneumatic tube
He whirls beneath the city’s stony floor
To where the cold coordinates of work
Advance their cross-hairs on the target hour.
There surplus value’s mathematic flower
(All X squared Y squared like a tesseract
Or ghostly dirigible) grows unseen
Across the lean dimension of in fact. 
5. 
Grows all unseen as Jason Quint pursues
The windy hazard of the Absolute
Through icy tundras, farther than the Horn,
Vaster than Asia in their wuthering snows.
The sweat of progress and humanity
Colors no litmus in those latitudes;
In a rustle of banknotes and casualty lists
The Bomb is shaken from the wrath-bearing tree. 
6. 
The quitting whistle lofts a flag of truce,
And all hope’s flutes and harpsichords compound
The lonely leisure. The Great Nocturnal Drift
Sets to its Deep. He walks the park. Profound
Unease returns to Quint. The sleepy lathes
Of hummingbirds machine the emerald
Of garden silence which his feet confuse.
The statues hoist, on labyrinthine paths,
The mineral grandeur of a public smile. 
7. 
And the world goes blank, and heavy as a stone
Rolls into night. It is the human hour.
Imperfect. Lovers, food and politics
Command the air, and Jason Quint alone,
Clothed in abstraction, like a bush that burns
In the blind frequencies where none may pass,
Stalks through that only country of the poor—
The lamplit hour the quitting whistle mourns. 
8. 
Imperfect. The stability of dextrous stars
Offers him comfort, but their light is cold.
A storm of sentiment, sudden as a cloud
Of migrant birds, sings in his head. Now stirs
The terrible friend, companion of his dreams,
With his emotional algebra of need and loss—
The hateful witness to his mortal part
And confirmation of his loneliness.


^^EOP^^




November 1941



We sat in the park, but there was a war between us,
A dead moon over us and all around us
The shy and secret whisperings as of the tiny
Woods animals which in the high forest gather
Wind-fallen goods before the frost comes. 
      We praised as lucky all whose sure existence
      (As of the careless moon, the dutiless squirrels)
      Is not responsible for human history—
      Feeling how our happiness, how hope must mount
      Machine guns which other men yet have the firing of,
      How liberty is seen in the form of a fighter plane
      Millions look up asking, Is it ours? 
Our despair was temporary but not less painful.
Over us the moon was quiet about its business,
Pouring its constant light upon the naked beaches.
The squirrels built up their small defenses
Obliged to the fulfillment of a natural process.
Their leaf-lined cell, the brilliance of the moon,
The winter cannot touch and no touch tarnish.


^^EOP^^

1. 
After the sweet promise,
the summer’s mild retreat
from mother’s cancer, the winter months of her death,
I come to this white office, its sterile sheet,
its hard tablet, its stirrups, to hold my breath
while I, who must, allow the glove its oily rape,
to hear the almost mighty doctor over me equate
my ills with hers
and decide to operate. 
It grew in her
as simply as a child would grow,
as simply as she housed me once, fat and female.
Always my most gentle house before that embryo
of evil spread in her shelter and she grew frail.
Frail, we say, remembering fear, that face we wear
in the room of the special smells of dying, fear
where the snoring mouth gapes
and is not dear. 
There was snow everywhere.
Each day I grueled through
its sloppy peak, its blue-struck days, my boots
slapping into the hospital halls, past the retinue
of nurses at the desk, to murmur in cahoots
with hers outside her door, to enter with the outside
air stuck on my skin, to enter smelling her pride,
her upkeep, and to lie
as all who love have lied. 
No reason to be afraid,
my almost mighty doctor reasons.
I nod, thinking that woman’s dying
must come in seasons,
thinking that living is worth buying.
I walk out, scuffing a raw leaf,
kicking the clumps of dead straw
that were this summer’s lawn.
Automatically I get in my car,
knowing the historic thief
is loose in my house
and must be set upon.  
2. 
Clean of the body’s hair,
I lie smooth from breast to leg.
All that was special, all that was rare
is common here. Fact: death too is in the egg.
Fact: the body is dumb, the body is meat.
And tomorrow the O.R. Only the summer was sweet. 
The rooms down the hall are calling
all night long, while the night outside
sucks at the trees. I hear limbs falling
and see yellow eyes flick in the rain. Wide eyed
and still whole I turn in my bin like a shorn lamb.
A nurse’s flashlight blinds me to see who I am. 
The walls color in a wash
of daylight until the room takes its objects
into itself again. I smoke furtively and squash
the butt and hide it with my watch and other effects.
The halls bustle with legs. I smile at the nurse
who smiles for the morning shift. Day is worse. 
Scheduled late, I cannot drink
or eat, except for yellow pills
and a jigger of water. I wait and think
until she brings two mysterious needles: the skills
she knows she knows, promising, soon you’ll be out.
But nothing is sure. No one. I wait in doubt. 
I wait like a kennel of dogs
jumping against their fence. At ten
she returns, laughs and catalogues
my resistance to drugs. On the stretcher, citizen
and boss of my own body still, I glide down the halls
and rise in the iron cage toward science and pitfalls. 
The great green people stand
over me; I roll on the table
under a terrible sun, following their command
to curl, head touching knee if I am able.
Next, I am hung up like a saddle and they begin.
Pale as an angel I float out over my own skin. 
I soar in hostile air
over the pure women in labor,
over the crowning heads of babies being born.
I plunge down the backstair
calling mother at the dying door,
to rush back to my own skin, tied where it was torn.
Its nerves pull like wires
snapping from the leg to the rib.
Strangers, their faces rolling lilke hoops, require
my arm. I am lifted into my aluminum crib.  
3. 
Skull flat, here in my harness,
thick with shock, I call mother
to help myself, call toe to frog,
that woolly bat, that tongue of dog;
call God help and all the rest.
The soul that swam the furious water
sinks now in flies and the brain
flops like a docked fish and the eyes
are flat boat decks riding out the pain. 
My nurses, those starchy ghosts,
hover over me for my lame hours
and my lame days. The mechanics
of the body pump for their tricks.
I rest on their needles, am dosed
and snoring amid the orange flowers
and the eyes of visitors. I wear,
like some senile woman, a scarlet
candy package ribbon in my hair. 
Four days from home I lurk on my
mechanical parapet with two pillows
at my elbows, as soft as praying cushions.
My knees work with the bed that runs
on power. I grumble to forget the lie
I ought to hear, but don't. God knows
I thought I’d die—but here I am,
recalling mother, the sound of her
good morning, the odor of orange and jam. 
All’s well, they say. They say I’m better.
I lounge in frills or, picturesque,
I wear bunny pink slippers in the hall.
I read a new book and shuffle past the desk
to mail the author my first fan letter.
Time now to pack this humpty-dumpty
back the frightened way she came
and run along, Anne, and run along now,
my stomach laced like a football
for the game.


^^EOP^^

I don’t belong in this century—who does?
In my time, summer came someplace in June—
The cutbanks blazing with roses, the birds brazen, and the astonished
Pastures frisking with young calves . . .
                                                          That was in the country—
I don’t mean another country, I mean in the country:
And the country is lost. I don’t mean just lost to me,
Nor in the way of metaphorical loss—it’s lost that way too—
No; nor in no sort of special case: I mean Lost. 
Now, down below, in the fire and stench, the city
Is building its shell: elaborate levels of emptiness
Like some sea-animal building toward its extinction.
And the citizens, unserious and full of virtue,
Are hunting for bread, or money, or a prayer,
And I behold them, and this season of man, without love. 
If it were not a joke, it would be proper to laugh.
—Curious how that rat’s nest holds together—
Distracting . . .
                      Without it there might be, still,
The gold wheel and the silver, the sun and the moon,
The season’s ancient assurance under the unstable stars
Our fiery companions . . .
                                     And trees, perhaps, and the sound
Of the wild and living water hurrying out of the hills. 
Without these, I have you for my talisman:
Sun, moon, the four seasons,
The true voice of the mountains. Now be
(The city revolving in its empty shell,
The night moving in from the East)
—Be thou these things.


^^EOP^^

   Oh down at the tavern
the children are singing
around their round table
and around me still. Did you hear what it said? 
                   I only said
how there is a pewter urn
pinned to the tavern wall,
as old as old is able
to be and be there still.
I said, the poets are there
I hear them singing and lying
around their round table
and around me still.
Across the room is a wreath
made of a corpse’s hair,
framed in glass on the wall,
as old as old is able
to be and be remembered still. Did you hear what it said? 
                  I only said
how I want to be there and I
would sing my songs with the liars
and my lies with all the singers.
And I would, and I would but
it’s my hair in the hair wreath,
my cup pinned to the tavern wall,
my dusty face they sing beneath.
Poets are sitting in my kitchen.
Why do these poets lie?
Why do children get children and Did you hear what it said? 
                  I only said
how I want to be there,
Oh, down at the tavern
where the prophets are singing
around their round table
until they are still.


^^EOP^^

Where once I loved my flesh,
That social fellow,
Now I want security of bone
And cherish the silence of my skeleton. 
Where once I walked the world
Hunting the devil,
Now I find the darkness and the void
Within my side. 
First to be good, then to be happy I
Worked and prayed.
Before the midnight, like the foul fiend,
I killed my dear friend. 
Hope unto hope, dream beyond monstrous dream
I sought the world.
Now, at the black pitch and midnight of despair,
I find it was always here.


^^EOP^^

I saw a child set down her binder like a wall
through the candy bin at the Corner Luncheonette
so she could scoop out gum while she spoke to the clerk— 
and from that moment was in love: Oh theft. 
College was supposed to straighten me
like a bent tree strangled by a wire,
but being done with sweetness I could not resist the lure of meat. 
How the red muscle gleamed in its shiny wrap,
a wedge that had once been the thigh or the loin
of a slow brute’s body, sugar-dirt and clotted grass 
to be snatched in an instant
and zipped into the crone-y-est of pocketbooks.
Radiance housed in rawhide again, as when it was living. 
A steak can be stuck in your jeans when you’re skinny,
a rump roast is right for a puffy down coat,
small chops will fit under a thin peasant blouse 
where it falls off the breasts
like a woodland rive
with a limestone amphitheater underneath. 
Ancient city, ancient sublet, ancient wooden fire escape—
with my other bandits I learned to say how-de-do in French.
We were yanking on the cord that would start the motor of our lives 
though we did not have the choke adjusted yet. 
Sometimes it seemed I floated in the dregs like a tea bag
bloating up with facts.
Until a girl ran in the door, panting hard, face red, 
slab thudding
from her snowflake-damasked waist onto the table,
and we stood around it gawking at the way it seemed to breathe.


^^EOP^^

All night long I hear the sleepers toss
Between the darkened window and the wall.
The madman’s whimper and the lover’s voice,
The worker’s whisper and the sick child’s call—
Knowing them all 
I’d walk a mile, maybe, hearing some cat
Crying its guts out, to throttle it by hand,
Such simple love I had. I wished I might—
Or God might—answer each call in person and
Each poor demand. 
Well, I’d have been better off sleeping myself.
These fancies had some sentimental charm,
But love without direction is a cheap blanket
And even if it did no one any harm,
No one is warm.


^^EOP^^

The professor stabbed his chest with his hands curled like forks
before coughing up the question
that had dogged him since he first read Emerson: Why am I “I”? Like musk oxen we hunkered
while his lecture drifted against us like snow.
If we could, we would have turned our backs into the wind. 
I felt bad about his class’s being such a snoozefest, though peaceful too,
a quiet little interlude from everyone outside
rooting up the corpse of literature
for being too Caucasian. There was a simple answer
to my own question (how come no one loved me,
stomping on the pedals of my little bicycle):  I was insufferable. So, too, was Emerson I bet,
though I liked If the red slayer think he slays—
the professor drew a giant eyeball to depict the Over-soul.
Then he read a chapter from his own book:
naptime.
He didn’t care if our heads tipped forward on their stalks. 
When spring came, he even threw us a picnic in his yard
where dogwood bloomed despite a few last
dirty bergs of snow. He was a wounded animal
being chased across the tundra by those wolves,
the postmodernists. At any moment
you expected to see blood come dripping through his clothes. 
And I am I who never understood his question,
though he let me climb to take a seat
aboard the wooden scow he’d been building in the shade
of thirty-odd years. How I ever rowed it
from his yard, into my life—remains a mystery.
The work is hard because the eyeball’s heavy, riding in the bow.


^^EOP^^

The old woman in the parking lot
wields her walker not unspryly. Gray hair
lank and without style, hanging
under her ski hat, as I wear a ski hat—
her legs bare under her skirt,
my legs bare under my skirt,
she wears sneakers, I wear sneakers—
windbreaker, windbreaker. She rolls up
to watch me board, as people do,
because it is interesting
to see the wheelchair maneuvered backward
into the van. You got it?
she asks, as people do
though I am not their child.
We are not sisters either,
despite the wind’s ruffling our skirts in sync—
oh how she is interested in the ruffling of my skirt.
The ruffle makes her giddy, starts
her bald gums racing on their wordless observations
as she peers into my thighs. How alike we are! says this
no-sister of mine to be argued with,
just some crazy old woman
flashing the terrible crater of her smile
to raise the wind and
prove her point.


^^EOP^^

The missile to launch a missile
was almost a secret.
Two male Ph.D.’s were picked
and primed to fill it
and one hundred
carefully counted insects,
three almost new snakes,
coiled in a cube,
exactly fifty fish creatures
in tanks, the necessary files,
twenty bars of food, ten brief cures,
special locks, fourteen white rats,
fourteen black rats, a pouch of dirt,
were all stuffed aboard before
the thing blasted from the desert. 
And the missile that launched
a missile launched out
into a marvelous scientific balloon
that rolled and bobbed about
in the mists of Venus; suddenly
sank like a sweet fat grape,
oozing past gravity to snuggle
down upon the triumphant shape
of space. The two men signaled
Earth, telling their Continent
VENUS IS GREEN. And parades assembled,
the loud earth tellers spent
all fifteen minutes on it, even
shortened their weather forecast.
But rival nations, angry and oily,
fired up their best atom blast
and the last Earth war was done.
The place became crater on each side,
sank down to its first skull,
shedding forests, oceans, dried
bones and neons, as it fell through
time like a forgotten pitted stone. 
These two men walked hopefully out
onto their hot empty planet
with machines, rats, tanks,
boxes, insects and the one odd set
of three almost new snakes,
to make the tests they were meant to do.
But on the seventh month the cages
grew small, too small to interview,
too tight to bear. The rats were gray
and heavy things where they ran
against wire and the snakes built eggs
on eggs and even the fish began
to bump in water as they spawned
on every side of each other’s swim.
And the men grew listless; they opened
the pouch of dirt, undid each locked bin
and let every creature loose
to live on Venus, or anyhow hide
under rocks. Bees swarmed the air,
letting a warm pollen slide
from their wings and onto the grass.
The fish flapped to a small pool
and the rats untangled their hairs
and humped over the vestibule
of the cramped balloon. Trees sprang
from lichen, the rock became a park,
where, even at star-time, things brushed;
even in the planet’s new dark
crotch, that air snag where snakes
coupled and rats rubbed in disrepair,
it grew quick and noisy with
a kind of wonder in the lonely air. 
Old and withered, two Ph.D.’s
from Earth hobbled slowly back
to their empty balloon, crying alone
for sense, for the troubling lack
of something they ought to do,
while countless fish slapped
and the waters grew, green came
taller and the happy rats sped
through integrated forests,
barking like dogs at the top
of the sky. But the two men,
that last morning of death, before
the first of light, watched the land
of Venus, its sweetless shore,
and thought, “This is the end.
This is the last of a man like me.”
Until they saw, over the mists
of Venus, two fish creatures stop
on spangled legs and crawl
from the belly of the sea.
And from the planet park
they heard the new fruit drop.


^^EOP^^

I am doing laps at night, alone In the indoor pool. Outside It is snowing, but I am warm And weightless, suspended and out Of time like a fly in amber.  She is thousands of miles From here, and miles above me, Ghosting the stratosphere, Heading from New York to London. Though it is late, even At that height, I know her light Is on, her window a square Of gold as she reads mysteries Above the Atlantic. I watch  The line of black tile on the pool’s Floor, leading me down the lane. If she looks down by moonlight, Under a clear sky, she will see Black water. She will see me Swimming distantly, moving far From shore, suspended with her In flight through the wide gulf As we swim toward land together. 


^^EOP^^

Aship, reel in fountainhead
enclosure of roses
skies indigo, gold moon 
Omphalos triumphant
“only connect”
end, point of beginning 
of old, apotheosis
chandelier fond du lac
cross (mortal) hid boundary 
compass beyond confines
music of the spheres solved,
mosaic of Cosmos 
snowflakes lit darkest sea,
bowsprit the deeps
bound white antipodes 
such conflagration of souls
Dawn in Erewhon,
corporeal cornucopia        
one being, surround in bloom
flow essential seed
portal system Milky Way 
as Unmoved Mover under orders axis mundi, ascend scale
organism omnipotent 
poised in flesh,
awake horns psaltery
Fanfare for the Common Man 
mind set razor an edge,
blood fulfill final ablution
fire purify baton 
Oompapah! to lead the band
anystray orchestra
knows who destination 
core of the universe
(so rings redwood of eons)
gospel sentience        
Lo! allegro non troppo
remake mankind,
a joyous noise into the void 
“from going to and fro
in the earth, and from walking
up and down in it” 
as speech arc Simulacrum, O
chorus us Homo Sapiens
in a major key! 
tools, consonant & vowel
to fashion a voice
commensurate wheel of time 
Origins great aorta
leaved from the wrist up, but
yet to attain the skies 
all arrowed a rainbow midair, ad astra per aspera
countdown for Lift Off


^^EOP^^

O 
Tree 
into the World, 
Man 
the chosen 
Rose out of Chaos: 
Song    Thunder amid held daffodil,
the hills of yellow celandine in sudden sun

^^EOP^^

I stood at a bus cornerone afternoon, waitingfor the #2. An oldguy stood waiting too.I stared at him. Hecaught my stare, grinned,gap-toothed. Will yousign my coat? he said.Held out a pen. He worea dirty canvas coat thathad signatures all overit, hundreds, maybethousands.          I’m tryingto get everybody, hesaid.          I signed. On alittle space on a pocket.Sometimes I remember:I am one of everybody.


^^EOP^^

The land was ours before we were the land’s.She was our land more than a hundred yearsBefore we were her people. She was oursIn Massachusetts, in Virginia,But we were England’s, still colonials,Possessing what we still were unpossessed by,Possessed by what we now no more possessed.Something we were withholding made us weakUntil we found out that it was ourselvesWe were withholding from our land of living,And forthwith found salvation in surrender.Such as we were we gave ourselves outright(The deed of gift was many deeds of war)To the land vaguely realizing westward,But still unstoried, artless, unenhanced,Such as she was, such as she would become.


^^EOP^^

I am offering this poem to you,
since I have nothing else to give.
Keep it like a warm coat
when winter comes to cover you,
or like a pair of thick socks
the cold cannot bite through, 
                         I love you, 
I have nothing else to give you,
so it is a pot full of yellow corn
to warm your belly in winter,
it is a scarf for your head, to wear
over your hair, to tie up around your face, 
                         I love you, 
Keep it, treasure this as you would
if you were lost, needing direction,
in the wilderness life becomes when mature;
and in the corner of your drawer,
tucked away like a cabin or hogan
in dense trees, come knocking,
and I will answer, give you directions,
and let you warm yourself by this fire,
rest by this fire, and make you feel safe 
                         I love you, 
It’s all I have to give,
and all anyone needs to live,
and to go on living inside,
when the world outside
no longer cares if you live or die;
remember, 
                         I love you.


^^EOP^^

beside me in this garden
are huge and daisy-like
(why not? are not
oxeye daisies a chrysanthemum?),
shrubby and thick-stalked,
the leaves pointing up
the stems from which
the flowers burst in
sunbursts. I love
this garden in all its moods,
even under its winter coat
of salt hay, or now,
in October, more than
half gone over: here
a rose, there a clump
of aconite. This morning
one of the dogs killed
a barn owl. Bob saw
it happen, tried to
intervene. The airedale
snapped its neck and left
it lying. Now the bird
lies buried by an apple
tree. Last evening
from the table we saw
the owl, huge in the dusk,
circling the field
on owl-silent wings.
The first one ever seen
here: now it’s gone,
a dream you just remember. 
The dogs are barking. In
the studio music plays
and Bob and Darragh paint.
I sit scribbling in a little
notebook at a garden table,
too hot in a heavy shirt
in the mid-October sun
into which the Korean mums
all face. There is a
dull book with me,
an apple core, cigarettes,
an ashtray. Behind me
the rue I gave Bob
flourishes. Light on leaves,
so much to see, and
all I really see is that
owl, its bulk troubling
the twilight. I’ll
soon forget it: what
is there I have not forgot?
Or one day will forget:
this garden, the breeze
in stillness, even
the words, Korean mums.


^^EOP^^




                                                                          for Kenward Elmslie




Up from the valley
now and then a chain saw rising to a shriek, subsiding to a buzz
“Someone” is “cutting in his wood lot” another day
shows they are not
someone is two men clearing shoulders
of a narrow high-crowned road
stacked poles were lately sapling
the leaves on the slash gone limp, unstarched, unsized
one man with one fierce eye and where the other should be
an ill-knit cicatrix
men who don’t make much aren’t much
for spending what they do
on glass eyes, tooth-straightening devices (“a mouth
like the back of a switchboard”), nose jobs, dewenning operations
a country look prevails
and a vestigial fear of the evil eye lurks
“. . . my skin creeps . . .”
                                       Out of Adamant Co-op
men in “overhauls” step into evening rising
in long-shadowed bluish haze to gold and pink
by Sodom Lake (was it that any Bible name
was an OK name?) and boys stare unabashed
and unaggressive not what the man on the bus fled
from his one day job talking excitedly about
“teen-age Puerto Rican tail-bait” and
“You can have New York!” Some present
you’d rather have wouldn’t you an apple tree
that climbed up into keels over
sad, and too bad, the best apples on Apple Hill
still, it can be propped or budded on new stock or just
that it once was there
                               Driving past, driving down, driving over
along the Winooski
through the home of Granite City Real Ice Cream
The Monument Capitol
buildings of rusticated granite marred
to our eyes by etched polished granite remodeled downstairs
may be found by a future happily heterodox
“There’s a touch of autumn—
                                          there’s another touch of autumn”
and the dark tranquility of hemlocks encroaching on untilled fields
“You can’t make a living
plowing stones” subsistence
farming is well out of style: “You can’t call it living
without the margin”
coveted obsolescence!
a margin like that on this page
a paper luxury “Collectors”
the lady in the antique shop said “are snapping up
silver” “Since we’re off the silver standard?” “Why,
maybe so” Perhaps
six 1827 Salem coin-silver spoons for $18
or what about
“Have you The Pearl of Orr’s Island?”
“That’s a book I’d want to read myself.
I’m from here but live in Florida.
Winters are too hard: 40 below.
You don’t feel it though
like zero in Boston. I’ll take St. Johnsbury any day
over Boston.”
                    Over St. Johnsbury the clouds shift in curds
and a street goes steeply down
into Frenchtown by the railroad station
into which anachronistically comes
a real train: yesterday’s torment of dust-exhaling plush
on the backs of bare knees today’s nostalgia
but not much. Curls cut out of wood, brick
of a certain cut and color, a hopped-up cripple
on a hill above his pond, a slattern
frowning at the early-closed state liquor store,
an attic window like a wink,
The Scale Co., St. Johnsbury has everything
               Not this high hill a road
going in undergrowth leads up to
by walls of flat cleared-field stones
so many and so long a time to take
so much labor so long ago and so soon
to be going back, a host to hardhack
and blueberry baby steps
first fallings from a sky
in which the wind is moving furniture
the upholstery of summer coming all unstitched
the air full of flying kapok
and resolutions: “remember to fetch the ax
whack back pine intrusions”
from the road turning down to a lower field
and across the roughest one the County keeps
a woman and a boy come up
on heavy horses. “Morning!
Had frost
last night at Adamant.
Might have a killing frost
tonight.” Quick and clear as the water
where cress grows the cold
breaks on the hills to the soft crash
of a waterfall beyond
a beaver pond
and slides on
flinging imaginary fragments of cat’s ice
from its edges to flash
a bright reality in the night sky and it —
the cold—stands, a rising pool, about
Sloven’s farmhouse and he dreams
of dynamite. A bog sucks
at his foundations. Somewhere a deer
breaks branches. The trees
say Wesson. Mazola
replies a frog.
                    It doesn’t happen though the cold
that is not that night. It happens all right
not then when the white baneberry
leans secretively where a road forks
met with surprise: “Why here it is:
the most beautiful thing.” The spirit
of Gelett Burgess sets Mother Nature
gabbing. “That’s my Actea pachypoda, dear, we
call it Doll’s-Eyes.” Got up as smart
as ever in muck and dank she belches
—“’Scuse: just a touch of gas”—
swamp maple flames and ambles over and plunks
down on a dead rubber tire
to contemplate smashed glass and a rusty tin
and “some of my choicer bits: that
I call Doctor’s Dentures. These
are Little Smellies.” Not
the sort you look to meet so near
gold-domed, out of scale Montpelier
a large-windowed kind of empty public bigness
so little to show, so much
to take pride in rather more than on the way to Stowe
a pyrocrafted maple board in a Gyp-to-teria
IF MORE MEN WERE SELF STARTERS
FEWER WIVES WOULD HAVE TO CRANK.
Welcome to the chair lift and cement chalet.
                                                               Days
of unambiguous morning when dawn
peels back like a petal to disclose blue depths
deep beyond all comprehending and tall field growth bends
with a crushing weight of water cut
into sac-shaped portions, each less than a carat
and which streak an early walker’s trouser legs
“You’re soaked!” crossing on a door
the spill to where Nodding Ladies’ Tresses
pallidly braid their fragrance and the woods
emit their hum. Days
when the pond holds on its steel one cloud
in which thin drowned trees stand
spare shapes of winter when summer
is just loosening to fall and bits of ribbon
from an electric typewriter patch a screen.
Croquet days, scissor-and-paste nights
after dinner on the better sort of ham
and coffee strong enough to float a goose egg.
Are those geese, that V, flying so early?
Can it be so late? in the green state
needles, leaves, fronds, blades, lichens and moss create
                                   Can it be so soon before the long white
refrozen in frost on frost
on all twigs again will flash
cross cutting star streaks—the atoms
dance—on a treacherous night
in headlights?
 
                          “Horrible Cold Night
Remain at Home” 
                          “Clear and Beautiful
Remain at Home”


^^EOP^^

They turn the water off, so I live without water,
they build walls higher, so I live without treetops,
they paint the windows black, so I live without sunshine,
they lock my cage, so I live without going anywhere,
they take each last tear I have, I live without tears,
they take my heart and rip it open, I live without heart,
they take my life and crush it, so I live without a future,
they say I am beastly and fiendish, so I have no friends,
they stop up each hope, so I have no passage out of hell,
they give me pain, so I live with pain,
they give me hate, so I live with my hate,
they have changed me, and I am not the same man,
they give me no shower, so I live with my smell,
they separate me from my brothers, so I live without brothers,
who understands me when I say this is beautiful?
who understands me when I say I have found other freedoms? 
I cannot fly or make something appear in my hand,
I cannot make the heavens open or the earth tremble,
I can live with myself, and I am amazed at myself, my love,
my beauty,
I am taken by my failures, astounded by my fears,
I am stubborn and childish,
in the midst of this wreckage of life they incurred,
I practice being myself,
and I have found parts of myself never dreamed of by me,
they were goaded out from under rocks in my heart
when the walls were built higher,
when the water was turned off and the windows painted black.
I followed these signs
like an old tracker and followed the tracks deep into myself,
followed the blood-spotted path,
deeper into dangerous regions, and found so many parts of myself,
who taught me water is not everything,
and gave me new eyes to see through walls,
and when they spoke, sunlight came out of their mouths,
and I was laughing at me with them,
we laughed like children and made pacts to always be loyal,
who understands me when I say this is beautiful?    CORRECTION: the last line of the first stanza was corrected to read "who understands me when I say I have found other freedoms?", and the first line of the second stanza was corrected to read "I cannot fly or make something appear in my hand," on November 15, 2010.


^^EOP^^

a commingling sky 
                      a semi-tropic night
                      that cast the blackest shadow
                      of the easily torn, untrembling banana leaf 
or Quebec! what a horrible city
so Steubenville is better?
                          the sinking sensation
when someone drowns thinking, “This can’t be happening to me!”
the profit of excavating the battlefield where Hannibal whomped the Romans
the sinuous beauty of words like allergy
the tonic resonance of
pill when used as in
“she is a pill”
on the other hand I am not going to espouse any short stories in which lawn mowers clack.
No, it is absolutely forbidden
for words to echo the act described; or try to. Except very directly
as in
bong. And tickle. Oh it is inescapable kiss.
Marriages of the atmosphere
are worth celebrating
                          where Tudor City
catches the sky or the glass side
of a building lit up at night in fog
“What is that gold-green tetrahedron down the river?”
“You are experiencing a new sensation.” 
               if the touch-me-nots
               are not in bloom
               neither are the chrysanthemums

^^EOP^^

Went down home ’bout a year ago
things so bad, Lord, my heart was sore.
Folks had nothing was a sin and shame
every-body said hard time was the blame.
      Great-God-a-mighty folks feeling bad
      lost every thing they ever had. 
Sun was shining fourteen days and no rain
hoeing and planting was all in vain.
Hard hard times, Lord, all around
meal barrels empty crops burnt to the ground.
      Great-God-a-mighty folks feeling bad
      lost every thing they ever had. 
Skinny looking children bellies poking out
that old pellagra without a doubt.
Old folks hanging ’round the cabin door
ain’t seen times this hard before.
      Great-God-a-mighty folks feeling bad
      lost every thing they ever had. 
I went to the Boss at the Commissary store
folks all starving please don’t close your door
want more food a little more time to pay
Boss Man laughed and walked away.
      Great-God-a-mighty folks feeling bad
      lost every thing they ever had. 
Landlord coming ’round when the rent is due
you ain’t got the money take your home from you
take your mule and horse even take your cow
get offa my land you ain’t no good no how.
      Great-God-a-mighty folks feeling bad
      lost every thing they ever had.


^^EOP^^

Under the French horns of a November afternoon
a man in blue is raking leaves
with a wide wooden rake (whose teeth are pegs
or rather, dowels). Next door
boys play soccer: “You got to start
over!” sort of. A round attic window
in a radiant gray house waits like a kettledrum.
“You got to start . . .” The Brahmsian day
lapses from waltz to march. The grass,
rough-cropped as Bruno Walter’s hair,
is stretched, strewn and humped beneath a sycamore
wide and high as an idea of heaven
in which Brahms turns his face like a bearded thumb
and says, “There is something I must tell you!”
to Bruno Walter. “In the first movement
of my Second, think of it as a family
planning where to go next summer
in terms of other summers. A material ecstasy,
subdued, recollective.” Bruno Walter
in a funny jacket with a turned-up collar
says, “Let me sing it for you.”
He waves his hands and through the vocalese-shaped spaces
of naked elms he draws a copper beech
ignited with a few late leaves. He bluely glazes
a rhododendron “a sea of leaves” against gold grass.
There is a snapping from the brightwork
of parked and rolling cars.
There almost has to be a heaven! so there could be
a place for Bruno Walter
who never needed the cry of a baton.
Immortality—
in a small, dusty, rather gritty, somewhat scratchy
Magnavox from which a forte
drops like a used Brillo Pad?
Frayed. But it’s hard to think of the sky as a thick glass floor
with thick-soled Viennese boots tromping about on it.
It’s a whole lot harder thinking of Brahms
in something soft, white, and flowing.
“Life,” he cries (here, in the last movement),
“is something more than beer and skittles!”
“And the something more
is a whole lot better than beer and skittles,”
says Bruno Walter,
darkly, under the sod. I don’t suppose it seems so dark
to a root. Who are these men in evening coats?
What are these thumps?
Where is Brahms?
And Bruno Walter?
Ensconced in resonant plump easy chairs
covered with scuffed brown leather
in a pungent autumn that blends leaf smoke
(sycamore, tobacco, other),
their nobility wound in a finale
like this calico cat
asleep, curled up in a breadbasket,
on a sideboard where the sun falls.


^^EOP^^

Some folks hollered hard times
in nineteen-twenty-nine.
In nineteen-twenty-eight
say I was way behind. 
Some folks hollered hard times
because hard times were new.
Hard times is all I ever had,
why should I lie to you? 
Some folks hollered hard times.
What is it all about?
Things were bad for me when
those hard times started out.


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

Let the musicians begin,
Let every instrument awaken and instruct us
In love’s willing river and love’s dear discipline:
We wait, silent, in consent and in the penance
Of patience, awaiting the serene exaltation
Which is the liberation and conclusion of expiation. 
Now may the chief musician say: “Lust and emulation have dwelt amoung us
Like barbarous kings: have conquered us:
Have inhabited our hearts: devoured and ravished
—With the savage greed and avarice of fire—
The substance of pity and compassion.”

^^EOP^^

Brown gas-fog, white
beneath the street lamps.
Cut off on three sides, all space filled
with our bodies.
       Bodies that stumble
in brown airlessness, whitened
in light, a mildew glare,
       that stumble
hand in hand, blinded, retching.
Wanting it, wanting
to be here, the body believing it’s
dying in its nausea, my head
clear in its despair, a kind of joy,
knowing this is by no means death,
is trivial, an incident, a
fragile instant.    Wanting it, wanting
          with all my hunger this anguish,
          this knowing in the body
the grim odds we’re
up against, wanting it real.
Up that bank where gas
curled in the ivy, dragging each other
up, strangers, brothers
and sisters.    Nothing
will do but
to taste the bitter
taste. No life
other, apart from.


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

                                               1 
A tattering of rain and then the reign
Of pour and pouring-down and down,
Where in the westward gathered the filming gown
Of grey and clouding weakness, and, in the mane
Of the light’s glory and the day’s splendor, gold and vain,
Vivid, more and more vivid, scarlet, lucid and more luminous,
Then came a splatter, a prattle, a blowing rain!
And soon the hour was musical and rumorous:
A softness of a dripping lipped the isolated houses,
A gaunt grey somber softness licked the glass of hours.  
                                               2 
Again, after a catbird squeaked in the special silence,
And clouding vagueness fogged the windowpane
And gathered blackness and overcast, the mane
Of light’s story and light’s glory surrendered and ended
—A pebble—a ring—a ringing on the pane,
A blowing and a blowing in: tides of the blue and cold
Moods of the great blue bay, and slates of grey
Came down upon the land’s great sea, the body of this day
—Hardly an atom of silence amid the roar
Allowed the voice to form appeal—to call:
By kindled light we thought we saw the bronze of fall.


^^EOP^^

The dog trots freely in the street
and sees reality
and the things he sees
are bigger than himself
and the things he sees
are his reality
Drunks in doorways
Moons on trees
The dog trots freely thru the street
and the things he sees
are smaller than himself
Fish on newsprint
Ants in holes
Chickens in Chinatown windows
their heads a block away
The dog trots freely in the street
and the things he smells
smell something like himself
The dog trots freely in the street
past puddles and babies
cats and cigars
poolrooms and policemen
He doesn’t hate cops
He merely has no use for them
and he goes past them
and past the dead cows hung up whole
in front of the San Francisco Meat Market
He would rather eat a tender cow
than a tough policeman
though either might do
And he goes past the Romeo Ravioli Factory
and past Coit’s Tower
and past Congressman Doyle
He’s afraid of Coit’s Tower
but he’s not afraid of Congressman Doyle
although what he hears is very discouraging
very depressing
very absurd
to a sad young dog like himself
to a serious dog like himself
But he has his own free world to live in
His own fleas to eat
He will not be muzzled
Congressman Doyle is just another
fire hydrant
to him
The dog trots freely in the street
and has his own dog’s life to live
and to think about
and to reflect upon
touching and tasting and testing everything
investigating everything
without benefit of perjury
a real realist
with a real tale to tell
and a real tail to tell it with
a real live
              barking
                         democratic dog
engaged in real
                      free enterprise
with something to say
                             about ontology
something to say
                        about reality
                                        and how to see it
                                                               and how to hear it
with his head cocked sideways
                                       at streetcorners
as if he is just about to have
                                       his picture taken
                                                             for Victor Records
                                  listening for
                                                   His Master’s Voice
                      and looking
                                       like a living questionmark
                                                                 into the
                                                              great gramaphone
                                                           of puzzling existence
                 with its wondrous hollow horn
                         which always seems
                     just about to spout forth
                                                      some Victorious answer
                                                              to everything


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

            I stumble down        around torn peaks
                          “Fit the right suit
                                                      to trick them all.”
                                         the questions fall
                                   around allure. Poems floated
                           from the hearth
                                                sparks
                                 out the mouth. I am wound up, bored
we are only strangers on our way
the hotel                turned slender to mind
                now written out (sloppy)
                                                to music
                dark brown wood
                                 gold mirrors
                             (tight)
                                 The drinking songs from upper stories
drag us to sleep                 a bend in the basement wall
             unexplained
                              scorched. pulling on clean clothes
                  I let myself out
                                                              walk up
                                                                       underground
                                        to a far off hill
                                                             smoke on top
“The orchestra of the
                           immense magnified
       inner life
                   is now prodigious.”
the strings sound down
             make the surface of a mirror
                                                    & hang the head
                           my forbidden past 
                                        Rose & Silk
           the wine is young
                                  The brooks still hum
                                                               with melted snow


^^EOP^^




—“mu” twentieth part—



     The way we lay
 we mimed a body
   of water. It was
this or that way
                         with
 the dead and we
were them. No
                         one
    worried which...
     Millet beer made
our legs go weak,
                            loosed
  our tongues. “The dead,”
                                          we
       said, “are drowning
    of thirst,” gruff
     summons we muttered
  out loud in our
                           sleep...
    It was a journey we
 were on, drawn-out
   scrawl we made a road
of, long huthered hajj
                                   we
    were on. Raw strip
   of cloth we now rode,
       wishful, letterless
                                   book
        the ride we thumbed...
    Harp-headed ghost whose
      head we plucked incessantly.
 Bartered star.       Tethered
                                            run...
   It was a ride we knew we’d
 wish to return to. Every-
     thing was everything,
nothing no less. No less
                                      newly
   arrived or ancestral, of
     late having to do with
  the naming of parts...
    Rolling hills rolled
up like a rug, raw sprawl
                                        of a
       book within a book
     without a name known as
        Namless, not to be
arrived at again...
                              It was
   the Book of No Avail we
were in did we dare name
  it, momentary kings and
                                          queens,
     fleet kingdom. Land fell
   away on all sides. 
                             Past
Lag we caught ourselves,
   run weft at last
 adequate, shadowless,
                                     lit,
    left up Atet Street,
  legs tight, hill after
      hill after hill.
    Had it been a book Book  of Opening the Book it
    would’ve been called,
                                      kept
under lock and key...
                                 Hyperbolic
   arrest. Ra was on the
                                    box.
 It was after the end of
the world... To lie on
     our backs looking
   into the dark was all
      there was worth
                                doing,
  each the aroused eye
one another sought,
     swore he or she
                               saw
   we lay where love’s
 pharaonic torso lay
     deepest, wide-eyed
                                   all
night without sleep...
                                   “String
   our heads with straw,” we
  said, half-skulls tied with
     catgut, strummed...
                                     Scratched
    our strummed heads, memory
made us itch. Walked out
  weightless, air what eye
                                       was
      left... 
               Someone said Rome,
      someone said destroy it.
Atlantis, a third shouted
                                       out...
    Low ride among ruins
 notwithstanding we flew.
  Swam, if often seemed,
underwater, oddly immersed,
                                                bodies
        long since bid goodbye,
                                               we
   lay in wait, remote muses
      kept us afloat. Something
 called pursuit had us by
    the nose. Wafted ether
                                          blown
low, tilted floor, splintered
       feet. Throated bone...
   Rickety boat we rode...
                                         As
     though what we wanted
  was to be everywhere at
                                         once,
an altered life lived on an
                                          ideal
       coast we’d lay washed up
         on, instancy and elsewhere
                                                     endlessly
    entwined


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

In the green morning, before
Love was destiny,
The sun was king,
And God was famous. 
The merry, the musical,
The jolly, the magical,
The feast, the feast of feasts, the festival
Suddenly ended
As the sky descended
But there was only the feeling,
In all the dark falling,
Of fragrance and of freshness, of birth and beginning.


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^




^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^




—“mu” twenty-eighth part—



   On Antiphon Island they lowered
the bar and we bent back. It
  wasn’t limbo we were in albeit
       we limbo’d. Everywhere we
                                                   went we
  limbo’d, legs bent, shoulder
   blades grazing the dirt,
                                       donned
andoumboulouous birth-shirts,
    sweat salting the silence
 we broke... Limbo’d so low we
     fell and lay looking up at
   the clouds, backs embraced by
                                                    the
       ground and the ground a fallen
                                                         wall
  we were ambushed by... Later we’d
      sit, sipping the fig liqueur, beckoning
 sleep, soon-come somnolence nowhere
     come as yet. Where we were, not-
withstanding, wasn’t there... 
                                             Where we
  were was the hold of a ship we were
                                                           caught
      in. Soaked wood kept us afloat... It
wasn’t limbo we were in albeit we
    limbo’d our way there. Where we
 were was what we meant by “mu.”
                                                        Where
     we were was real, reminiscent
  arrest we resisted, bodies briefly
                                                    had,
 held on
to                   • 
     “A Likkle Sonance” it said on the
record. A trickle of blood hung
    overhead I heard it spurts. An
  introvert trumpet run, trickle of
                                                     sound...
      A trickle of water lit by the sun
        I saw with an injured eye, captive
  music ran our legs and we danced...
                                                           Knees
bent, asses all but on the floor, love’s
      bittersweet largesse... I wanted
   trickle turned into flow, flood,
        two made one by music, bodied
                                                           edge
          gone up into air, aura, atmosphere
              the garment we wore. We were on
            a ship’s deck dancing, drawn in a
                                                                 dream
    above hold... The world was ever after,
                                                                 elsewhere.
Where we were they said likkle for little, lick
     ran with trickle, weird what we took it
  for... The world was ever after, elsewhere,
                                                                   no
  way where we were
was there


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

Oh, greenly and fair in the lands of the sun, The vines of the gourd and the rich melon run, And the rock and the tree and the cottage enfold, With broad leaves all greenness and blossoms all gold, Like that which o'er Nineveh's prophet once grew, While he waited to know that his warning was true, And longed for the storm-cloud, and listened in vain For the rush of the whirlwind and red fire-rain. On the banks of the Xenil the dark Spanish maiden Comes up with the fruit of the tangled vine laden; And the Creole of Cuba laughs out to behold Through orange-leaves shining the broad spheres of gold; Yet with dearer delight from his home in the North, On the fields of his harvest the Yankee looks forth, Where crook-necks are coiling and yellow fruit shines, And the sun of September melts down on his vines. Ah! on Thanksgiving day, when from East and from West, From North and from South come the pilgrim and guest, When the gray-haired New Englander sees round his board The old broken links of affection restored, When the care-wearied man seeks his mother once more, And the worn matron smiles where the girl smiled before, What moistens the lip and what brightens the eye? What calls back the past, like the rich Pumpkin pie? Oh, fruit loved of boyhood! the old days recalling, When wood-grapes were purpling and brown nuts were falling! When wild, ugly faces we carved in its skin, Glaring out through the dark with a candle within! When we laughed round the corn-heap, with hearts all in tune, Our chair a broad pumpkin,—our lantern the moon, Telling tales of the fairy who travelled like steam, In a pumpkin-shell coach, with two rats for her team! Then thanks for thy present! none sweeter or better E'er smoked from an oven or circled a platter! Fairer hands never wrought at a pastry more fine, Brighter eyes never watched o'er its baking, than thine! And the prayer, which my mouth is too full to express, Swells my heart that thy shadow may never be less, That the days of thy lot may be lengthened below, And the fame of thy worth like a pumpkin-vine grow, And thy life be as sweet, and its last sunset sky Golden-tinted and fair as thy own Pumpkin pie!


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

Soon I shall take more
I will get more light
and I'll know what I think
about that 
Driving down Second Ave. in a car
the frieze of my hand
like a grandmother
captured in an institution
I know I'll never live here again etc.
many many long years ago
Millions of peeps in the scrawl
the regular trees
the regular dog snort &
dig. In the West Village
you could put on a hat
a silly hat & it's clear
whereas over here
20 years passed
that rotting hat
it's loyalty to someone or something
that's really so gone
the moment clenched
like religion or government.
Wait a minute. I prefer umm a beatle's cap
when it's really really old
neighborhood devoted to that. 
Poetry is a sentimental act
everything spring she said
being surrounded by so much rot.
Pages & pages
mounds of them that I'm in
not some library but in your
little home, like you.
Every season I know I'm leaving
I'm as loyal as the cross
to this smeltering eccentricity
down by the river with Daddio
toss your ball in the river
in the future over bridges
they say you have to imagine
the 20th century. All these buildings were colored
a blasted interior
scarlet curtains rattling day
cobwebs on inexplicable machinery
a theater once dwelled here
all I see is rotting ideas
the epics I imagined
the unified cast of everyone
eating turkey together
on a stage
my idea
like waters towers popping up
feeling mellow
not exactly nothing all this time
but the buildings that are absolute
gone that I never
described. You can't kill
a poet. We just get erased &
written on. It aches in
my brain, my back
this beauty I'm eating my toast
everyone I knew you would
be dead tomorrow
& you were. The composing camera
infatuated with the shovel
on the lid & the pile
of rocks. He is not aging
same Alexandrian
blond in Bini-bons
the sirens are gods
when I lifted my head
from my swarming difficulty
You were so marvelous
bringing those toys to my feet
in between the invisibility of
the constant production & consumption
the network of that
& apart from the mold.
You survived.


^^EOP^^

              The mouth of the cavern
is cut along the top like snowy peaks
in cartoons—it zigzags. I sweat onto
my violet shirt in the shape
of a heart, lock that away
behind varnish, a hidden floor
between stalactites
               (long trick knives)
                    A lady of Falconbridge & lady
of Dorset
           torn back
through the center & made quiet
A paper cut black branch set
on a red field. A horse
draws the carriage past a lake
of blue & all the kids
            are laid down
in the forest to live
                   tilt their heads back,
                   Don’t think of stopping
your shooting, more drinking!
These are to be
                       among the permanent
            (wrong) colors
Ice rats in stairwells, above us
centaurs smack their heads
into light bulbs. They get excited
          over massacre
Who were once
     the innocents who never hoped
to live out unspoken prayer. A country
that laid so dark so long
                                 Pyramids send word
     to the painted mountains
               don’t try to lie down
as it gets late. stay on guard
study your drums & then tighten, pound back
          a few shots more
                  ash on the sea floors
Don’t you scrape away too many organs
or paint over.
                   Do not temper the spirit.
 
                                   (4-27-07)


^^EOP^^




—orphic fragment—



    Carnival morning they
 were Greeks in Brazil,
   Africans in Greek
disguise. Said of herself
                                     she
       was born in a house in
    heaven. He said he was
     born in the house next
 door... They were in hell.
   In Brazil they were
                                  lovebait.
      To abide by hearing was
         what love was... To
       love was to hear without
    looking. Sound was the
                                          beloved’s
     mummy cloth... All to say,
 said the exegete, love in
    hell was a voice, to be spoken
  to from behind, not be able
     to turn and look... It
   wasn’t Greece where they
                                           were,
 nor was it Benin... Carnival
morning in made-up hell, bodies
    bathed in loquat light, would-be
 song’s all the more would-be
     title, “Sound and Cerement,”
                                                    voice
      wound in bandages
   raveling
                lapse                    . 
    Up all night, slept well
past noon. Awoke restless
  having dreamt she awoke on
     Lone Coast, wondering
   afterwards what it came
                                         to,
     glimpsed interstice,
                                    crevice,
       crack... Saw her
  dead mother and brother
pull up in a car, her brother
   at the wheel not having driven
     while alive, newly taught
                                             by
   death it appeared. A fancy car,
                                                   bigger
  than any her mother had had while
     alive, she too better off it
appeared... A wishful read, “it
    appeared” notwithstanding, the
  exegete impossibly benign. Dreamt
                                                         a dream
      of dream’s end, anxious, unannounced,
   Eronel’s nevermore namesake, Monk’s
         anagrammatic Lenore... That the
       dead return in luxury cars made
                                                          us
        weep, pathetic its tin elegance,
                                                        pitiable,
          sweet read misread,
       would-be
     sweet


^^EOP^^


 The vote came in early. We ignored
   it. No ballot-box auction for us...
Nub’s uninstructed dance’s bare
     feet, music we took them for.
                                                   At a
 loss with only bodies to fend with,
  nonsonant waves kept coming,
sang without wind,        saltless,
     waterless,         Nub’s inverted
 run, Nub newly vented by horns
                                                    blown
   elsewhere, bells full of insect
     husks... Nonsonant scruff held
 on to, sheerness... Nothingness
   it seemed we grabbed at, gathered,
beginning to be unending it seemed.
                                                          We
   were beginning to be lured again,
ready to be hectored, huthered, move
  on, beginning to be uprooted again... 
   A peppered expanse the country we
crossed. Space doled out so stingily
      we wept, love’s numb extremity
  the outskirts of Nuh, name whose
                                                        elision
     we embraced... A tale told many
times over, known before it reached
       us, known before we knew, un-
     backed alley of soul we wandered
                                                          into,
       shadowbox romance it was called...
    Come of late to creation’s outskirts,
  rub’s new muse a republic of none, a
       yet-to-be band the band we were...
     We were Andoumboulou, dreamt
                                                          in-
      habitants of “mu,” moored but
 immersed, real but made up, so much
     farther flung than we’d have thought...
    They the would-be we lay on a bed
  the size of Outlandish. Lip attesting
        lip, tongue rummaging tongue,
                                                         took
      between finger and thumb the hem
    of her dress, flat bead of sweat, salted
                                                              cloth...
       A hammer hit them each on the head.
     Hammered heads rang and rang without
  end...       Called it creation, called it
   their clime, close where there was otherwise
       distance,       mute endearment,        recondite
     embrace... So much farther, felt even
                                                                so,
mouth she remembered, home. His to hear
     her tell it, hers were it his to say, whose
   book was of lengthening limbs, hers of
                                                                the
 unquenchable kiss... A tale told over and
                                                                 over,
    long since known by heart. Lay belly to
  back, turned belly to belly, each the other’s
dreamt accompanist, music they made in
 their sleep... Frayed hem the interstice,
                                                              time’s
    moot rule. Time’s moot rule amended,
                                                                 echoed
  advance it was
also called     
             ______________ 
    A first unfallen church of what might've
  been. Let run its course it would have 
      gone otherwise, time's ulterior bequest... 
This they had a way of imagining,
                                                     this
    they so wished it to be. Abstract he 
      at the back of her mind, she at the 
   back of his, each the other's Nub 
       constituent, ghost of an alternative
                                                              life...  
  They were we before we were, ancestral,
                                                                 we 
     who'd never not be ill at ease. A vocation 
   for lack he'd have said, she'd have said 
longing, a world, were they to speak, be-
  tween... What wasn't, they'd have said,
                                                                went
        away, would come back, first fanatic
                                                                 church, 
     what would
   be     
                     • 
    They the would-be we talking talk of
election, devotees of Iemanjá. Glass-
  green water they were in up to
                                                  their
     shoulders, each the other's moored
recess... The way she said his name stayed
   with him. More made of what wasn't
     there than what was, whispered,
                                                        came
back again... Love called out from side-
     walk to balcony, rooftop to galaxy,
                                                           mute...
    More made of what was there than
      was there, mouths vow-heavy at
   bed's edge, lip-touch never to be done.
Never to get up again it seemed, lay
                                                         shaken,
      endlessly commemorative advent,
                                                           dreamt
     evanescent caress... A first unfallen
        church it might have been. Let
   run its course it would have gone
     otherwise, time's ulterior bequest...
This they had a way of imagining,
                                                      this
   they so wished it to be. Abstract he
     at the back of her mind, she at the
 back of his, each the other's Nub
      constituent, ghost of an alternative
                                                             life...
 They were we before we were, ancestral,
                                                                we
    who'd never not be ill at ease. A vocation
  for lack he'd have said, she'd have said
longing, a world, were they to speak, be-
    tween... What wasn't, we'd have said,
                                                               went
         away, would come back, first afflicted
                                                                    church,
     what would be... We were caught in a
   dream whispering names we'd forget
     waking up, caught waking up or in a
dream of waking up, moot sound riffling
          our lips. Nub was a name,        was
                                                                  was
    a name,           a was a name, all moving
 on... Names came after us, roused us in
    our sleep, the ballot-box opening grinned
and grinned again, gone we'd have been
                                                               could
        we have run... It wasn't we were stuck,
      stood frozen, transfixed, Paralytic Dream #12...
   It was waking known otherwise put running
    out of reach, nonsonance's waterless waves held
      us up, more than we could sense but
                                                                sensed
   even so, nonsonance's
  gaptooth
slur     
                   • 
      Day late so all the old attunements gave
   way, late but soon come even so... A
     political trek we'd have said it was
albeit politics kept us at bay,         nothing
                                                                   wasn't
       politics we'd say. Wanting our want to
    be called otherwise, kept at bay though
     we were, day late but all the old stories
                                                                   echoed
  yet again, old but even so soon come... A
    mystic march they'd have said it was,
      acknowledging politics kept us at
  bay,        everything was mystical
they'd say. Wanting our want to be
                                                        so
      named, kept at bay as we were,
                                                       what
        the matter was wasn't a question, no
                                                                  ques-
   tion what
it was     
             ______________ 
      Nub no longer stood but lay and we
   lay with it, earth-sway cradling our
     backs. What the matter was rocked
us, a way we had with dirt, awaiting
                                                         what
        already might have been there... Dust...
     Abducted future... Dearth Lake's dry
         largesse... Dread Lakes' aliases, alibis,
                                                                   Death
     Lake also there... Where we were rubbed
         earth in our faces, a feeling we had
             for debris. Nub, no longer standing,
           filled the air, an exact powder, fell
                                                                 as
        we ran thru it, earth-sway swaddling
                                                                  our
     feet


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

We who are here present thank the Great Spirit that we are here          to praise Him.We thank Him that He has created men and women, and ordered          that these beings shall always be living to multiply the earth.We thank Him for making the earth and giving these beings its products          to live on.We thank Him for the water that comes out of the earth and runs          for our lands.We thank Him for all the animals on the earth.We thank Him for certain timbers that grow and have fluids coming          from them for us all.We thank Him for the branches of the trees that grow shadows          for our shelter.We thank Him for the beings that come from the west, the thunder          and lightning that water the earth.We thank Him for the light which we call our oldest brother, the sun          that works for our good.We thank Him for all the fruits that grow on the trees and vines.We thank Him for his goodness in making the forests, and thank          all its trees.We thank Him for the darkness that gives us rest, and for the kind Being          of the darkness that gives us light, the moon.We thank Him for the bright spots in the skies that give us signs,          the stars.We give Him thanks for our supporters, who had charge of our harvests.We give thanks that the voice of the Great Spirit can still be heard          through the words of Ga-ne-o-di-o.We thank the Great Spirit that we have the privilege of this pleasant          occasion.We give thanks for the persons who can sing the Great Spirit's music,          and hope they will be privileged to continue in his faith.We thank the Great Spirit for all the persons who perform the ceremonies          on this occasion.


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

Now the pink is in the water
its wavy edges celebrated
by cars & guys with hands
in pockets staring out. A woman
chewing gum by the window
of the train. Which heaves
its accordion on & we move.
They call it choo-choo
because of the faint chooing
sound as it starts. It's
twee too & dit dit dit
eel & screech. All this as
the colors change. The buildings
they bothered to paint
white are pink like
someone's awful socks
were mistakenly
washed. Who owns
this insidious red. The
trees are black
cause that's where the green
goes. The girl who chews
has fanned her fingers
out below the glass
and I long to stare
at them. To count
them one by one
as the wires slip
by. It's the sultriness,
the smokey approach
of the loss of
light that I love. The
homosexual lilac
comes & it's ours
& everyone like us. The
bright compartment
of white lights &
gleaming flip top &
yawns rage
on. Outside the Hudson
River queerness tools
on my brain like
a hopeless little
wallet of feeling. A clear
swipe to night. Everyone
in my compartment
is tearing now. It's true,
I heard two sheets
at once get torn
to pluck a brownie
out. Its smell
oozes, & the other
one, god knows
whose—to park
her gum? Her hands
are holding her
head, my silent
partner's & she's
sleeping (deep in my gaze.) I look
at her knees, the wrinkled
foot just above
the heel, a yellowish
unmoody pink. The trees
crowd the house &
finally we go fast
finally it's not so
warm on the train
& boats are sitting
on purple sand
the mountains
are bland & blue
a woman's sigh
is falling
off, from on
high and
into her body.
My partner's
knees sway.
Someone says
Proust. Or was
it Bruce. The train
is rough. Cutting
through sweetness
every night.
I think "time."
Then "cargo."


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

My wedding-ring lies in a basket
as if at the bottom of a well.
Nothing will come to fish it back up
and onto my finger again.
                                      It lies
among keys to abandoned houses,
nails waiting to be needed and hammered
into some wall,
telephone numbers with no names attached,
idle paperclips.
                      It can’t be given away
for fear of bringing ill-luck
                      It can’t be sold
for the marriage was good in its own
time, though that time is gone.
                      Could some artificer
beat into it bright stones, transform it
into a dazzling circlet no one could take
for solemn betrothal or to make promises
living will not let them keep? Change it
into a simple gift I could give in friendship?


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

The porchlight coming on again,
Early November, the dead leaves
Raked in piles, the wicker swing
Creaking. Across the lots
A phonograph is playing Ja-Da. 
An orange moon. I see the lives
Of neighbors, mapped and marred
Like all the wars ahead, and R.
Insane, B. with his throat cut,
Fifteen years from now, in Omaha. 
I did not know them then.
My airedale scratches at the door.
And I am back from seeing Milton Sills
And Doris Kenyon. Twelve years old.
The porchlight coming on again.


^^EOP^^

Poetry, I tell my students,
is idiosyncratic. Poetry 
is where we are ourselves
(though Sterling Brown said 
“Every ‘I’ is a dramatic ‘I’”),
digging in the clam flats 
for the shell that snaps,
emptying the proverbial pocketbook. 
Poetry is what you find
in the dirt in the corner, 
overhear on the bus, God
in the details, the only way 
to get from here to there.
Poetry (and now my voice is rising) 
is not all love, love, love,
and I’m sorry the dog died. 
Poetry (here I hear myself loudest)
is the human voice, 
and are we not of interest to each other?


^^EOP^^

The day the fat woman
In the bright blue bathing suit
Walked into the water and died,
I thought about the human
Condition. Pieces of old fruit
Came in and were left by the tide. 
What I thought about the human
Condition was this: old fruit
Comes in and is left, and dries
In the sun. Another fat woman
In a dull green bathing suit
Dives into the water and dies.
The pulmotors glisten. It is noon. 
We dry and die in the sun
While the seascape arranges old fruit,
Coming in and the tide, glistening
At noon. A woman, moderately stout,
In a nondescript bathing suit,
Swims to a pier. A tall woman
Steps toward the sea. One thinks about the human
Condition. The tide goes in and goes out.


^^EOP^^

According to Mister Hedges, the custodian
who called upon their parents
after young Otwiner and young Julia
were spotted at the matinee
of Rudolph Valentino in The Sheik
at the segregated Knickerbocker Theater
in the uncommon Washington December
of 1922, “Your young ladies
were misrepresenting themselves today,”
meaning, of course, that they were passing.
After coffee and no cake were finished
and Mister Hedges had buttoned his coat
against the strange evening chill,
choice words were had with Otwiner and Julia,
shame upon the family, shame upon the race. 
How they’d longed to see Rudolph Valentino,
who was swarthy like a Negro, like the finest Negro man.
In The Sheik, they’d heard, he was turbaned,
whisked damsels away in a desert cloud.
They’d heard this from Lucille and Ella
who’d put on their fine frocks and French,
claiming to be “of foreign extraction”
to sneak into the Knickerbocker Theater
past the usher who knew their parents
but did not know them.
They’d heard this from Mignon and Doris
who’d painted carmine bindis on their foreheads
braided their black hair tight down the back,
and huffed, “We’ll have to take this up with the Embassy”
to the squinting ticket taker.
Otwiner and Julia were tired of Oscar Michaux,
tired of church, tired of responsibility,
rectitude, posture, grooming, modulation,
tired of homilies each way they turned,
tired of colored right and wrong.
They wanted to be whisked away. 
The morning after Mister Hedges’ visit
the paperboy cried “Extra!” and Papas
shrugged camel’s hair topcoats over pressed pajamas,
and Mamas read aloud at the breakfast table,
“No Colored Killed When Roof Caves In”
at the Knickerbocker Theater
at the evening show
from a surfeit of snow on the roof.
One hundred others dead. 
It appeared that God had spoken.
There was no school that day,
no movies for months after.


^^EOP^^

[Étude from the Fourth Treatise of the Convivio, Chapter XXVII] 
In my youth, not unstaind
and in much ignoble;   in manhood,
struggling to ring true   yet
knowing often my defection from
these graces Dante lists
proper to Man:   temperance, courage,
love, courtesy,
and loyalty.   I speak still
to sustain his meaning in my own.
And, in you, whatever I have known
of grace comes through to me. 
Now, upon old age:   “Our life has a fixt course and a simple path”
I would not avoid, “that of our right nature”
—then Dante adds, himself quoting: “and in every part of our life
 place is given for certain things

^^EOP^^

The stiff spokes of this wheel 
touch the sore spots of the earth.   
On the Potomac, swan-white 
power launches keep breasting the sulphurous wave.   
Otters slide and dive and slick back their hair, 
raccoons clean their meat in the creek.   
On the circles, green statues ride like South American 
liberators above the breeding vegetation—   
prongs and spearheads of some equatorial 
backland that will inherit the globe.   
The elect, the elected . . . they come here bright as dimes, 
and die dishevelled and soft.   
We cannot name their names, or number their dates— 
circle on circle, like rings on a tree—   
but we wish the river had another shore, 
some further range of delectable mountains,   
distant hills powdered blue as a girl’s eyelid. 
It seems the least little shove would land us there,   
that only the slightest repugnance of our bodies 
we no longer control could drag us back.


^^EOP^^

A day all blue and white, and we
Came out of woods to sand
And snow-capped waves. The sea
Rose with us as we walked, the land
Built dunes, a lighthouse, and a sky of gulls. 
Here where I built my life ten years ago,
The day breaks gray and cold;
And brown surf, muddying the shore,
Deposits fish-heads, sewage, rusted tin.
Children and men break bottles on the stones.
Beyond the lighthouse, black against the sky,
Two gulls are circling where the woods begin.


^^EOP^^




To Herbert Cahoon



1.
Black, under the candlesticks, moving in harness
To a slow music, we hang the sepulchre
And hear the herald angels sing, “He is not here.”
It is mid-November. The first snows
Have fallen silently over the town. I eat
Black pudding at the altar while a dove
Descends from the flaming tower. Later,
Dr. Rashdall, behind whose scholarship
A generation’s knowledge burns, will unmask
Newman. But now it is mid-November.
I eat black pudding and the dove descends. 
2.
In a hollow tree by the bridge, an owl awaits.
The moon is full and white. The stars are out.
Tall elms surround the statue of a nymph
Where old Etonians, festive in Norfolk jackets,
Commemorate D. G. Rossetti with a plaque.
I relish the scene, remembering old Watts-Dunton
Boasting, “Dogs have never bitten me!” that day
We talked about Rossetti. Later, attacks of gout,
That horrible baby that looked like Gosse, a wheelchair
Wobbling on toward Trinity, webs covering my eyes.
But tonight the moon is full, and white. Thus 1904 begins. 
3.
Of the far end of Marseilles and the islands:
A dwarf climbing where the waves are luminous
With phosphorescent lights, where foam bursts into flower,
And the slow rise and fall of the ocean
Rocks the world. Moving like a crab over the sand,
He murmurs, “We can never praise the beauty of
The world enough, my friend.” Later, death by starvation;
Until the end, swinging on a trapeze for an hour
Every day, longing to be tall.  He left
Some wonderful paintings. I walk beside him now
At the far end of Marseilles, toward the islands.
 
4.
Now, now, if ever, love opening your eyes,
The great blind windows lifted toward the sun, the doors
Thrown open wide.  I said to my heart,
Do I wake or sleep?—Soon, soon, these closings start
Where mornings held the garden captive; and early dusk,
Laden with mist and smoke, drift upward from the grass.
The wind dies. The scraping leaves are still. I said to my heart,
Ravaged by darkness, “Now, Soon, and Later have become
Each other—doors all closed, the windows blocked and barred for good—
All and sink down together to the bottom of the sea.
Do I wake or sleep? It is late tonight as it will ever be.” 
 


^^EOP^^

I like the generosity of numbers.
The way, for example,
they are willing to count
anything or anyone:
two pickles, one door to the room,
eight dancers dressed as swans. 
I like the domesticity of addition— add two cups of milk and stir—
the sense of plenty: six plums
on the ground, three more
falling from the tree. 
And multiplication’s school
of fish times fish,
whose silver bodies breed
beneath the shadow
of a boat. 
Even subtraction is never loss,
just addition somewhere else:
five sparrows take away two,
the two in someone else’s
garden now. 
There’s an amplitude to long division,
as it opens Chinese take-out
box by paper box,
inside every folded cookie
a new fortune. 
And I never fail to be surprised
by the gift of an odd remainder,
footloose at the end:
forty-seven divided by eleven equals four,
with three remaining. 
Three boys beyond their mother’s call,
two Italians off to the sea,
one sock that isn't anywhere you look.


^^EOP^^

Nikita zips across stage
Trailed by a troop of white-gloved
One-wheelers: Killer Joes,
The 12 & Under Crew
In disguise. 
A sixth sense guides him
Beyond darkness. An
Inner voice says when, Don’t stop, don’t stop, don’t stop,
I’ll tell you when

^^EOP^^

This is the house of Bedlam. 
This is the man
that lies in the house of Bedlam. 
This is the time
of the tragic man
that lies in the house of Bedlam. 
This is a wristwatch
telling the time
of the talkative man
that lies in the house of Bedlam. 
This is a sailor
wearing the watch
that tells the time
of the honored man
that lies in the house of Bedlam. 
This is the roadstead all of board
reached by the sailor
wearing the watch
that tells the time
of the old, brave man
that lies in the house of Bedlam. 
These are the years and the walls of the ward,
the winds and clouds of the sea of board
sailed by the sailor
wearing the watch
that tells the time
of the cranky man
that lies in the house of Bedlam. 
This is a Jew in a newspaper hat
that dances weeping down the ward
over the creaking sea of board
beyond the sailor
winding his watch
that tells the time
of the cruel man
that lies in the house of Bedlam. 
This is a world of books gone flat.
This is a Jew in a newspaper hat
that dances weeping down the ward
over the creaking sea of board
of the batty sailor
that winds his watch
that tells the time
of the busy man
that lies in the house of Bedlam. 
This is a boy that pats the floor
to see if the world is there, is flat,
for the widowed Jew in the newspaper hat
that dances weeping down the ward
waltzing the length of a weaving board
by the silent sailor
that hears his watch
that ticks the time
of the tedious man
that lies in the house of Bedlam. 
These are the years and the walls and the door
that shut on a boy that pats the floor
to feel if the world is there and flat.
This is a Jew in a newspaper hat
that dances joyfully down the ward
into the parting seas of board
past the staring sailor
that shakes his watch
that tells the time
of the poet, the man
that lies in the house of Bedlam. 
This is the soldier home from the war.
These are the years and the walls and the door
that shut on a boy that pats the floor
to see if the world is round or flat.
This is a Jew in a newspaper hat
that dances carefully down the ward,
walking the plank of a coffin board
with the crazy sailor
that shows his watch
that tells the time
of the wretched man
that lies in the house of Bedlam.


^^EOP^^

You could whistle me home from anywhere in the neighborhood; avenues away, I’d pick out your clear, alternating pair of notes, the signal to quit my child’s play and run back to our house for supper, or a Saturday trip to the hardware store. Unthrottled, wavering in the upper reaches, your trilled summons traveled farther than our few blocks. I’ve learned too, how your heart’s radius extends, though its beat has stopped. Still, some days a sudden fear darts through me, whether it’s my own city street I hurry across, or at a corner in an unknown town: the high, vacant air arrests me—where’s home?


^^EOP^^

Mary sat musing on the lamp-flame at the table Waiting for Warren. When she heard his step, She ran on tip-toe down the darkened passage To meet him in the doorway with the news And put him on his guard. ‘Silas is back.’She pushed him outward with her through the door And shut it after her. ‘Be kind,’ she said. She took the market things from Warren’s arms And set them on the porch, then drew him down To sit beside her on the wooden steps.  ‘When was I ever anything but kind to him? But I’ll not have the fellow back,’ he said. ‘I told him so last haying, didn’t I? If he left then, I said, that ended it. What good is he? Who else will harbor him At his age for the little he can do? What help he is there’s no depending on. Off he goes always when I need him most. He thinks he ought to earn a little pay, Enough at least to buy tobacco with, So he won’t have to beg and be beholden.“All right,” I say, “I can’t afford to pay Any fixed wages, though I wish I could.”“Someone else can.” “Then someone else will have to.”I shouldn’t mind his bettering himself If that was what it was. You can be certain, When he begins like that, there’s someone at him Trying to coax him off with pocket-money,— In haying time, when any help is scarce. In winter he comes back to us. I’m done.’  ‘Sh! not so loud: he’ll hear you,’ Mary said.  ‘I want him to: he’ll have to soon or late.’  ‘He’s worn out. He’s asleep beside the stove. When I came up from Rowe’s I found him here, Huddled against the barn-door fast asleep, A miserable sight, and frightening, too— You needn’t smile—I didn’t recognize him— I wasn’t looking for him—and he’s changed. Wait till you see.’                            ‘Where did you say he’d been?’  ‘He didn’t say. I dragged him to the house, And gave him tea and tried to make him smoke. I tried to make him talk about his travels. Nothing would do: he just kept nodding off.’  ‘What did he say? Did he say anything?’  ‘But little.’                  ‘Anything? Mary, confess He said he’d come to ditch the meadow for me.’ ‘Warren!’                ‘But did he? I just want to know.’  ‘Of course he did. What would you have him say? Surely you wouldn’t grudge the poor old man Some humble way to save his self-respect. He added, if you really care to know, He meant to clear the upper pasture, too. That sounds like something you have heard before? Warren, I wish you could have heard the way He jumbled everything. I stopped to look Two or three times—he made me feel so queer— To see if he was talking in his sleep. He ran on Harold Wilson—you remember— The boy you had in haying four years since. He’s finished school, and teaching in his college. Silas declares you’ll have to get him back. He says they two will make a team for work: Between them they will lay this farm as smooth! The way he mixed that in with other things. He thinks young Wilson a likely lad, though daft On education—you know how they fought All through July under the blazing sun, Silas up on the cart to build the load, Harold along beside to pitch it on.’  ‘Yes, I took care to keep well out of earshot.’  ‘Well, those days trouble Silas like a dream. You wouldn’t think they would. How some things linger! Harold’s young college boy’s assurance piqued him. After so many years he still keeps finding Good arguments he sees he might have used. I sympathize. I know just how it feels To think of the right thing to say too late. Harold’s associated in his mind with Latin. He asked me what I thought of Harold’s saying He studied Latin like the violin Because he liked it—that an argument! He said he couldn’t make the boy believe He could find water with a hazel prong— Which showed how much good school had ever done him. He wanted to go over that. But most of all He thinks if he could have another chance To teach him how to build a load of hay—’  ‘I know, that’s Silas’ one accomplishment. He bundles every forkful in its place, And tags and numbers it for future reference, So he can find and easily dislodge it In the unloading. Silas does that well. He takes it out in bunches like big birds’ nests. You never see him standing on the hay He’s trying to lift, straining to lift himself.’  ‘He thinks if he could teach him that, he’d be Some good perhaps to someone in the world. He hates to see a boy the fool of books. Poor Silas, so concerned for other folk, And nothing to look backward to with pride, And nothing to look forward to with hope, So now and never any different.’  Part of a moon was falling down the west, Dragging the whole sky with it to the hills. Its light poured softly in her lap. She saw itAnd spread her apron to it. She put out her hand Among the harp-like morning-glory strings, Taut with the dew from garden bed to eaves, As if she played unheard some tenderness That wrought on him beside her in the night. ‘Warren,’ she said, ‘he has come home to die: You needn’t be afraid he’ll leave you this time.’  ‘Home,’ he mocked gently.                                         ‘Yes, what else but home? It all depends on what you mean by home. Of course he’s nothing to us, any more Than was the hound that came a stranger to us Out of the woods, worn out upon the trail.’  ‘Home is the place where, when you have to go there, They have to take you in.’                                        ‘I should have called it Something you somehow haven’t to deserve.’  Warren leaned out and took a step or two, Picked up a little stick, and brought it back And broke it in his hand and tossed it by. ‘Silas has better claim on us you think Than on his brother? Thirteen little miles As the road winds would bring him to his door. Silas has walked that far no doubt today. Why didn’t he go there? His brother’s rich, A somebody—director in the bank.’  ‘He never told us that.’                                    ‘We know it though.’  ‘I think his brother ought to help, of course. I’ll see to that if there is need. He ought of right To take him in, and might be willing to— He may be better than appearances. But have some pity on Silas. Do you think If he’d had any pride in claiming kin Or anything he looked for from his brother, He’d keep so still about him all this time?’  ‘I wonder what’s between them.’                                                  ‘I can tell you. Silas is what he is—we wouldn’t mind him— But just the kind that kinsfolk can’t abide. He never did a thing so very bad. He don’t know why he isn’t quite as good As anyone. Worthless though he is,He won’t be made ashamed to please his brother.’  ‘I can’t think Si ever hurt anyone.’  ‘No, but he hurt my heart the way he lay And rolled his old head on that sharp-edged chair-back. He wouldn’t let me put him on the lounge. You must go in and see what you can do. I made the bed up for him there tonight. You’ll be surprised at him—how much he’s broken. His working days are done; I'm sure of it.’  ‘I’d not be in a hurry to say that.’  ‘I haven’t been. Go, look, see for yourself. But, Warren, please remember how it is: He’s come to help you ditch the meadow. He has a plan. You mustn’t laugh at him. He may not speak of it, and then he may. I’ll sit and see if that small sailing cloud Will hit or miss the moon.’                                        It hit the moon. Then there were three there, making a dim row, The moon, the little silver cloud, and she.  Warren returned—too soon, it seemed to her, Slipped to her side, caught up her hand and waited.  ‘Warren,’ she questioned.                                       ‘Dead,’ was all he answered.


^^EOP^^

When over the flowery, sharp pasture’s
edge, unseen, the salt ocean 
lifts its form—chicory and daisies
tied, released, seem hardly flowers alone 
but color and the movement—or the shape
perhaps—of restlessness, whereas 
the sea is circled and sways
peacefully upon its plantlike stem


^^EOP^^

[De Vulgari Eloquentia, I,I] 
                            “We will endeavor,
the word aiding us from Heaven,
    to be of service
to the vernacular speech” 
        —from “Heaven” these 
“draughts of the sweetest   honey-milk”, 
       si dolcemente 
from the language we first heard 
    endearments    whisperings 
                infant song and revery 
a world we wanted    to go out into, 
     to come to ourselves     into, 
     organizations in the sound of them
     verging upon meaning,
                                        upon “Heaven”,
     hermetic talk
     into which my range of understandings
     was to grow    for love of it 
              portents 
     and adults expounding
         controversial doctrines, personal
         science fictions and
                            rules of order, 
but our own 
“is that which we acquire without
any rule”    for love of it 
                 “imitating our nurses”


^^EOP^^

He saw her from the bottom of the stairsBefore she saw him. She was starting down,Looking back over her shoulder at some fear.She took a doubtful step and then undid itTo raise herself and look again. He spokeAdvancing toward her: ‘What is it you seeFrom up there always—for I want to know.’She turned and sank upon her skirts at that,And her face changed from terrified to dull.He said to gain time: ‘What is it you see,’Mounting until she cowered under him.‘I will find out now—you must tell me, dear.’She, in her place, refused him any helpWith the least stiffening of her neck and silence.She let him look, sure that he wouldn’t see,Blind creature; and awhile he didn’t see.But at last he murmured, ‘Oh,’ and again, ‘Oh.’‘What is it—what?’ she said.                                          ‘Just that I see.’‘You don’t,’ she challenged. ‘Tell me what it is.’‘The wonder is I didn’t see at once.I never noticed it from here before.I must be wonted to it—that’s the reason.The little graveyard where my people are!So small the window frames the whole of it.Not so much larger than a bedroom, is it?There are three stones of slate and one of marble,Broad-shouldered little slabs there in the sunlightOn the sidehill. We haven’t to mind those.But I understand: it is not the stones,But the child’s mound—’                             ‘Don’t, don’t, don’t, don’t,’ she cried.She withdrew shrinking from beneath his armThat rested on the banister, and slid downstairs;And turned on him with such a daunting look,He said twice over before he knew himself:‘Can’t a man speak of his own child he’s lost?’‘Not you! Oh, where’s my hat? Oh, I don’t need it!I must get out of here. I must get air.I don’t know rightly whether any man can.’‘Amy! Don’t go to someone else this time.Listen to me. I won’t come down the stairs.’He sat and fixed his chin between his fists.‘There’s something I should like to ask you, dear.’‘You don’t know how to ask it.’                                              ‘Help me, then.’Her fingers moved the latch for all reply.‘My words are nearly always an offense.I don’t know how to speak of anythingSo as to please you. But I might be taughtI should suppose. I can’t say I see how.A man must partly give up being a manWith women-folk. We could have some arrangementBy which I’d bind myself to keep hands offAnything special you’re a-mind to name.Though I don’t like such things ’twixt those that love.Two that don’t love can’t live together without them.But two that do can’t live together with them.’She moved the latch a little. ‘Don’t—don’t go.Don’t carry it to someone else this time.Tell me about it if it’s something human.Let me into your grief. I’m not so muchUnlike other folks as your standing thereApart would make me out. Give me my chance.I do think, though, you overdo it a little.What was it brought you up to think it the thingTo take your mother-loss of a first childSo inconsolably—in the face of love.You’d think his memory might be satisfied—’‘There you go sneering now!’                                           ‘I’m not, I’m not!You make me angry. I’ll come down to you.God, what a woman! And it’s come to this,A man can’t speak of his own child that’s dead.’‘You can’t because you don't know how to speak.If you had any feelings, you that dugWith your own hand—how could you?—his little grave;I saw you from that very window there,Making the gravel leap and leap in air,Leap up, like that, like that, and land so lightlyAnd roll back down the mound beside the hole.I thought, Who is that man? I didn’t know you.And I crept down the stairs and up the stairsTo look again, and still your spade kept lifting.Then you came in. I heard your rumbling voiceOut in the kitchen, and I don’t know why,But I went near to see with my own eyes.You could sit there with the stains on your shoesOf the fresh earth from your own baby’s graveAnd talk about your everyday concerns.You had stood the spade up against the wallOutside there in the entry, for I saw it.’‘I shall laugh the worst laugh I ever laughed.I’m cursed. God, if I don’t believe I’m cursed.’‘I can repeat the very words you were saying:“Three foggy mornings and one rainy dayWill rot the best birch fence a man can build.”Think of it, talk like that at such a time!What had how long it takes a birch to rotTo do with what was in the darkened parlor?You couldn’t care! The nearest friends can goWith anyone to death, comes so far shortThey might as well not try to go at all.No, from the time when one is sick to death,One is alone, and he dies more alone.Friends make pretense of following to the grave,But before one is in it, their minds are turnedAnd making the best of their way back to lifeAnd living people, and things they understand.But the world’s evil. I won’t have grief soIf I can change it. Oh, I won’t, I won’t!’‘There, you have said it all and you feel better.You won’t go now. You’re crying. Close the door.The heart’s gone out of it: why keep it up.Amy! There’s someone coming down the road!’‘You—oh, you think the talk is all. I must go—Somewhere out of this house. How can I make you—’‘If—you—do!’ She was opening the door wider.‘Where do you mean to go?  First tell me that.I’ll follow and bring you back by force.  I will!—’


^^EOP^^

A Stranger came to the door at eve,    And he spoke the bridegroom fair. He bore a green-white stick in his hand,    And, for all burden, care. He asked with the eyes more than the lips    For a shelter for the night, And he turned and looked at the road afar    Without a window light. The bridegroom came forth into the porch    With, ‘Let us look at the sky, And question what of the night to be,    Stranger, you and I.’The woodbine leaves littered the yard,    The woodbine berries were blue, Autumn, yes, winter was in the wind;    ‘Stranger, I wish I knew.’Within, the bride in the dusk alone    Bent over the open fire, Her face rose-red with the glowing coal    And the thought of the heart’s desire. The bridegroom looked at the weary road,    Yet saw but her within, And wished her heart in a case of gold    And pinned with a silver pin. The bridegroom thought it little to give    A dole of bread, a purse, A heartfelt prayer for the poor of God,    Or for the rich a curse; But whether or not a man was asked    To mar the love of two By harboring woe in the bridal house,    The bridegroom wished he knew.


^^EOP^^

There was never a sound beside the wood but one,And that was my long scythe whispering to the ground.What was it it whispered? I knew not well myself;Perhaps it was something about the heat of the sun,Something, perhaps, about the lack of sound—And that was why it whispered and did not speak.It was no dream of the gift of idle hours,Or easy gold at the hand of fay or elf:Anything more than the truth would have seemed too weakTo the earnest love that laid the swale in rows,Not without feeble-pointed spikes of flowers(Pale orchises), and scared a bright green snake.The fact is the sweetest dream that labor knows.My long scythe whispered and left the hay to make.


^^EOP^^

O hushed October morning mild,Thy leaves have ripened to the fall;Tomorrow’s wind, if it be wild,Should waste them all.The crows above the forest call;Tomorrow they may form and go.O hushed October morning mild,Begin the hours of this day slow.Make the day seem to us less brief.Hearts not averse to being beguiled,Beguile us in the way you know.Release one leaf at break of day;At noon release another leaf;One from our trees, one far away.Retard the sun with gentle mist;Enchant the land with amethyst.Slow, slow!For the grapes’ sake, if they were all,Whose leaves already are burnt with frost,Whose clustered fruit must else be lost—For the grapes’ sake along the wall.


^^EOP^^

The buzz saw snarled and rattled in the yardAnd made dust and dropped stove-length sticks of wood,Sweet-scented stuff when the breeze drew across it.And from there those that lifted eyes could countFive mountain ranges one behind the otherUnder the sunset far into Vermont.And the saw snarled and rattled, snarled and rattled,As it ran light, or had to bear a load.And nothing happened: day was all but done.Call it a day, I wish they might have saidTo please the boy by giving him the half hourThat a boy counts so much when saved from work.His sister stood beside him in her apronTo tell them ‘Supper.’ At the word, the saw,As if to prove saws knew what supper meant,Leaped out at the boy’s hand, or seemed to leap—He must have given the hand. However it was, Neither refused the meeting. But the hand!The boy’s first outcry was a rueful laugh,As he swung toward them holding up the handHalf in appeal, but half as if to keepThe life from spilling. Then the boy saw all—Since he was old enough to know, big boyDoing a man’s work, though a child at heart— He saw all spoiled. ‘Don’t let him cut my hand off—The doctor, when he comes. Don’t let him, sister!’So. But the hand was gone already.The doctor put him in the dark of ether.He lay and puffed his lips out with his breath.And then—the watcher at his pulse took fright.No one believed. They listened at his heart.Little—less—nothing!—and that ended it. No more to build on there. And they, since theyWere not the one dead, turned to their affairs.


^^EOP^^

I wonder about the trees.Why do we wish to bearForever the noise of theseMore than another noiseSo close to our dwelling place?We suffer them by the dayTill we lose all measure of pace,And fixity in our joys,And acquire a listening air.They are that that talks of goingBut never gets away;And that talks no less for knowing,As it grows wiser and older,That now it means to stay.My feet tug at the floorAnd my head sways to my shoulderSometimes when I watch trees sway,From the window or the door.I shall set forth for somewhere,I shall make the reckless choiceSome day when they are in voiceAnd tossing so as to scareThe white clouds over them on.I shall have less to say,But I shall be gone.


^^EOP^^




“That God is colouring Newton doth shew”—William Blake



          Erecting beyond the boundaries of all government his grand Station and Customs, I find what I have made there a Gate, a staking out of his art in Inconsequence.  I have in mind a poetry that will frame the willingness of the heart and deliver it over to the arrest of Time, a sentence  as if there could stand some solidity  most spacial in its intent against the drifts and appearances that arise and fall away in time from the crude events of physical space.  The Mind alone holds the consequence of the erection to be true, so that Desire and Imagination usurp the place of the Invisible Throne. 
          It is an angel then, weeping and yet ever attending the betrayal of the Word I mean to come to in the end.  For my sake, the blood must be somewhere in time and in its own naming of place actual, and death must be  as my own awaits me  immediate to undo from its reality the physical body, all there is of the matter of me that is mine from me.  The would-be dialecticians—Inquisitors of the New Dispensation in Poetry and Historians of Opprobrium, the Realists and Materialists—come forward to hold the party line against his ideality.  There are too many listeners.  There are too many voices in the one line.  They must enter the Ideal to do so, for he has changed his mind, as if the Eternal existed only momentarily and went out with him.  The Chairman of the Politbureau gets his number  and moves to isolate his heresy.  The number is no longer the same.  He has gone back into the exchange of numbers.  The phone continues ringing in the pattern of the message they strive to listen  to report to the Bureau of Poetic Numbers and Approved Measures. 
          This is to say to the month of April and the rainbow dancer, I am with you.  I belong to the company without number.  I shall live one hundred years and then be gone.  Here and now  only I from this life can come forward to impersonate the necessity of his being here.  His, the horizon.  His, the perspectives and outlines.  His, the regulation of the relevant.  I will willingly assume his numbers among my own. 
          The rest is all Asia, the astral miasma, the Undoing we came from, my version of Who-He-Is-In-Reality, the domain of colouring invading the Responsible.


^^EOP^^

She does not know
her beauty,
she thinks her brown body
has no glory. 
If she could dance
naked
under palm trees
and see her image in the river,
she would know. 
But there are no palm trees
on the street,
and dish water gives back
no images.


^^EOP^^

We drove past late fall fields as flat and cold as sheets of tin and, in the distance, trees were tossed like coins against the sky. Stunned gold and bronze, oaks, maples stood in twos and threes: some copper bright, a few dull brown and, now and then, the shock of one so steeled with frostit glittered like a dime. The autumn boughs and blackened branches wore a somber glossthat whispered tails to me, not heads. I read memorial columns in their trunks; their leavesspelled UNUM, cent; and yours, the only head . . .  in penny profile, Lincoln-like (one sleeve,one eye) but even it was turning tails as russet leaves lay spent across the trails. 


^^EOP^^

Right hand graced with writing,
my left arm my secondhand new
suit bestrode, from the auto I
say, “Antinous, perched like a
parakeet cracking sunflower seeds
in a hot ice cave or cage,
you’re an apogee. Acid pennies
will fill your mouth, your head
bowl at a soldiers’ revel. Fly
the safety you despise and seek,
a butcher with a butcher’s knife
peers. The lice are fast. Ta ta.”

^^EOP^^

Centre of equal daughters, equal sons,All, all alike endear’d, grown, ungrown, young or old,Strong, ample, fair, enduring, capable, rich,Perennial with the Earth, with Freedom, Law and Love,A grand, sane, towering, seated Mother,Chair’d in the adamant of Time.


^^EOP^^

Woke in the brume,lilacs like turf stars.The late fawnstanding in his syrups;bucks down the swalechewing sedge.We move southto slopes of sleeping poppy,past the white alder,bending heads to scentof calx—in natural darka man tries his handat belonging. Hewith greave of hide, a bornhood, lay with threespikes in the clay, greenpeak in the breeze.He whose breathingwrongs the still.You stir now to mend,to redress?To be one of us, after all this?

^^EOP^^




For John Ashbery



We pullmaned to Peoria. Was
Gladys glad, Skippy missed
Sookie so. So Peru-ward, home.
“I’ll sew buttons on dresses yet.” 
Nike’s peach-knife nicked little
finger Chinese straw finger-cuffed
to Minna’s Siamesed. Hartford,
how are your wheres, our whens? 
Or extirpated traumas’ gifted
guilt smothered aboard a club
car. Lake Ontario spilled
Jo Jo’s knapsack: “Pasternak.” 
An alligator ate an alligator-
trapping monkey. We ate because
“it’s dark, it’s air-conditioned”
like lurching to the movies, 
shot marbles in lobbies. What
interests? Takes? Escapes? Eat,
moth-light, part and apart, slowly
we slow waiters serve hot plates.

^^EOP^^

Branches etch the film of iceon the studio window. A crow looks in,hopping and shrieking when I dancein my black tutu, trimmed with silver. The ballet master says, 

^^EOP^^

Finis Poloniae—a phrase/figure of speech,that apart from its literal historical meaningstands in forthe end of empires.Charged atmosphere,everything breathes damply,epicene air—if it could think anythingit would think un-European things like monsoonsand yellow seas.Greatness bears itself to death,says its last words to itself,a foreign-sounding swansong, generally misunderstood,sometimes tolerated—Finis Poloniae—perhaps on a rainy day, bummer, but in this instance a sound of happinessfollowed by solo horn,and then a hydrangea, most placid of flowers,capable of standing out in the rain into November,dropped softly into the grave.

^^EOP^^

A bunch of glads,
certainly highly emblematic of creation,
remote from frills of working blossom with hope of fruit:
slow, durable, placid,
generous, sure of kingly dreams. 
All else is natural world and intellect!
Over there the mutton herds:
strenuous ends of clover and daggy sheep—
here friendly talents,
pushing Anna to the center of attention,
explaining her, finding a solution! 
The glads offer no solution:
being—falling—
you mustn’t count the days—
fulfillment
livid, tattered, or beautiful.

^^EOP^^




                      Griffith Park, Los AngelesEvery living heart . . . all over this broad land, will yet swell . . . , when again touched, as surely they will be, by the better angels of our nature.                      —Abraham Lincoln



Because the body now and its organs suggest nothing     but those pathologies in which we’ve been instructed,Because the gutter’s black as new blood, a Petri dish     of piss and teeth knocked loose at the root,Because our walking here’s scared up pigeons and the air’s     thick with their disease, because, therefore, we’re holdingOur breath in silent prayer, Good People of Los Angeles,     for our immune systems, for hand sanitizer,For swift and decisive return of the sun’s irradiating     grace, I can hardly say I even know you muchBeyond the turnstile’s slick in the discount supermarket,     the sidewalk’s chewing gum and tuberculosis.But I’ve been thinking of you, of your eyes darting behind     

^^EOP^^

“Jena before us in the lovely valley”
thus my mother on a postcard
from a walking holiday on the banks of the Saale,
she was spending a week at the spa of Kosen;
long forgotten now, the ancestor no more,
her script a subject for graphology,
years of becoming, years of illusion,
only those words I’ll never forget. 
It wasn’t a great picture, no class,
there was not enough blossom
to justify lovely, poor paper, no pulp-free mass,
also the hills weren’t green with vineyards,
but she was from back-country hovels,
so the valleys probably did strike her as lovely,
she didn’t need laid paper or four-color print,
she supposed others would see what she had seen. 
It was something said at a venture,
an exaltation had prompted it,
the landscape had moved her,
so she asked the waiter for a postcard,
and yet—

^^EOP^^

Struck a pair of stones to start off. Left behindten men curled like scythes round the fire.Left behind the bracing moon. Passed a packof ibex, passed the mammoth. Left the cariouscanines before the rath, left the scapula—freed space for petal dyes, for fixatives.Passed (in a dream) 

^^EOP^^

Feel it—but remember, millennia have felt it—the sea and the beasts and the mindless starswrestle it down today as ever

^^EOP^^

1 
A tree, enamel needles, owl takeoffs shake,
flapping a sound and smell
of underwing, like flags,
the clothy weight of flags.
A cone of silence stuck
with diamonds, the watch
she hunts, the frayed band
broke. It was a black night.
Dawn walked on it, the sun
set its heel. She won’t
find: a boundary of marsh,
the island in the wood.

^^EOP^^

Homeless and never sadder,dragging bags, spending money,leaning over luggage,suddenly saying, “Without you, God,I can’t continue.” Who was that?And then I lift it and walk to find one book.Up Iffley Turn to the Hawkwell and Tree Innsand down over a lockinto an extended filthy riverthrough the Thames Valleyand over a meadow into town:two fats,one fishing and one man on a bikeswerving through Cotswold cow pads.I ask:“Do you know the fastest wayto City Centre?”No, yes, no!Circle Magdalen College, and the mall, the High,Broad Street, 

^^EOP^^

The spine is a slide of human marvels; it is a hierarchy of white florets; it is a cult of secret brothers; it is a deliberate list; so look how the spineless relax in their unblushing banality. I lose my patience in Greensboro where no discoveries are ever made and the only inner lavishment is the bar, occasionally. The spineless aspire to incessant interludes that never arrive anywhere and that can’t remember wherefrom they came. Mary is slightly spineless, for instance: her dress is cream her skin is cream her creamy mind is fine and her life will end finely—how sad is that to think of, the finery of a cream life? It is the saddest of all truths that can be read on a person’s face in a decorous garden that person has planted themselves and of which they are explaining to you the intricacies and expense: “notice how in the light”; “three pallets shipped last week”; “have complementary attitudes when it comes to soil-type and moisture.” She isn’t wicked; but, also, she destroys the art of her life.


^^EOP^^

Out here in the desert, everything is one thing: the desert. What god but the One God, exotic in his reachless amount casting love over our encampment beside the nervy water of Jordan? John, you have a little gristle when you speak and what’s left of you is the scrape of a year starved on grasshoppers. It is touching to see the basin of your devoted body. A little bit east, whole lambs were smeared on the temple. The city was coiled, white within its walls (violet), its muscles twisting over muscles. The temple, sleek at the top, smiled with music—it might’ve lifted for a second.I was just there. The priests wore such tall hats, heavenly bodies dropped behind their eyes. The mothers of Jerusalem suggested curtains tattering down from the markets that whirred with the songs of bargaining, parting one from the other, laughing home.The dust lifted into the hair of the peaceful citizens and was shaken out. The land was socializing. The invalids were blind as stars; the children plaited their hair in a manner pleasing to mountain lions: the boys; the trumpets bellowed like lonely bulls—they were distressed, despite their red velvet dresses; the widows were wrapping themselves in silk as their sons carried nearby stones outside the city; mules were begging to be beaten with softer sticks; a yellowing vine was making love to a young tree; grape skins were staining the feet of dancers; merchant’s fingers became little bodies which wrapped themselves around each coin; cups of hot tea startled the mouths of the idle; a tangle of serpents tried to choose just one mate; the lit membrane of a sheet hung in a window to dry, itself a heavenly body. I could go on, John, but why leave the sheet? What sermon on hope or virtue can you make that is more convincing than it?Leaving the city was a wrenching kind of death, but lying here by you, John, in rocks and flat dirt—Heaven is unexpected. 


^^EOP^^

The day gets slowly started.
A rap at the bedroom door,
bitter coffee, hot cereal, juice
the color of sun which
isn’t out this morning. A
cool shower, a shave, soothing
Noxzema for razor burn. A bed
is made. The paper doesn’t come
until twelve or one. A gray shine
out the windows. “No one
leaves the building until
those scissors are returned.”
It’s that kind of a place.
Nonetheless, I’ve seen worse.
The worried gray is melting
into sunlight. I wish I’d
brought my book of enlightening
literary essays. I wish it
were lunch time. I wish I had
an appetite. The day agrees
with me better than it did, or,
better, I agree with it. I’ll
slide down a sunslip yet, this
crass September morning.

^^EOP^^

Some people might describe this room as spare:a bedside table and an ashtray and an antiquechair; a mattress and a coffee mug;an unwashed cotton blanket and a rugmy mother used to own. I used to havea phone. I used to have anotherroom, a bigger broom, a wetter sponge.I used to water my bouquetof paper clips and empty pens, of thingsI thought I’d want to say if given chance;but now, to live, to sit somehow, to watcha particle of thought dote on the dustand dwindle in a little grid of shadow on the sunset’s patchy rust seems like enough.

^^EOP^^

Mother tried to take her life. The icicles thawed. The house, a wet coat we couldn’t put back on. Still, the garden quickened, the fields were firm. Birds flew from the woods’fingertips. Among the petals and sticks and browning fruit, we sat in the grass and bickered, chained daisies, prayed. All that falls is caught. Unless it doesn’t stop, like moonlight,which has no pace to speak of,falling through the cedar limbs,falling through the rock. 

^^EOP^^

Deafness to imperatives
is profundity in the wise man,
children and grandchildren
don’t bother him,
don’t alarm him. 
To represent a particular outlook,
to act,
to travel hither and yon
are all signs of a world
that doesn’t see clearly.
In front of my window
—

^^EOP^^

Drew down the curse of heaven on her umbrella
furled and smelling of wet cigarettes,
Jo ran off in rain one pitchy night,
one bloody a.m. found her staring, snoring. 
“Why do we all stay up so late?” Jo queried.
“Though I don’t stay up so late as my friends.”
She tripped the little bomb of wasps.
They got her. 
Tears for Jo, four, each perfect, waspish.
A silver tongue and piss-blond hair
decants a funeral oblation for the mouse.
“She was a rare sight, a winning wonder.
Jo cultivates her toothaches elsewhere.”

^^EOP^^

They are human after all, you think,
as the waiter steps up to a table
out of sight of you,
reserved, corner table—
they too are thin-skinned and pleasure-seeking,
with their own feelings and their own sufferings. 
You’re not so all alone
in your mess, your restlessness, your shakes,
they too will be full of doubt, dither, shilly-shallying,
even if it’s all about making deals,
the universal-human
albeit in its commercial manifestations,
but present there too. 
Truly, the grief of hearts is ubiquitous
and unending,
but whether they were ever in love
(outwith the awful wedded bed)
burning, athirst, desert-parched
for the nectar of a faraway
mouth,
sinking, drowning
in the impossibility of a union of souls— 
you won’t know, nor can you
ask the waiter,
who’s just ringing up
another bock,
always avid for coupons
to quench a thirst of another nature,
though also deep.

^^EOP^^

Once more the bright blade of a morning breezeglides almost too easily through me,and from the scuffle I’ve been sutured tosome flap of me is freed: I am severedlike a simile: an honest tenortrembling toward the vehicle I meanto be: a blackbird licking half notesfrom the muscled, sap-damp branchesof the sugar maple tree

^^EOP^^

Not reading English,and hearing about a new English thrillerthat hasn’t been translated.Seeing a cold beer when it’s hot out,and not being able to afford it.Having an ideathat you can’t encapsulate in a line of Hölderlin,the way the professors do.

^^EOP^^

You carve and sculpt, the deft chisel
in a soft shapely hand.
I beat my head against the marble
to knock it into shape,
my hands work for a living. 
I am still a long way from myself,
but I want to become Me!
There is someone deep in my blood
who cries out for homemade
Olympuses and worlds for humans. 
My mother is such a poor wretch,
you’d laugh if you saw her,
we live in a tight annex,
built onto the end of the village. 
My youth is like a scab:
under it there is a wound
that every day leaks blood.
It disfigures me. 
I don’t need sleep,
food just enough to keep from starving.
An implacable struggle
and the world bristling with sword points.
Each one hungers for my heart.
Each one, I, unarmed,
must melt in my blood. 

^^EOP^^

Zeh was a pharmacist,or claimed to be,times were tranquil, people didn’t ask too many questions,but when a new broom came along, it was duly “established that” etc.and it all contributed to his downfall.Zeh was an incomparable magicianshelves full of powders and tincturesnot that he had to sell them to youyou were persuaded of their efficacyin advance.Zeh had mixed up a slimming-curecalled Zeean that you hardly even needed to takeit worked in your pocketyou straightaway started to reduce.He had stuck that preparation       in one of the pharmacy windows.Among other things you could see thereherbal teas, pestles and mortars, chatty tipsfor di- and nocturnal events of an untoward natureall of it defying description—unrivaled in their suggestivenessfrom a psychosomatic point of viewhis like would never be found againchildren (not likely!) 

^^EOP^^

Out through the fields and the woods   And over the walls I have wended;I have climbed the hills of view   And looked at the world, and descended;I have come by the highway home,   And lo, it is ended. The leaves are all dead on the ground,   Save those that the oak is keepingTo ravel them one by one   And let them go scraping and creepingOut over the crusted snow,   When others are sleeping. And the dead leaves lie huddled and still,   No longer blown hither and thither;The last lone aster is gone;   The flowers of the witch hazel wither;The heart is still aching to seek,   But the feet question ‘Whither?’ Ah, when to the heart of man   Was it ever less than a treasonTo go with the drift of things,   To yield with a grace to reason,And bow and accept the end   Of a love or a season?


^^EOP^^

Chestnuts fell in the charred season,
Fell finally, finding room
In air to open their old cases
So they gleam out from the gold leaves,
In the dusk now, where they dropped down. 
I go watch them, waiting for winter,
Their husks open and holding on.
Those rusted rims are rigid=hard
And cling clean to the clear brown, 
And the fall sun sinks soon,
And the day draws to its dark end,
.and the feet give up the gray walk,
no longer lingering, light gone,
and I am here and do not go home. 
Hollow gifts to cold children:
The chestnuts they hid in small caches
Have gone hollow, their gleam gone,
Their grain gone, and the children are home.


^^EOP^^

These are the seasons Persephone promised
as she turned on her heel—
the ones that darken, till green no longer
bandages what I feel. 
Now touches of gold stipple the branches,
promising weeks of time
to fade through, finding the footprints
she left as she turned to climb.


^^EOP^^

Maple leaves turn black in the courtyard.
Light drives lower and one bluejay crams
our cold memories out past the sun, 
each time your traces come past the shadows
and visit under my looking-glass fingers
that lift and block out the sun. 
Come—I’ll trace you one final autumn,
and you can trace your last homecoming
into the snow or the sun.


^^EOP^^




For Mabon (fall equinox), Sept. 21



Our voices press
from us
and twine
around the year's
fermenting wine

^^EOP^^

Moon has dusks for walls,
October’s days for a floor,
crickets for rooms, windy halls.
Only one night is her door. 
When I was thirteen she found me,
spiralled into my blood like a hive.
I stood on a porch where she wound me
for the first time, tight and alive, 
till my body flooded to find her:
to know I would not be alone
as I moved through the tides that don't bind her
into womanhood, like a flung stone. 
With each curve that waxed into fullness
I grew to her, ready and wild.
I filled myself up like her priestess.
I emptied myself like her child. 
Flooding, ready, and certain,
I hid her—full, fallow, or frail—
beneath each long summer's rich curtain.
It covered her face—the thin grail 
that delivers me now. Now I’m with her.
All cast shadows come home.
I stand in these shadows to kiss her;
I spin in her cool, calming storm.  Now as I move through my own beauty
and my shadow grows deeper than blood,
oh triple, oh goddess, sustain me
with your light’s simple opening hood.

^^EOP^^




(The Celtic Halloween)



In the season leaves should love,
since it gives them leave to move
through the wind, towards the ground
they were watching while they hung,
legend says there is a seam
stitching darkness like a name. 
Now when dying grasses veil
earth from the sky in one last pale
wave, as autumn dies to bring
winter back, and then the spring,
we who die ourselves can peel
back another kind of veil 
that hangs among us like thick smoke.
Tonight at last I feel it shake.
I feel the nights stretching away
thousands long behind the days
till they reach the darkness where
all of me is ancestor. 
I move my hand and feel a touch
move with me, and when I brush
my own mind across another,
I am with my mother's mother.
Sure as footsteps in my waiting
self, I find her, and she brings 
arms that carry answers for me,
intimate, a waiting bounty.
"Carry me." She leaves this trail
through a shudder of the veil,
and leaves, like amber where she stays,
a gift for her perpetual gaze.


^^EOP^^

You have such lovely bones, he says,holding my face in his hands,  and although I can almost feelthe stone and the sand  sifting away, his fingerslike the softest of brushes,  I realize after this touchhe would know me  years from now, evenin the dark, even  without my skin.Thank you,

^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

As an experiment,The Washington Post asked a concert violinist— wearing jeans, tennis shoes, and a baseball cap— to stand near a trash can at rush hour in the subway and play Bach on a Stradivarius.Partita No. 2 in D Minor called out to commuters like an ocean to waves, sang to the station about why we should bother to live.   A thousand people streamed by.  Seven of them paused for a minute or so and thirty-two dollars floated into the open violin case. A café hostess who drifted over to the open door each time she was free said later that Bach gave her peace, and all the children, all of them, waded into the music as if it were water, listening until they had to be rescued by parents who had somewhere else to go.


^^EOP^^

The one horse you gave me
you took back when she went insane,
when she began to chew wood
instead of the expensive grain
we bought from the feed store,
the grain that had the sweet smell
of molasses and was good for even
us to chew. She turned into
an ugly thing with her wild thoughts,
and I forgot about the beauty
expected of her when her blanket
filled out and complemented
her chestnut body and the name
the Nez Percé gave her. She rotted
and began to stink of promises
gone wrong, of gods avenging
their defilement. A man who knew
what to do with useless horses
came and took her away in
a wooden trailer she tried to chew,
and my tears welled up in huge drops
before they splattered on the ground,
as I trembled and realized I would have
to give up her own ghost for her,
ghost which she did not have, ghost
which she came here beautifully without.


^^EOP^^

you lie in bed listening,
waiting, fearing the moment
your father returns home. you
listen to voices talking in the
next room and wonder why you are
still afraid of the dark. his voice
in the other room you would love to
kiss. you cannot see your face in the
dark but the blackness is there, like
his back. if only he would
open the door and look at you. maybe
the light would be in his eyes,
his voice.


^^EOP^^

sometimes the deaf
hear better than the blind 
some men
when they first
heard her sing 
were only attracted
to the flower in her hair


^^EOP^^

Ink runs from the corners of my mouth.
There is no happiness like mine.
I have been eating poetry. 
The librarian does not believe what she sees.
Her eyes are sad
and she walks with her hands in her dress. 
The poems are gone.
The light is dim.
The dogs are on the basement stairs and coming up. 
Their eyeballs roll,
their blond legs burn like brush.
The poor librarian begins to stamp her feet and weep. 
She does not understand.
When I get on my knees and lick her hand,
she screams. 
I am a new man.
I snarl at her and bark.
I romp with joy in the bookish dark.


^^EOP^^

a trouble 
archaically fettered
to produce  E Pluribus Unum an
island 
in the sea a Capitol
surmounted 
by Armed Liberty—
painting 
sculpture straddled by
a dome 
eight million pounds
in weight 
iron plates constructed
to expand 
and contract with
variations 
of temperature
the folding 
and unfolding of a lily.
And Congress 
authorized and the
Commission 
was entrusted was
entrusted! 
a sculptured group
Mars 
in Roman mail placing
a wreath 
of laurel on the brow
of Washington 
Commerce Minerva
Thomas 
Jefferson John Hancock
at 
the table Mrs. Motte
presenting 
Indian burning arrows
to Generals 
Marion and Lee to fire
her mansion 
and dislodge the British—
this scaleless 
jumble is superb 
and accurate in its
expression 
of the thing they
would destroy— 
Baptism of Poca-
hontas 
with a little card
hanging 
under it to tell
the persons 
in the picture. 
It climbs 
it runs, it is Geo.
Shoup 
of Idaho it wears
a beard 
it fetches naked
Indian 
women from a river
Trumbull 
Varnum Henderson
Frances 
Willard’s corset is
absurd— 
Banks White Columbus
stretched 
in bed men felling trees 
The Hon. Michael
C. Kerr 
onetime Speaker of
the House 
of Representatives
Perry 
in a rowboat on Lake
Erie 
changing ships the
dead 
among the wreckage
sickly green


^^EOP^^

There is joy in the woods just now,
       The leaves are whispers of song,
And the birds make mirth on the bough
       And music the whole day long,
And God! to dwell in the town
       In these springlike summer days,
On my brow an unfading frown
       And hate in my heart always— 
A machine out of gear, aye, tired,
Yet forced to go on—for I’m hired. 
Just forced to go on through fear,
       For every day I must eat
And find ugly clothes to wear,
       And bad shoes to hurt my feet
And a shelter for work-drugged sleep!
       A mere drudge! but what can one do?
A man that’s a man cannot weep!
       Suicide? A quitter? Oh, no! 
But a slave should never grow tired,
Whom the masters have kindly hired. 
But oh! for the woods, the flowers
       Of natural, sweet perfume,
The heartening, summer showers
       And the smiling shrubs in bloom,
Dust-free, dew-tinted at morn,
       The fresh and life-giving air,
The billowing waves of corn
       And the birds’ notes rich and clear:— 
For a man-machine toil-tired
May crave beauty too—though he’s hired.


^^EOP^^

On summer nights I sleep naked
in Jerusalem. My bed
stands on the brink of a deep valley
without rolling down into it. 
In the daytime I walk around with the Ten
Commandments on my lips
like an old tune someone hums to himself. 
Oh touch me, touch me, good woman!
That’s not a scar you feel under my shirt, that’s
a letter of recommendation, folded up tight,
from my father:
“All the same, he’s a good boy, and full of love.” 
I remember my father waking me for early prayers.
He would do it by gently stroking my forehead, not
by tearing away the blanket. 
Since then I love him even more.
And as his reward, may he be wakened
gently and with love
on the Day of the Resurrection.


^^EOP^^

i will die this month. how
i do not know. still there
is much work to be done. i
am afraid not for myself but
for betty and the girls. some
nights i stay awake looking
out the window, a gun in my
hand. i know how cruel people
can be. i have known hatred and
blindness. there are brothers
waiting to do me harm. i will
die for them. i will love them
as only i can. may allah be my
witness.


^^EOP^^

Sir star, Herr Lenz, white season body
master snapping masts in half, absent
winds’ workmanship: what window
will I look you through, what brook, stream 
creaking past fretwork weeds, clouds
in the context of cold? Lord knot
to be untied, skiff hard alee ill winds:
a hiss of wish and cinders and I 
am warm, crossing dazed oceans by hand
to sow the doubtful sea with drought. Mine
of rain and seize and sluice, you change 
your mind again, a rage for green waves’
open vowels, undrinkable. No talking
to the weeds, no talking with the snow.


^^EOP^^

death surrounds itself with the living
i watch them take the body from the house
i’m a young kid maybe five years old
the whole thing makes no sense to me
i hear my father say
          lord jesus what she go and do this for
i watch him walk out the backdoor of the house
i watch him walk around the garden
kick the dirt
stare at the flowers
& shake his head  shake his head
he shakes his head all night long 
yazoo
jackson
vicksburg
we must have family in almost every city
i spent more time traveling than growing up
guess that’s why i’m still shorter than my old man
he don’t like to stay in one place much
he tell me
soon as people get to know your last name
seem like they want to call you by your first
boy    if someone ask you your name
tell them to call you mississippi
not sippi or sip but mississippi 
how many colored folks you know name mississippi 
none see 
now you can find a whole lot of folks whose
name is canada
just like you can find 53 people in any phone book
whose name is booker t. washington 
your mother she was a smart woman
gave you a good name
not one of them abolitionist names 
what you look like with a name like
john brown or william lloyd garrison
that don’t have no class 
your mother she named you after the river
cause of its beauty and mystery
just like my mother named me nevada
cause she didn’t know where it was


^^EOP^^

 
         Today the moon sees fit to come between a parched earth

    and sun, hurrying the premature darkness. A rooster in the yard

            cuts off its crowing, fooled into momentary sleep.

               And soon the Perseid showers, broken bits

         of the ancient universe, will pass through the skin of our

            atmosphere. Time and space are alive over our city.

 

       Final eclipse of the sun, last of this millennium, our city’s

        brightness broken off. We have known other dark hours:             Here, coffin that slowly passes, I give you my sprig         of lilac—Lincoln’s death, winding procession toward sleep.

          We have known slave coffles and holding pens in yards

       not half a mile from our Capitol, wooden palings sunk in earth

 

       to guarantee none would escape. In this freest city. Oh if earth

              could talk. Earth does talk in the neatly framed yards

                where death thinks to lay us down to rest. Asleep,

                the marker stones. But not the voices, jagged bits

                of memory, shards of poems. Sterling Brown. Our

           human possessions and all they've left us. This whole city

 

                  sings their songs. Say their names. In this city

               they are our monuments: Frederick Douglass, our

             Rayford Logan, Alain Locke, Franklin Frazier, Georgia

       Douglas Johnson, Paul Laurence Dunbar, May Miller: Not sleep

        but garlands left to us. Montague Cobb, William Hastie. Yards

                 of names. And here, the place where we unearth

 

             an immigrant father of seven. He leans down—no earthly

           reason for his choice—to pick up his nearest child. A yard-long

             rack of brooms behind him, a bin of apples. Not the sleep

                   of cold, but autumn in Washington. 1913 or a bit

               later. He stands awkwardly on 4 1/2 Street, S. W. as our

                street photographer, who’s just come by with his city

 

              chatter, ducks beneath a dark cloth. Monuments of the city

         behind him, he leans over his black box camera in time to capture

                       that moment when the child will play her bit

      part, pushing away from her father like a boat from shore. In the sleep

         of winter, years later, she will become my mother. What yardstick

                 by which to measure importance? To measure earthly

 

     agency? Each of us has monuments in the bone case of memory. Earth-    

 bound, I take my sac of marble and carry it down lonely city streets where our

generals on horseback and a tall bearded man keep watch over all their citizens.   


^^EOP^^

inside the car
françois and i
could see the light
coming from the
cigarette michele
duvalier was smoking
her husband
declared president
for life looked like
a fat chauffeur
sitting beind the
wheel 
françois
and i smiled 
the small
procession of cars
slipping past us
in the dark 
we did not know
that a few miles
away people were
already celebrating
nor could we see
joy on the faces
of the men who ran
holding knives and
sticks to the place
where papa doc
was buried
tonight even
ghosts will die
as françois and i
walk barefoot
at the center
of port-au-prince


^^EOP^^

                    
                    
                    I think I know what sort of person I am. But then I think, But this stranger will imagine me quite otherwise when he or she hears this or that to my credit, for instance that I have a position at the university: the fact that I have a position at the university will appear to mean that I must be the sort of person who has a position at the university. But then I have to admit, with surprise, that, after all, it is true that I have a position at the university. And if it is true, then perhaps I really am the sort of person you imagine when you hear that a person has a position at the university. But, on the other hand, I know I am not the sort of person I imagine when I hear that a person has a position at the university. Then I see what the problem is: when others describe me this way, they appear to describe me completely, whereas in fact they do not describe me completely, and a complete description of me would include truths that seem quite incompatible with the fact that I have a position at the university.
                

^^EOP^^

On Friday, at twilight of a summer day
While the smells of food and prayer rose from every house
And the sound of the Sabbath angels’ wings was in the air,
While still a child I started to lie to my father:
“I went to another synagogue.” 
I don’t know if he believed me or not
But the taste of the lie was good and sweet on my tongue
And in all the houses that night
Hymns rose up along with lies
To celebrate the Sabbath.
And in all the houses that night
Sabbath angels died like flies in a lamp,
And lovers put mouth to mouth,
Blew each other up until they floated upward,
Or burst. 
And since then the lie has been good and sweet on my tongue
And since then I always go to another synagogue.
And my father returned the lie when he died:
“I’ve gone to another life.”


^^EOP^^

on the top shelf
of the closet
is the hat my father
wears on special occasions
it rests next to the large jar
he saves pennies in 
his head is always bare
when i see him walking
in the street 
i once sat in his bedroom
watching him search
between sweaters and suits
looking for something missing
a tie perhaps 
then he stopped
and slowly walked to the closet
took the hat from the shelf 
i sat on the bed
studying his back
waiting for him to turn
and tell me who died


^^EOP^^

The potato that ate all its carrots, can see in the dark like a mole,its eyes the scarsfrom centuries of shovels, tines.May spelled backwardsbecause it hates the light,pawing its way, padding along, there in the catacombs.


^^EOP^^

Oft have I seen at some cathedral door       A laborer, pausing in the dust and heat,       Lay down his burden, and with reverent feet       Enter, and cross himself, and on the floor Kneel to repeat his paternoster o'er;       Far off the noises of the world retreat;       The loud vociferations of the street       Become an undistinguishable roar. So, as I enter here from day to day,       And leave my burden at this minster gate,       Kneeling in prayer, and not ashamed to pray, The tumult of the time disconsolate       To inarticulate murmurs dies away,       While the eternal ages watch and wait.  II How strange the sculptures that adorn these towers!       This crowd of statues, in whose folded sleeves       Birds build their nests; while canopied with leaves       Parvis and portal bloom like trellised bowers, And the vast minster seems a cross of flowers!       But fiends and dragons on the gargoyled eaves       Watch the dead Christ between the living thieves,       And, underneath, the traitor Judas lowers! Ah! from what agonies of heart and brain,       What exultations trampling on despair,       What tenderness, what tears, what hate of wrong, What passionate outcry of a soul in pain,       Uprose this poem of the earth and air,       This mediæval miracle of song!  I enter, and I see thee in the gloom       Of the long aisles, O poet saturnine!       And strive to make my steps keep pace with thine.       The air is filled with some unknown perfume; The congregation of the dead make room       For thee to pass; the votive tapers shine;       Like rooks that haunt Ravenna's groves of pine       The hovering echoes fly from tomb to tomb. From the confessionals I hear arise       Rehearsals of forgotten tragedies,       And lamentations from the crypts below; And then a voice celestial that begins       With the pathetic words, "Although your sins       As scarlet be," and ends with "as the snow."  With snow-white veil and garments as of flame,       She stands before thee, who so long ago       Filled thy young heart with passion and the woe       From which thy song and all its splendors came; And while with stern rebuke she speaks thy name,       The ice about thy heart melts as the snow       On mountain heights, and in swift overflow       Comes gushing from thy lips in sobs of shame. Thou makest full confession; and a gleam,       As of the dawn on some dark forest cast,       Seems on thy lifted forehead to increase; Lethe and Eunoë — the remembered dream       And the forgotten sorrow — bring at last       That perfect pardon which is perfect peace.  I lift mine eyes, and all the windows blaze       With forms of Saints and holy men who died,       Here martyred and hereafter glorified;       And the great Rose upon its leaves displays Christ's Triumph, and the angelic roundelays,       With splendor upon splendor multiplied;       And Beatrice again at Dante's side       No more rebukes, but smiles her words of praise. And then the organ sounds, and unseen choirs       Sing the old Latin hymns of peace and love       And benedictions of the Holy Ghost; And the melodious bells among the spires       O'er all the house-tops and through heaven above       Proclaim the elevation of the Host!  O star of morning and of liberty!       O bringer of the light, whose splendor shines       Above the darkness of the Apennines,       Forerunner of the day that is to be! The voices of the city and the sea,       The voices of the mountains and the pines,       Repeat thy song, till the familiar lines       Are footpaths for the thought of Italy! Thy fame is blown abroad from all the heights,       Through all the nations, and a sound is heard,       As of a mighty wind, and men devout, Strangers of Rome, and the new proselytes,       In their own language hear thy wondrous word,       And many are amazed and many doubt. 


^^EOP^^

“Take me with you” my mother says standing in her nightgown as, home from college, I prepare to leave before dawn. The desolation she must face was once my concern but like a bobber pulled beneath  the surface by an inedible fish she vanished into the life he offered her. It stopped occurring to me she might return. “I’ll be back” I say and then I go.


^^EOP^^

A grainy predawn dark, early Expressway traffic bleeding arterial tail lights across gray water and its blue heart. Under Lemon Hill, grunts from Boathouse Row, woodshop clunks, young men’s voices too loud for a day exhaling into starless skies, bad boysafter keg night, hungover, push long scullsinto the water and slice its marcelled run, a marbled peacock wake behind each strokeand coxswain counting that muscled steadinesspast the Water Works, Spring Garden Street Bridgethen Girard Avenue Bridge, where on the bankEakins sketches Max Schmitt in a single scull,his light like this, tinfoil blue, where the crews sweat offlast night’s lost time but won’t row too far north to river canals, Manayunk Reach, its towpath,mules and barges and anthracite from Point Carbon to feed stoves and Bessemers in Harrisburg, Pittsburgh

^^EOP^^

The canals of Marsbeseech various oxides, vastdust stormsof a dulled red,a daytime warmththat only reaches so far.Let’s call these fissures canalsso we’ll think of Venicelooking through our telescopeas Mars comes this closein this our anniversary yearwith its thin atmosphereand, to be probed,its extreme cold.

^^EOP^^

It’s now all about money about which poetry rarely reaches transcendence. But love must still fester even under that. Everyone I knowfrets if poetry can still matter,but what about love? It’s all becometoo much for them, and they’re all on the soma. It makes sense with these pills when the someonethey thought they loved for yearsby never thinking about it says, “I don’t love you anymore,but let’s stay friends in that mellowwoebegone way poetry now sings without singing.” Of course, they’re always asking “What is poetry?”and then answering by saying it’s what Boethius was thinking aboutwhen they squished his headuntil his eyes popped out, or anything barbaric enough to geteveryone to stop eating for a bitand reach for a moment past a chatty moment. Sort of a solution to awkward goodbyes. How money becomes a sort of welcome relief that defuses the poetry charging tense moments. “Interesting,”someone remarks between bites, “to be right here in the momentyet also out there watching some once-in-a-lifetime sublimity unfold, as if living as if already dead.” As if standing in a dream far up in the stars somewhere with Scipio

^^EOP^^




For Craig



The blackbird sings atthe frontier of his music.The branch where he satmarks the brink of doubt,is the outpost of his realm,edge from which to routencroachers with trillsand melismatic runs sur-passing earthbound skills.It sounds like ardor,it sounds like joy. We are gladhere at the borderwhere he signs the airwith his invisible staves,“Trespassers beware”—Song as survival—a kind of pure music whichwe cannot rival.

^^EOP^^

Under the locked grille, the animals are crying.You hear them while you wait and when the bus pulls up,Finally, and you get on. That was many years ago.The cellar is given over to new shopkeepers, one after the other,Who fail and are replaced. Even the selfish brother,The crazed neighbor, the criminal in his cell, face of blueTattoos, has never allowed a living thing to starveAs you have. Who knows this except for you and the laughingAfrican with his flashing gold teeth and padlock key.

^^EOP^^

Lo I the man, whose Muse whilome did maske, As time her taught in lowly Shepheards weeds, Am now enforst a far unfitter taske, For trumpets sterne to chaunge mine Oaten reeds, And sing of Knights and Ladies gentle deeds; Whose prayses having slept in silence long, Me, all too meane, the sacred Muse areeds To blazon broad emongst her learned throng: Fierce warres and faithful loves shall moralize my song. Helpe then, O holy Virgin chiefe of nine, Thy weaker Novice to performe thy will, Lay forth out of thine everlasting scryne The antique rolles, which there lye hidden still, Of Faerie knights and fairest Tanaquill, Whom that most noble Briton Prince so long Sought through the world, and suffered so much ill, That I must rue his undeserved wrong: O helpe thou my weake wit, and sharpen my dull tong. And thou most dreaded impe of highest Jove, Faire Venus sonne, that with thy cruell dart At that good knight so cunningly didst rove, That glorious fire it kindled in his hart, Lay now thy deadly Heben bow apart, And with thy mother milde come to mine ayde: Come both, and with you bring triumphant Mart, In loves and gentle jollities arrayd, After his murdrous spoiles and bloudy rage allayd. And with them eke, O Goddesse heavenly bright, Mirrour of grace and Majestie divine, Great Lady of the greatest Isle, whose light Like Phoebus lampe throughout the world doth shine, Shed thy faire beames into my feeble eyne, And raise my thoughts too humble and too vile, To thinke of that true glorious type of thine, The argument of mine afflicted stile: The which to heare, vouchsafe, O dearest dred a-while.  i A Gentle Knight was pricking on the plaine, Y cladd in mightie armes and silver shielde, Wherein old dints of deepe wounds did remaine, The cruell markes of many a bloudy fielde; Yet armes till that time did he never wield: His angry steede did chide his foming bitt, As much disdayning to the curbe to yield: Full jolly knight he seemd, and faire did sitt, As one for knightly giusts and fierce encounters fitt.  ii But on his brest a bloudie Crosse he bore, The deare remembrance of his dying Lord, For whose sweete sake that glorious badge he wore, And dead as living ever him ador'd: Upon his shield the like was also scor'd, For soveraine hope, which in his helpe he had: Right faithfull true he was in deede and word, But of his cheere did seeme too solemne sad; Yet nothing did he dread, but ever was ydrad.  iii Upon a great adventure he was bond, That greatest Gloriana to him gave, That greatest Glorious Queene of Faerie lond, To winne him worship, and her grace to have, Which of all earthly things he most did crave; And ever as he rode, his hart did earne To prove his puissance in battell brave Upon his foe, and his new force to learne; Upon his foe, a Dragon horrible and stearne.  iv A lovely Ladie rode him faire beside, Upon a lowly Asse more white then snow, Yet she much whiter, but the same did hide Under a vele, that wimpled was full low, And over all a blacke stole she did throw, As one that inly mournd: so was she sad, And heavie sat upon her palfrey slow; Seemed in heart some hidden care she had, And by her in a line a milke white lambe she lad.  v So pure an innocent, as that same lambe, She was in life and every vertuous lore, And by descent from Royall lynage came Of ancient Kings and Queenes, that had of yore Their scepters stretcht from East to Westerne shore, And all the world in their subjection held; Till that infernall feend with foule uprore Forwasted all their land, and them expeld: Whom to avenge, she had this Knight from far compeld.  vi Behind her farre away a Dwarfe did lag, That lasie seemd in being ever last, Or wearied with bearing of her bag Of needments at his backe. Thus as they past, The day with cloudes was suddeine overcast, And angry Jove an hideous storme of raine Did poure into his Lemans lap so fast, That every wight to shrowd it did constrain, And this faire couple eke to shroud themselves were fain.  vii Enforst to seeke some covert nigh at hand, A shadie grove not far away they spide, That promist ayde the tempest to withstand: Whose loftie trees yclad with sommers pride, Did spred so broad, that heavens light did hide, Not perceable with power of any starre: And all within were pathes and alleies wide, With footing worne, and leading inward farre: Faire harbour that them seemes; so in they entred arre.  viii And foorth they passe, with pleasure forward led, Joying to heare the birdes sweete harmony, Which therein shrouded from the tempest dred, Seemd in their song to scorne the cruell sky. Much can they prayse the trees so straight and hy, The sayling Pine, the Cedar proud and tall, The vine-prop Elme, the Poplar never dry, The builder Oake, sole king of forrests all, The Aspine good for staves, the Cypresse funerall.  ix The Laurell, meed of mightie Conquerours And Poets sage, the Firre that weepeth still, The Willow worne of forlorne Paramours, The Eugh obedient to the benders will, The Birch for shaftes, the Sallow for the mill, The Mirrhe sweete bleeding in the bitter wound, The warlike Beech, the Ash for nothing ill, The fruitfull Olive, and the Platane round, The carver Holme, the Maple seeldom inward sound.  x Led with delight, they thus beguile the way, Untill the blustring storme is overblowne; When weening to returne, whence they did stray, They cannot find that path, which first was showne, But wander too and fro in wayes unknowne, Furthest from end then, when they neerest weene, That makes them doubt, their wits be not their owne: So many pathes, so many turnings seene, That which of them to take, in diverse doubt they been.  xi At last resolving forward still to fare, Till that some end they finde or in or out, That path they take, that beaten seemd most bare, And like to lead the labyrinth about; Which when by tract they hunted had throughout, At length it brought them to a hollow cave, Amid the thickest woods. The Champion stout Eftsoones dismounted from his courser brave, And to the Dwarfe a while his needlesse spere he gave.  xii Be well aware, quoth then that Ladie milde, Least suddaine mischiefe ye too rash provoke: The danger hid, the place unknowne and wilde, Breeds dreadfull doubts: Oft fire is without smoke, And perill without show: therefore your stroke Sir knight with-hold, till further triall made. Ah Ladie (said he) shame were to revoke The forward footing for an hidden shade: Vertue gives her selfe light, through darkenesse for to wade.  xiii Yea but (quoth she) the perill of this place I better wot then you, though now too late To wish you backe returne with foule disgrace, Yet wisedome warnes, whilest foot is in the gate, To stay the steppe, ere forced to retrate. This is the wandring wood, this Errours den, A monster vile, whom God and man does hate: Therefore I read beware. Fly fly (quoth then The fearefull Dwarfe:) this is no place for living men.  xiv But full of fire and greedy hardiment, The youthfull knight could not for ought be staide, But forth unto the darksome hole he went, And looked in: his glistring armor made A litle glooming light, much like a shade, By which he saw the ugly monster plaine, Halfe like a serpent horribly displaide, But th'other halfe did womans shape retaine, Most lothsom, filthie, foule, and full of vile disdaine.  xv And as she lay upon the durtie ground, Her huge long taile her den all overspred, Yet was in knots and many boughtes upwound, Pointed with mortall sting. Of her there bred A thousand yong ones, which she dayly fed, Sucking upon her poisonous dugs, eachone Of sundry shapes, yet all ill favored: Soone as that uncouth light upon them shone, Into her mouth they crept, and suddain all were gone.  xvi Their dam upstart, out of her den effraide, And rushed forth, hurling her hideous taile About her cursed head, whose folds displaid Were stretcht now forth at length without entraile. She lookt about, and seeing one in mayle Armed to point, sought backe to turne againe; For light she hated as the deadly bale, Ay wont in desert darknesse to remaine, Where plaine none might her see, nor she see any plaine.  xvii Which when the valiant Elfe perceiv'd, he lept As Lyon fierce upon the flying pray, And with his trenchand blade her boldly kept From turning backe, and forced her to stay: Therewith enrag'd she loudly gan to bray, And turning fierce, her speckled taile advaunst, Threatning her angry sting, him to dismay: Who nought aghast, his mightie hand enhaunst: The stroke down from her head unto her shoulder glaunst.  xviii Much daunted with that dint, her sence was dazd, Yet kindling rage, her selfe she gathered round, And all attonce her beastly body raizd With doubled forces high above the ground: Tho wrapping up her wrethed sterne arownd, Lept fierce upon his shield, and her huge traine All suddenly about his body wound, That hand or foot to stirre he strove in vaine: God helpe the man so wrapt in Errours endlesse traine.  xix His Lady sad to see his sore constraint, Cride out, Now now Sir knight, shew what ye bee, Add faith unto your force, and be not faint: Strangle her, else she sure will strangle thee. That when he heard, in great perplexitie, His gall did grate for griefe and high disdaine, And knitting all his force got one hand free, Wherewith he grypt her gorge with so great paine, That soone to loose her wicked bands did her constraine.  xx Therewith she spewd out of her filthy maw A floud of poyson horrible and blacke, Full of great lumpes of flesh and gobbets raw, Which stunck so vildly, that it forst him slacke His grasping hold, and from her turne him backe: Her vomit full of bookes and papers was, With loathly frogs and toades, which eyes did lacke, And creeping sought way in the weedy gras: Her filthy parbreake all the place defiled has.  xxi As when old father Nilus gins to swell With timely pride above the Aegyptian vale, His fattie waves do fertile slime outwell, And overflow each plaine and lowly dale: But when his later spring gins to avale, Huge heapes of mudd he leaves, wherein there breed Ten thousand kindes of creatures, partly male And partly female of his fruitfull seed; Such ugly monstrous shapes elsewhere may no man reed.  xxii The same so sore annoyed has the knight, That welnigh choked with the deadly stinke, His forces faile, ne can no longer fight. Whose corage when the feend perceiv'd to shrinke, She poured forth out of her hellish sinke Her fruitfull cursed spawne of serpents small, Deformed monsters, fowle, and blacke as inke, Which swarming all about his legs did crall, And him encombred sore, but could not hurt at all.  xxiii As gentle Shepheard in sweete even-tide, When ruddy Phoebus gins to welke in west, High on an hill, his flocke to vewen wide, Markes which do byte their hasty supper best; A cloud of combrous gnattes do him molest, All striving to infixe their feeble stings, That from their noyance he no where can rest, But with his clownish hands their tender wings He brusheth oft, and oft doth mar their murmurings.  xxiv Thus ill bestedd, and fearefull more of shame, Then of the certaine perill he stood in, Halfe furious unto his foe he came, Resolv'd in minde all suddenly to win, Or soone to lose, before he once would lin; And strooke at her with more then manly force, That from her body full of filthie sin He raft her hatefull head without remorse; A streame of cole black bloud forth gushed from her corse.  xxv Her scattred brood, soone as their Parent deare They saw so rudely falling to the ground, Groning full deadly, all with troublous feare, Gathred themselves about her body round, Weening their wonted entrance to have found At her wide mouth: but being there withstood They flocked all about her bleeding wound, And sucked up their dying mothers blood, Making her death their life, and eke her hurt their good.  xxvi That detestable sight him much amazde, To see th'unkindly Impes of heaven accurst, Devoure their dam; on whom while so he gazd, Having all satisfide their bloudy thurst, Their bellies swolne he saw with fulnesse burst, And bowels gushing forth: well worthy end Of such as drunke her life, the which them nurst; Now needeth him no lenger labour spend, His foes have slaine themselves, with whom he should contend.  xxvii His Ladie seeing all, that chaunst, from farre Approcht in hast to greet his victorie, And said, Faire knight, borne under happy starre, Who see your vanquisht foes before you lye: Well worthy be you of that Armorie, Wherein ye have great glory wonne this day, And proov'd your strength on a strong enimie, Your first adventure: many such I pray, And henceforth ever wish, that like succeed it may.  xxviii Then mounted he upon his Steede againe, And with the Lady backward sought to wend; That path he kept, which beaten was most plame, Ne ever would to any by-way bend, But still did follow one unto the end, The which at last out of the wood them brought. So forward on his way (with God to frend) He passed forth, and new adventure sought; Long way he travelled, before he heard of ought.  xxix At length they chaunst to meet upon the way An aged Sire, in long blacke weedes yclad, His feete all bare, his beard all hoarie gray, And by his belt his booke he hanging had; Sober he seemde, and very sagely sad, And to the ground his eyes were lowly bent, Simple in shew, and voyde of malice bad, And all the way he prayed, as he went, And often knockt his brest, as one that did repent.  xxx He faire the knight saluted, louting low, Who faire him quited, as that courteous was: And after asked him, if he did know Of straunge adventures, which abroad did pas. Ah my deare Sonne (quoth he) how should, alas, Silly old man, that lives in hidden cell, Bidding his beades all day for his trespas, Tydings of warre and worldly trouble tell? With holy father sits not with such things to mell.  xxxi But if of daunger which hereby doth dwell, And homebred evill ye desire to heare, Of a straunge man I can you tidings tell, That wasteth all this countrey farre and neare. Of such (said he) I chiefly do inquere, And shall you well reward to shew the place, In which that wicked wight his dayes doth weare: For to all knighthood it is foule disgrace, That such a cursed creature lives so long a space.  xxxii Far hence (quoth he) in wastfull wildernesse His dwelling is, by which no living wight May ever passe, but thorough great distresse. Now (sayd the Lady) draweth toward night, And well I wote, that of your later fight Ye all forwearied be: for what so strong, But wanting rest will also want of might? The Sunne that measures heaven all day long, At night doth baite his steedes the Ocean waves emong.  xxxiii Then with the Sunne take Sir, your timely rest, And with new day new worke at once begin: Untroubled night they say gives counsell best. Right well Sir knight ye have advised bin, (Quoth then that aged man;) the way to win Is wisely to advise: now day is spent; Therefore with me ye may take up your In For this same night. The knight was well content: So with that godly father to his home they went.  xxxiv A little lowly Hermitage it was, Downe in a dale, hard by a forests side, Far from resort of people, that did pas In travell to and froe: a little wyde There was an holy Chappell edifyde, Wherein the Hermite dewly wont to say His holy things each morne and eventyde: Thereby a Christall streame did gently play, Which from a sacred fountaine welled forth alway.  xxxv Arrived there, the little house they fill, Ne looke for entertainement, where none was: Rest is their feast, and all things at their will; The noblest mind the best contentment has. With faire discourse the evening so they pas: For that old man of pleasing wordes had store, And well could file his tongue as smooth as glas; He told of Saintes and Popes, and evermore He strowd an Ave-Mary after and before.  xxxvi The drouping Night thus creepeth on them fast, And the sad humour loading their eye liddes, As messenger of Morpheus on them cast Sweet slombring deaw, the which to sleepe them biddes. Unto their lodgings then his guestes he riddes: Where when all drownd in deadly sleepe he findes, He to his study goes, and there amiddes His Magick bookes and artes of sundry kindes, He seekes out mighty charmes, to trouble sleepy mindes.  xxxvii Then choosing out few wordes most horrible, (Let none them read) thereof did verses frame, With which and other spelles like terrible, He bad awake blacke Plutoes griesly Dame, And cursed heaven, and spake reprochfull shame Of highest God, the Lord of life and light; A bold bad man, that dar'd to call by name Great Gorgon, Prince of darknesse and dead night, At which Cocytus quakes, and Styx is put to flight.  xxxviii And forth he cald out of deepe darknesse dred Legions of Sprights, the which like little flyes Fluttring about his ever damned hed, A-waite whereto their service he applyes, To aide his friends, or fray his enimies: Of those he chose out two, the falsest twoo, And fittest for to forge true-seeming lyes; The one of them he gave a message too, The other by him selfe staide other worke to doo.  xxxix He making speedy way through spersed ayre, And through the world of waters wide and peepe, To Morpheus house doth hastily repaire. Amid the bowels of the earth full steepe, And low, where dawning day doth never peepe, His dwelling is; there Tethys his wet bed Doth ever wash, and Cynthia still doth steepe In silver deaw his ever-drouping hed, Whiles sad Night over him her mantle black doth spred.  xl Whose double gates he findeth locked fast, The one faire fram'd of burnisht Yvory, The other all with silver overcast; And wakefull dogges before them farre do lye Watching to banish Care their enimy, Who oft is wont to trouble gentle Sleepe. By them the Sprite doth passe in quietly, And unto Morpheus comes, whom drowned deepe In drowsie fit he findes: of nothing he takes keepe.  xli And more, to lulle him in his slumber soft, A trickling streame from high rocke tumbling downe And ever-drizling raine upon the loft, Mixt with a murmuring winde, much like the sowne Of swarming Bees, did cast him in a swowne: No other noyse, nor peoples troublous cryes, As still are wont t'annoy the walled towne, Might there be heard: but carelesse Quiet lyes, Wrapt in eternall silence farre from enemyes.  xlii The messenger approching to him spake, But his wast wordes returnd to him in vaine: So sound he slept, that nought mought him awake. Then rudely he him thrust, and pusht with paine, Whereat he gan to stretch: but he againe Shooke him so hard, that forced him to speake. As one then in a dreame, whose dryer braine In tost with troubled sights and fancies weake, He mumbled soft, but would not all his silence breake.  xliii The Sprite then gan more boldly him to wake, And threatned unto him the dreaded name Of Hecate: whereat he gan to quake, And lifting up his lumpish head, with blame Halfe angry asked him, for what he came. Hither (quoth he) me Archimago sent, He that the stubborne Sprites can wisely tame, He bids thee to him send for his intent A fit false dreame, that can delude the sleepers sent.  xliv The God obayde, and calling forth straight way A diverse dreame out of his prison darke, Delivered it to him, and downe did lay His heavie head, devoide of carefull carke, Whose sences all were straight benumbed and starke. He backe returning by the Yvorie dore, Remounted up as light as chearefull Larke, And on his litle winges the dreame he bore In hast unto his Lord, where he him left afore.  xlv Who all this while with charmes and hidden artes, Had made a Lady of that other Spright, And fram'd of liquid ayre her tender partes So lively, and so like in all mens sight, That weaker sence it could have ravisht quight: The maker selfe for all his wondrous witt, Was nigh beguiled with so goodly sight: Her all in white he clad, and over it Cast a blacke stole, most like to seeme for Una fit.  xlvi Now when that ydle dreame was to him brought, Unto that Elfin knight he bad him fly, Where he slept soundly void of evill thought And with false shewes abuse his fantasy, In sort as he him schooled privily: And that new creature borne without her dew, Full of the makers guile, with usage sly He taught to imitate that Lady trew, Whose semblance she did carrie under feigned hew.  xlvii Thus well instructed, to their worke they hast, And comming where the knight in slomber lay, The one upon his hardy head him plast, And made him dreame of loves and lustfull play, That nigh his manly hart did melt away, Bathed in wanton blis and wicked joy: Then seemed him his Lady by him lay, And to him playnd, how that false winged boy, Her chast hart had subdewd, to learne Dame pleasures toy.  xlviii And she her selfe of beautie soveraigne Queene, Faire Venus seemde unto his bed to bring Her, whom he waking evermore did weene, To be the chastest flowre, that ay did spring On earthly braunch, the daughter of a king, Now a loose Leman to vile service bound: And eke the Graces seemed all to sing, Hymen {i}{_o} Hymen, dauncing all around, While freshest Flora her with Yvie girlond crownd.  xlix In this great passion of unwonted lust, Or wonted feare of doing ought amis, He started up, as seeming to mistrust Some secret ill, or hidden foe of his: Lo there before his face his Lady is, Under blake stole hyding her bayted hooke, And as halfe blushing offred him to kis, With gentle blandishment and lovely looke, Most like that virgin true, which for her knight him took.  l All cleane dismayd to see so uncouth sight, And halfe enraged at her shamelesse guise, He thought have slaine her in his fierce despight: But hasty heat tempring with sufferance wise, He stayde his hand, and gan himselfe advise To prove his sense, and tempt her faigned truth. Wringing her hands in wemens pitteous wise, Tho can she weepe, to stirre up gentle ruth, Both for her noble bloud, and for her tender youth.  li And said, Ah Sir, my liege Lord and my love, Shall I accuse the hidden cruell fate, And mightie causes wrought in heaven above, Or the blind God, that doth me thus amate, For hoped love to winne me certaine hate? Yet thus perforce he bids me do, or die. Die is my dew: yet rew my wretched state You, whom my hard avenging destinie Hath made judge of my life or death indifferently.  lii Your owne deare sake forst me at first to leave My Fathers kingdome, There she stopt with teares; Her swollen hart her speach seemd to bereave, And then againe begun, My weaker yeares Captiv'd to fortune and frayle worldly feares, Fly to your faith for succour and sure ayde: Let me not dye in languor and long teares. Why Dame (quoth he) what hath ye thus dismayd? What frayes ye, that were wont to comfort me affrayd?  liii Love of your selfe, she said, and deare constraint Lets me not sleepe, but wast the wearie night In secret anguish and unpittied plaint, Whiles you in carelesse sleepe are drowned quight. Her doubtfull words made that redoubted knight Suspect her truth: yet since no'untruth he knew, Her fawning love with foule disdainefull spight He would not shend, but said, Deare dame I rew, That for my sake unknowne such griefe unto you grew.  liv Assure your selfe, it fell not all to ground; For all so deare as life is to my hart, I deeme your love, and hold me to you bound; Ne let vaine feares procure your needlesse smart, Where cause is none, but to your rest depart. Not all content, yet seemd she to appease Her mournefull plaintes, beguiled of her art, And fed with words, that could not chuse but please, So slyding softly forth, she turnd as to her ease.  lv Long after lay he musing at her mood, Much griev'd to think that gentle Dame so light, For whose defence he was to shed his blood. At last dull wearinesse of former fight Having yrockt a sleepe his irkesome spright, That troublous dreame gan freshly tosse his braine, With bowres, and beds, and Ladies deare delight: But when he saw his labour all was vaine, With that misformed spright he backe returnd againe. 


^^EOP^^

I was conceived in the cruelest monthin whatever spring California could muster.A little rain—with some more likely.And the buckeyes were they yet on the ground?Damn my father’s smooth stone eyes,other prevailing enticements and what Eliot calledthe 

^^EOP^^

An old man with a new hat
is running out of pride.
I want to tell the truth
but I don’t know how.
The wind is our best pen
and it blows poetry out of the water. 
I wait for days and weeks to enter
a feeling that’s had years to leave.
The ocean keeps throwing questions
it has all the answers to.
A candle lights a room
and dims the stars. 
When all that consoled consoles no longer
loneliness finds a room inside the one it knows.
I am shrinking from the light
and turning into space.
An old man with a new hat
wears his smile in the dark.

^^EOP^^

She dances only in her necklace,scotch-lit surely. He touches his glasses.Nightie-less, dugs whipping, hair sprung,some music inside, out, wet tonguetip at her lip, no mere palsied shuffle,both bony feet lifted, elbows awful.Shakespeare’s banshee of wailing parts,a woman with hair, a woman with warts.He’s fixed to the floor. Dear Heloise:do other presumed-sane mothers do this—wait in the dark after the ballto strip for their sons at the end of the hall?A dream, insists his sisterbut his first wife knows better.

^^EOP^^

We scratch at the backyard togetherthrough leaf mould, worm casings she kicks offin a fan behind her. I use a stickto dig, to find for her what she’s shown menear the roots, at the edge of a step—stickyslug on the underside of a hosta’s leaf.How complicated she is and how resigned.Between her beak and my outstretched hand,the worm’s writhing. Then the long slick goingdown. It fills the throat, like all that’s swallowed.        Her head chucks it back,        for the worm again dark.        The hen’s pupil dilates.        She wends and follows.Her queries, sighs, low gurgles, the hasteningclick of her nails on pavement then hungryagain into the grass. Grubs are largerthan pale yellow larvae I prize from insidechestnuts. These mucousy blind wanderersshe eats right from my palm. Nevertheless I amrepulsed by my husband’s embrace. I turnnow from his thick belly, breasts, his interests.A body I had clambered over, loved.I scrabble, struggle. I cover myself.        Another sticky truth dug up        that I must re-bury—        sorry on hands and knees,        hungry and wary.

^^EOP^^

I’m amazed we haven’t crawled off by now.Later we could go back and cross things out,that way we wouldn’t know where we came from,the shapes we asked to be bent into.Sinatra’d be okay again,mother the same distal approximation,the sea still trying to spit it out.Sometimes your sleep is different than mine.I can’t catch up.I don’t know—there are voices tangled outside.Wind wants to make me correct something,the refrigerator says something needs to be pushedfurther from the sun.Out where the sunset ends, they’ve installed a graveyardand where it rises, some automatons bash togethermellifluous metal tubingimparting a festive contusionto the usual calm disaster of getting out of bed.To find out why life has this glass sparkleat the end of a dark hall.To find out why the paper skeleton holds its handsdemurely over its crotch. Did it fall that way?To find out how we fell.There is a name to wake into and music to sleep through.To find out where the blood comes from on the towels.Old friends, I believe your betrayals were inadvertent.To find out if my heart is unruined.Father, are you out thereor was your corpse accurate?

^^EOP^^

A good way to fall in loveis to turn off the headlights and drive very fast down dark roads.Another way to fall in loveis to say they are only mints and swallow them with a strong drink.Then it is autumn in the body.Your hands are cold.Then it is winter and we are still at war.The gold-haired girl is singing into your earabout how we live in a beautiful country.Snow sifts from the cloudsinto your drink. It doesn’t matter about the war.A good way to fall in loveis to close up the garage and turn the engine on,then down you’ll fall through lovely mistsas a body might fall early one morning from a high window into love. Love,the broken glass. Love, the scissorsand the water basin. A good way to fallis with a rope to catch you.A good way is with something to drinkto help you march forward.The gold-haired girl says, 

^^EOP^^

At a book of detailsOf all the moments when knowledge is acquired.A sort of expanded balloonSighs and says, “We are what came before.”“The storm in the window of the mind,”The sleeping sister says while she’s walking aroundWonderland watchingA cat touching down and talking.Not a car in sight. A cemetery seen from the air.All the obelisks you could ever ask for.

^^EOP^^

Frosty, green through gray rising steeply,top of the bank a big top, red with a sign,misty, fantastical on the walk to school.“My sister can’t express herself properly. Imagine if those performerswere stuck in their caravansforever. If round the back of the big topthe doors were locked. That’s her.She’s a trapeze artist, lion tamer,cramped clean-faced clowndrinking tea, practicing tricks,movement through frosted windows.Language is her caravan on bricks,with tiny little windows in.”At the weekend he and his sisterstood on the frosty bankbeside his metaphor. She read the postercarefully, got them sat down in good time and at the back.The trapeze artist, lion tamer, freshly-made-up clownfilled the top with a noise he could go on translating forever.Walking home she opened her chest:“I liked the mime best.”

^^EOP^^

To wake when all is possible
before the agitations of the day
have gripped you
                    To come to the kitchen
and peel a little basketball
for breakfast
              To tear the husk
like cotton padding        a cloud of oil
misting out of its pinprick pores
clean and sharp as pepper
                             To ease
each pale pink section out of its case
so carefully       without breaking
a single pearly cell
                    To slide each piece
into a cold blue china bowl
the juice pooling       until the whole
fruit is divided from its skin
and only then to eat
                  so sweet
                            a discipline
precisely pointless       a devout
involvement of the hands and senses
a pause     a little emptiness 
each year harder to live within
each year harder to live without

^^EOP^^

Back there then I lived
         across the street from a home 
for funerals—afternoons
         I’d look out the shades

^^EOP^^

She visits still too much, dressed in aromasof fir needles, mango, mold: I still get lostknowing she’s close, me not getting youngeror more conscious. Sometimes I fantasticateI’m broad awake: her witchy presence waitsfor me to jump into her arms, but then she’s just an incoherent ache in sleep’s freaked scenes.I feel her frosty nitrogenous hands and wrists vaporing nooses around my head and feetand genitals, conjuring my drab hair into a party bowl of oiled, desirable locks.She makes me nervous, but what would I dowithout her? So long as I can’t have her,I want her and this alarming manic frequency.Then again, who wants to wake to change,its pulped, smelly suit of meat, drawing flies?My night-watch hot girl, moon-maiden, mom,let me get just one night’s sleep without regret,released from your foxy ticklish fondlings,your latest smell of windblown fresh-cut grass.

^^EOP^^

On rain washed paper dried, inkstill blurs. But all wordsare stains. The paper’s rippledlunar, mountain and crater, and 

^^EOP^^

A lot of the painting here is painting over.Can everyone at the back hear over everyone?Everyone is a blast of light seeping across the film.All day high toothy windows whiten in flashlight.We are much like we were: five times a day.Things don’t change that much in five centuries.For ten centuries before it was faces.Those were faces, yes. They were angels.The gold mosaic is as fine as an angel’s velvet wing.The Christian building is spongy yellow, ochre, gold.

^^EOP^^

going on everywherein summer’s cold windwinging through hollies.Banana plants flap like canvas sailsabove a dugout cellarwhere Latino boys shouldercans of dirt, rocks.Three doors downmore or less

^^EOP^^

Some dreamily smoke cigarettes, some track toddlers who walk like drunks. Buzzy,the picnic grounds, noisy, sun-crazed, how forks and spoons don’t exactly lie flat. A mountain’s here, a famous overlook from which you’d see none of this. Like that first daguerreotype, its moving carriages and those who strolled never picked up in the long exposure, a Paris street emptied by the camera, only houses and lamp posts gone eternal. Or the one who stopped for a shoe shine, the one who knelt to the task. At the picnic—a commotion. A large man to a younger man.

^^EOP^^

who somehow have found a sip of water,on this day in the past four syndicatedseries involving communication with the deadwere televised and in this way we resembledour own ghosts in a world made brief with flowers.To you, our agonies and tizziesmust appear quaint as the stiff shouldersof someone carrying buckets from a wellor the stung beekeeper 

^^EOP^^

Today a celebrity chimpanzee went postal,tearing up a woman’s face in Connecticut.And as the Taliban were given the suburbsof Swat in which to stone to death womentaken in adultery, a Muslim in New York whose radio station promoted Islamas the most humane religion cut off his wife’s head. Tomorrow, of course,will be another day, but we live one dayat a time. Yesterday I uncovered the ribbonsnake in the woodpile, stiff and coldin its winter sleep. A new urgency for spring:I put the split log back and took my woodfrom the farther end of the last stack.What’s with the chimp? I wondered,driving between filthy snowbanks past stark trees like bony hands clawing up outof the frozen earth to grab a gray heaven.My wife thinks it’s all that wireless buzzhissing unbeknownst through everyone’sbrains. I lean more toward toilet training. For sure, it began to go bad one unknown daybefore history when the last man was browbeaten to step beyond a globe of golden firelight to drain his dragon in outer darkness. But we can’t dwell in the past, can we? “To spring out on” we call hereabouts the firewood we wadethrough crusted snow to cut in March.Someone just might have to wake upearly this year. But, then, let’s just try to stay in the day, shall we?

^^EOP^^

                              I“There is a Thorn—it looks so old,In truth, you’d find it hard to sayHow it could ever have been young,It looks so old and grey.Not higher than a two years' childIt stands erect, this aged Thorn;No leaves it has, no prickly points;It is a mass of knotted joints,A wretched thing forlorn.It stands erect, and like a stoneWith lichens is it overgrown.                             II“Like rock or stone, it is o’ergrown,With lichens to the very top,And hung with heavy tufts of moss,A melancholy crop:Up from the earth these mosses creep,And this poor Thorn they clasp it roundSo close, you’d say that they are bentWith plain and manifest intentTo drag it to the ground;And all have joined in one endeavourTo bury this poor Thorn for ever.                             III“High on a mountain’s highest ridge,Where oft the stormy winter galeCuts like a scythe, while through the cloudsIt sweeps from vale to vale;Not five yards from the mountain path,This Thorn you on your left espy;And to the left, three yards beyond,You see a little muddy pondOf water—never dry,Though but of compass small, and bareTo thirsty suns and parching air.                             IV“And, close beside this aged Thorn,There is a fresh and lovely sight,A beauteous heap, a hill of moss,Just half a foot in height.All lovely colours there you see,All colours that were ever seen;And mossy network too is there,As if by hand of lady fairThe work had woven been;And cups, the darlings of the eye,So deep is their vermilion dye.                              V“Ah me! what lovely tints are thereOf olive green and scarlet bright,In spikes, in branches, and in stars,Green, red, and pearly white!This heap of earth o’ergrown with moss,Which close beside the Thorn you see,So fresh in all its beauteous dyes,Is like an infant’s grave in size,As like as like can be:But never, never any where,An infant’s grave was half so fair.                             VI“Now would you see this aged Thorn,This pond, and beauteous hill of moss,You must take care and choose your timeThe mountain when to cross.For oft there sits between the heap,So like an infant’s grave in size,And that same pond of which I spoke,A Woman in a scarlet cloak,And to herself she cries,‘﻿Oh misery! oh misery!Oh woe is me! oh misery!’﻿                             VII“At all times of the day and nightThis wretched Woman thither goes;And she is known to every star,And every wind that blows;And there, beside the Thorn, she sitsWhen the blue daylight’s in the skies,And when the whirlwind’s on the hill,Or frosty air is keen and still,And to herself she cries,‘﻿Oh misery! oh misery!Oh woe is me! oh misery!’ ”                            VIII“Now wherefore, thus, by day and night,In rain, in tempest, and in snow,Thus to the dreary mountain-topDoes this poor Woman go?And why sits she beside the ThornWhen the blue daylight’s in the skyOr when the whirlwind’s on the hill,Or frosty air is keen and still,And wherefore does she cry?—O wherefore? wherefore? tell me whyDoes she repeat that doleful cry?”                             IX“I cannot tell; I wish I could;For the true reason no one knows:But would you gladly view the spot,The spot to which she goes;The hillock like an infant’s grave,The pond—and Thorn, so old and grey;Pass by her door—’tis seldom shut—And if you see her in her hut—Then to the spot away!I never heard of such as dareApproach the spot when she is there.”                              X“But wherefore to the mountain-topCan this unhappy Woman go,Whatever star is in the skies,Whatever wind may blow?”“Full twenty years are past and goneSince she (her name is Martha Ray)Gave with a maiden’s true good-willHer company to Stephen Hill;And she was blithe and gay,While friends and kindred all approvedOf him whom tenderly she loved.                             XI“And they had fixed the wedding day,The morning that must wed them both;But Stephen to another MaidHad sworn another oath;And, with this other Maid, to churchUnthinking Stephen went— Poor Martha! on that woeful dayA pang of pitiless dismayInto her soul was sent;A fire was kindled in her breast,Which might not burn itself to rest.                             XII“They say, full six months after this,While yet the summer leaves were green,She to the mountain-top would go,And there was often seen.What could she seek?—or wish to hide?Her state to any eye was plain;She was with child, and she was mad;Yet often was she sober sadFrom her exceeding pain.O guilty Father—would that deathHad saved him from that breach of faith!                            XIII“Sad case for such a brain to holdCommunion with a stirring child!Sad case, as you may think, for oneWho had a brain so wild!Last Christmas-eve we talked of this,And grey-haired Wilfred of the glenHeld that the unborn infant wroughtAbout its mother’s heart, and broughtHer senses back again:And, when at last her time drew near,Her looks were calm, her senses clear.                             XIV“More know I not, I wish I did,And it should all be told to you;For what became of this poor childNo mortal ever knew;Nay—if a child to her was bornNo earthly tongue could ever tell;And if ’twas born alive or dead,Far less could this with proof be said;But some remember well,That Martha Ray about this timeWould up the mountain often climb.                             XV“And all that winter, when at nightThe wind blew from the mountain-peak,’Twas worth your while, though in the dark,The churchyard path to seek:For many a time and oft were heardCries coming from the mountain head:Some plainly living voices were;And others, I’ve heard many swear,Were voices of the dead:I cannot think, whate’er they say,They had to do with Martha Ray.                             XVI“But that she goes to this old Thorn,The Thorn which I described to you,And there sits in a scarlet cloak,I will be sworn is true.For one day with my telescope,To view the ocean wide and bright,When to this country first I came,Ere I had heard of Martha’s name,I climbed the mountain’s height:—A storm came on, and I could seeNo object higher than my knee.                            XVII“ ’Twas mist and rain, and storm and rain:No screen, no fence could I discover;And then the wind! in sooth, it wasA wind full ten times over.I looked around, I thought I sawA jutting crag,—and off I ran,Head-foremost, through the driving rain,The shelter of the crag to gain;And, as I am a man,Instead of jutting crag, I foundA Woman seated on the ground.                            XVIII“I did not speak—I saw her face;Her face!—it was enough for me;I turned about and heard her cry,‘﻿Oh misery! oh misery!’﻿And there she sits, until the moonThrough half the clear blue sky will go;And when the little breezes makeThe waters of the pond to shake,As all the country know,She shudders, and you hear her cry,‘﻿Oh misery! oh misery!’ ”                             XIX“But what’s the Thorn? and what the pond?And what the hill of moss to her?And what the creeping breeze that comesThe little pond to stir?”“I cannot tell; but some will sayShe hanged her baby on the tree;Some say she drowned it in the pond,Which is a little step beyond:But all and each agree,The little Babe was buried there,Beneath that hill of moss so fair.                             XX“I’ve heard, the moss is spotted redWith drops of that poor infant’s blood;But kill a new-born infant thus,I do not think she could!Some say, if to the pond you go,And fix on it a steady view,The shadow of a babe you trace,A baby and a baby’s face,And that it looks at you;Whene’er you look on it, ’tis plainThe baby looks at you again.                             XXI“And some had sworn an oath that sheShould be to public justice brought;And for the little infant’s bonesWith spades they would have sought.But instantly the hill of mossBefore their eyes began to stir!And, for full fifty yards around,The grass—it shook upon the ground!Yet all do still averThe little Babe lies buried there,Beneath that hill of moss so fair.                            XXII“I cannot tell how this may be,But plain it is the Thorn is boundWith heavy tufts of moss that striveTo drag it to the ground;And this I know, full many a time,When she was on the mountain high,By day, and in the silent night,When all the stars shone clear and bright,That I have heard her cry,‘﻿Oh misery! oh misery!Oh woe is me! oh misery!’ ”


^^EOP^^




‘They toil not, neither do they spin.’



One morn before me were three figures seen,     With bowèd necks, and joinèd hands, side-faced; And one behind the other stepp’d serene,     In placid sandals, and in white robes graced;         They pass’d, like figures on a marble urn,     When shifted round to see the other side; They came again; as when the urn once more         Is shifted round, the first seen shades return;     And they were strange to me, as may betide With vases, to one deep in Phidian lore.How is it, Shadows! that I knew ye not?     How came ye muffled in so hush a mask? Was it a silent deep-disguisèd plot     To steal away, and leave without a task         My idle days? Ripe was the drowsy hour;     The blissful cloud of summer-indolence Benumb’d my eyes; my pulse grew less and less;         Pain had no sting, and pleasure’s wreath no flower:     O, why did ye not melt, and leave my sense Unhaunted quite of all but—nothingness?A third time pass’d they by, and, passing, turn’d     Each one the face a moment whiles to me; Then faded, and to follow them I burn’d     And ached for wings, because I knew the three;         The first was a fair Maid, and Love her name;     The second was Ambition, pale of cheek, And ever watchful with fatiguèd eye;         The last, whom I love more, the more of blame     Is heap’d upon her, maiden most unmeek,— I knew to be my demon Poesy.They faded, and, forsooth! I wanted wings:     O folly! What is Love? and where is it? And for that poor Ambition! it springs     From a man’s little heart’s short fever-fit;         For Poesy!—no,—she has not a joy,—     At least for me,—so sweet as drowsy noons, And evenings steep’d in honey’d indolence;         O, for an age so shelter’d from annoy,     That I may never know how change the moons, Or hear the voice of busy common-sense! And once more came they by:—alas! wherefore?      My sleep had been embroider’d with dim dreams;  My soul had been a lawn besprinkled o’er      With flowers, and stirring shades, and baffled beams:         The morn was clouded, but no shower fell,      Tho’ in her lids hung the sweet tears of May; The open casement press’d a new-leaved vine,      Let in the budding warmth and throstle’s lay;         O Shadows! ’twas a time to bid farewell! Upon your skirts had fallen no tears of mine. So, ye three Ghosts, adieu! Ye cannot raise     My head cool-bedded in the flowery grass; For I would not be dieted with praise,     A pet-lamb in a sentimental farce!         Fade softly from my eyes, and be once more     In masque-like figures on the dreamy urn; Farewell! I yet have visions for the night,     And for the day faint visions there is store; Vanish, ye Phantoms! from my idle spright,     Into the clouds, and never more return!


^^EOP^^

The poet is a man who feigns
And feigns so thoroughly, at last
He manages to feign as pain
The pain he really feels, 
And those who read what once he wrote
Feel clearly, in the pain they read,
Neither of the pains he felt,
Only a pain they cannot sense. 
And thus, around its jolting track
There runs, to keep our reason busy,
The circling clockwork train of ours
That men agree to call a heart.
 


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

I watched him swinging the pick in the sun,breaking the concrete steps into chunks of rock,and the rocks into dust,and the dust into earth again.I must have sat for a very long time on the split rail fence,just watching him.My father’s body glistened with sweat,his arms flew like dark wings over his head.He was turning the backyard into terraces,breaking the hill into two flat plains.I took for granted the power of him,though it frightened me, too.I watched as he swung the pick into the airand brought it down hardand changed the shape of the world,and changed the shape of the world again.


^^EOP^^

I'm herdsman of a flock.
The sheep are my thoughts
And my thoughts are all sensations.
I think with my eyes and my ears
And my hands and feet
And nostrils and mouth. 
To think a flower is to see and smell it.
To eat a fruit is to sense its savor. 
And that is why, when I feel sad,
In a day of heat, because of so much joy
And lay me down in the grass to rest
And close my sun-warmed eyes,
I feel my whole body relaxed in reality
And know the whole truth and am happy.
 


^^EOP^^

1.
Of the gardens of Adonis, Lydia, I love
Most of all those fugitive roses
         That on the day they are born,
         That very day, must also die.
Eternal, for them, the light of day:
They're born when the sun is already high
         And die before Apollo's course 
         Across the visible sky is run.
We too, of our lives, must make one day:
We never know, my Lydia, nor want
        To know of nights before or after
        The little while that we may last.
2.
To be great, be whole: nothing that's you
         Should you exaggerate or exclude.
In each thing, be all. Give all you are
         In the least you ever do.
The whole moon, because it rides so high,
         Is reflected in each pool.
 


^^EOP^^

Is the governor falling
From a great height?
Arm in arm we fled the brassiere factory,
The motion-boat stayed on the shore!
I saw how round its bottom was
As you walked into southern France—
Upon the light hair of an arm
Cigar bands lay!
I kissed you then. Oh is my bar
The insect of your will? The water rose,
But will the buffalo on
The nickel yet be still?
For how can windows hold out the light
In your eyes!
Darling, we fled the brassiere factory
In forty-eight states,
Arm in arm,
When human beings hung on us
And you had been arrested by the cloths
Were used in making, and I said, “The Goths
Know such delight,” but still we fled, away
Into a dinner atmosphere
From all we knew, and fall asleep this day.
O maintenance men, with cruel eyes,
Then arm in arm we fled the listless factory!
The music changed your fingers’ ends to pearl,
I punched you, you foolish girl,
For thanks to the metronome we got out alive, in the air
Where the sun filled us with cruelty!
There’s what to do
Except despair, like pages! and laugh
Like prawns, about the sea!
Oh arm in arm we fled the industry
Into an earth of banks
And foolish tanks, for what bare breasts might be.


^^EOP^^

I remember when I wrote The Circus
I was living in Paris, or rather we were living in Paris
Janice, Frank was alive, the Whitney Museum
Was still on 8th Street, or was it still something else?
Fernand Léger lived in our building
Well it wasn’t really our building it was the building we lived in
Next to a Grand Guignol troupe who made a lot of noise
So that one day I yelled through a hole in the wall
Of our apartment I don’t know why there was a hole there
Shut up! And the voice came back to me saying something
I don’t know what. Once I saw Léger walk out of the building
I think. Stanley Kunitz came to dinner. I wrote The Circus
In two tries, the first getting most of the first stanza;
That fall I also wrote an opera libretto called Louisa or Matilda.
Jean-Claude came to dinner. He said (about “cocktail sauce”)
It should be good on something but not on these (oysters).
By that time I think I had already written The Circus
When I came back, having been annoyed to have to go
I forget what I went there about
You were back in the apartment what a dump actually we liked it
I think with your hair and your writing and the pans
Moving strummingly about the kitchen and I wrote The Circus
It was a summer night no it was an autumn one summer when
I remember it but actually no autumn that black dusk toward the post office
And I wrote many other poems then but The Circus was the best
Maybe not by far the best Geography was also wonderful
And the Airplane Betty poems (inspired by you) but The Circus was the best. 
Sometimes I feel I actually am the person
Who did this, who wrote that, including that poem The Circus
But sometimes on the other hand I don’t.
There are so many factors engaging our attention!
At every moment the happiness of others, the health of those we know and our own!
And the millions upon millions of people we don’t know and their well-being to think about
So it seems strange I found time to write The Circus
And even spent two evenings on it, and that I have also the time
To remember that I did it, and remember you and me then, and write this poem about it
At the beginning of The Circus
The Circus girls are rushing through the night
In the circus wagons and tulips and other flowers will be picked
A long time from now this poem wants to get off on its own
Someplace like a painting not held to a depiction of composing The Circus. 
Noel Lee was in Paris then but usually out of it
In Germany or Denmark giving a concert
As part of an endless activity
Which was either his career or his happiness or a combination of both
Or neither I remember his dark eyes looking he was nervous
With me perhaps because of our days at Harvard. 
It is understandable enough to be nervous with anybody! 
How softly and easily one feels when alone
Love of one’s friends when one is commanding the time and space syndrome
If that’s the right word which I doubt but together how come one is so nervous?
One is not always but what was I then and what am I now attempting to create
If create is the right word
Out of this combination of experience and aloneness
And who are you telling me it is or is not a poem (not you?) Go back with me though
To those nights I was writing The Circus.
Do you like that poem? have you read it? It is in my book Thank You
Which Grove just reprinted. I wonder how long I am going to live
And what the rest will be like I mean the rest of my life. 
John Cage said to me the other night How old are you? and I told him forty-six
(Since then I’ve become forty-seven) he said
Oh that’s a great age I remember.
John Cage once told me he didn’t charge much for his mushroom identification course (at the New School)
Because he didn’t want to make a profit from nature 
He was ahead of his time I was behind my time we were both in time
Brilliant go to the head of the class and “time is a river”
It doesn’t seem like a river to me it seems like an unformed plan
Days go by and still nothing is decided about
What to do until you know it never will be and then you say “time”
But you really don’t care much about it any more
Time means something when you have the major part of yours ahead of you
As I did in Aix-en-Provence that was three years before I wrote The Circus
That year I wrote Bricks and The Great Atlantic Rainway
I felt time surround me like a blanket endless and soft
I could go to sleep endlessly and wake up and still be in it
But I treasured secretly the part of me that was individually changing
Like Noel Lee I was interested in my career
And still am but now it is like a town I don’t want to leave
Not a tower I am climbing opposed by ferocious enemies 
I never mentioned my friends in my poems at the time I wrote The Circus
Although they meant almost more than anything to me
Of this now for some time I’ve felt an attenuation
So I’m mentioning them maybe this will bring them back to me
Not them perhaps but what I felt about them
John Ashbery Jane Freilicher Larry Rivers Frank O’Hara
Their names alone bring tears to my eyes
As seeing Polly did last night
It is beautiful at any time but the paradox is leaving it
In order to feel it when you’ve come back the sun has declined
And the people are merrier or else they’ve gone home altogether
And you are left alone well you put up with that your sureness is like the sun
While you have it but when you don’t its lack’s a black and icy night. I came home
And wrote The Circus that night, Janice. I didn’t come and speak to you
And put my arm around you and ask you if you’d like to take a walk
Or go to the Cirque Medrano though that’s what I wrote poems about
And am writing about that now, and now I’m alone 
And this is not as good a poem as The Circus
And I wonder if any good will come of either of them all the same.


^^EOP^^

Scholar-on-waves, a water-gazer,
Call me  Ishmael. Re-enter my own life.
Waves: they murmur, babble, waves 
Do not articulate what the ocean
Turning in its bed thinks: What must be said. 
          Sing above or sing
          Below
          The knot in the plank, the cursive
          Pine-grain
          Of my life in the bow and my life 
          Bay-less in the bowels
          Of the bow 
I signed myself on as me
                                     to become more so
                                                                  myself—
A study, one volume of 36 signatures, 576 pages (9 blank for notes),
And became dispossessed of all
                                              but one mis-
                                              spoken leaf—
Pro- and epilogue both. Sign your mark. I do 
Find the escape 
Clause titled in fine print, watermarked, on condition 
Of being or becoming: me 
Tar-dark, thumbless or thumbed,
Ocean eats the nib of pen
But a nub dipped in pitch 
          Sing above or sing below
          The wave’s back
          Broken by another wave 
          There is no air besides 
A nub dipped in pitch
Can’t help 
But write, beneath the sea-hawk’s wing
The sea-hawk’s cry, Sign your mark 
With a nail, a splinter, a harpoon
In the hand can’t help 
But
          Sing above and sing below
But write but
          What song strides surface tension
Help but write
          Thirst chokes and salt slakes
A contract for a name 
Of being or becoming
Ink on the line, a name or a contract 
For a name, a thumbprint, or I
Signed me on on my name alone: Now 
Profit Now Leak Now Bury Now Speak.


^^EOP^^

                                                      I 
At the Poem Society a black-haired man stands up to say
“You make me sick with all your talk about restraint and mature talent!
Haven’t you ever looked out the window at a painting by Matisse,
Or did you always stay in hotels where there were too many spiders crawling on your visages?
Did you ever glance inside a bottle of sparkling pop,
Or see a citizen split in two by the lightning?
I am afraid you have never smiled at the hibernation
Of bear cubs except that you saw in it some deep relation
To human suffering and wishes, oh what a bunch of crackpots!”
The black-haired man sits down, and the others shoot arrows at him.
A blond man stands up and says,
“He is right! Why should we be organized to defend the kingdom
Of dullness? There are so many slimy people connected with poetry,
Too, and people who know nothing about it!
I am not recommending that poets like each other and organize to fight them,
But simply that lightning should strike them.”
Then the assembled mediocrities shot arrows at the blond-haired man.
The chairman stood up on the platform, oh he was physically ugly!
He was small-limbed and –boned and thought he was quite seductive,
But he was bald with certain hideous black hairs,
And his voice had the sound of water leaving a vaseline bathtub,
And he said, “The subject for this evening’s discussion is poetry
On the subject of love between swans.” And everyone threw candy hearts
At the disgusting man, and they stuck to his bib and tucker,
And he danced up and down on the platform in terrific glee
And recited the poetry of his little friends—but the blond man stuck his head
Out of a cloud and recited poems about the east and thunder,
And the black-haired man moved through the stratosphere chanting
Poems of the relationships between terrific prehistoric charcoal whales,
And the slimy man with candy hearts sticking all over him
Wilted away like a cigarette paper on which the bumblebees have urinated,
And all the professors left the room to go back to their duty,
And all that were left in the room were five or six poets
And together they sang the new poem of the twentieth century
Which, though influenced by Mallarmé, Shelley, Byron, and Whitman,
Plus a million other poets, is still entirely original
And is so exciting that it cannot be here repeated.
You must go to the Poem Society and wait for it to happen.
Once you have heard this poem you will not love any other,
Once you have dreamed this dream you will be inconsolable,
Once you have loved this dream you will be as one dead,
Once you have visited the passages of this time’s great art!  
                                                      2 
“Oh to be seventeen years old
Once again,” sang the red-haired man, “and not know that poetry
Is ruled with the sceptre of the dumb, the deaf, and the creepy!”
And the shouting persons battered his immortal body with stones
And threw his primitive comedy into the sea
From which it sang forth poems irrevocably blue.
 
Who are the great poets of our time, and what are their names?
Yeats of the baleful influence, Auden of the baleful influence, Eliot of the baleful influence
(Is Eliot a great poet? no one knows), Hardy, Stevens, Williams (is Hardy of our time?),
Hopkins (is Hopkins of our time?), Rilke (is Rilke of our time?), Lorca (is Lorca of our time?), who is still of our time?
Mallarmé, Valéry, Apollinaire, Éluard, Reverdy, French poets are still of our time,
Pasternak and Mayakovsky, is Jouve of our time?
 
Where are young poets in America, they are trembling in publishing houses and universities,
Above all they are trembling in universities, they are bathing the library steps with their spit,
They are gargling out innocuous (to whom?) poems about maple trees and their children,
Sometimes they brave a subject like the Villa d’Este or a lighthouse in Rhode Island,
Oh what worms they are! they wish to perfect their form.
Yet could not these young men, put in another profession,
Succeed admirably, say at sailing a ship? I do not doubt it, Sir, and I wish we could try them.
(A plane flies over the ship holding a bomb but perhaps it will not drop the bomb,
The young poets from the universities are staring anxiously at the skies,
Oh they are remembering their days on the campus when they looked up to watch birds excrete,
They are remembering the days they spent making their elegant poems.)
 
Is there no voice to cry out from the wind and say what it is like to be the wind,
To be roughed up by the trees and to bring music from the scattered houses
And the stones, and to be in such intimate relationship with the sea
That you cannot understand it? Is there no one who feels like a pair of pants?  
                                                      3
 
Summer in the trees! “It is time to strangle several bad poets.”
The yellow hobbyhorse rocks to and fro, and from the chimney
Drops the Strangler! The white and pink roses are slightly agitated by the struggle,
But afterwards beside the dead “poet” they cuddle up comfortingly against their vase. They are safer now, no one will compare them to the sea.  
Here on the railroad train, one more time, is the Strangler.
He is going to get that one there, who is on his way to a poetry reading.
Agh! Biff! A body falls to the moving floor.
 
In the football stadium I also see him,
He leaps through the frosty air at the maker of comparisons
Between football and life and silently, silently strangles him!
 
Here is the Strangler dressed in a cowboy suit
Leaping from his horse to annihilate the students of myth!
 
The Strangler’s ear is alert for the names of Orpheus,
Cuchulain, Gawain, and Odysseus,
And for poems addressed to Jane Austen, F. Scott Fitzgerald,
To Ezra Pound, and to personages no longer living
Even in anyone’s thoughts—O Strangler the Strangler!
 
He lies on his back in the waves of the Pacific Ocean.  
                                                      4
 
Supposing that one walks out into the air
On a fresh spring day and has the misfortune
To encounter an article on modern poetry
In New World Writing, or has the misfortune
To see some examples of some of the poetry
Written by the men with their eyes on the myth
And the Missus and the midterms, in the Hudson Review,
Or, if one is abroad, in Botteghe Oscure,
Or indeed in Encounter, what is one to do
With the rest of one’s day that lies blasted to ruins
All bluely about one, what is one to do?
O surely one cannot complain to the President,
Nor even to the deans of Columbia College,
Nor to T. S. Eliot, nor to Ezra Pound,
And supposing one writes to the Princess Caetani,
“Your poets are awful!” what good would it do?
And supposing one goes to the Hudson Review
With a package of matches and sets fire to the building?
One ends up in prison with trial subscriptions
To the Partisan, Sewanee, and Kenyon Review! 
 
                                                      5 
Sun out! perhaps there is a reason for the lack of poetry
In these ill-contented souls, perhaps they need air! 
Blue air, fresh air, come in, I welcome you, you are an art student,
Take off your cap and gown and sit down on the chair. 
Together we shall paint the poets—but no, air! perhaps you should go to them, quickly,
Give them a little inspiration, they need it, perhaps they are out of breath,
Give them a little inhuman company before they freeze the English language to death!
(And rust their typewriters a little, be sea air! be noxious! kill them, if you must, but stop their poetry!
I remember I saw you dancing on the surf on the Côte d’Azur,
And I stopped, taking my hat off, but you did not remember me,
Then afterwards you came to my room bearing a handful of orange flowers
And we were together all through the summer night!) 
That we might go away together, it is so beautiful on the sea, there are a few white clouds in the sky!
 
But no, air! you must go . . . Ah, stay! 
But she has departed and . . . Ugh! what poisonous fumes and clouds! what a suffocating atmosphere!
Cough! whose are these hideous faces I see, what is this rigor
Infecting the mind? where are the green Azores,
Fond memories of childhood, and the pleasant orange trolleys,
A girl’s face, red-white, and her breasts and calves, blue eyes, brown eyes, green eyes, fahrenheit
Temperatures, dandelions, and trains, O blue?!
Wind, wind, what is happening? Wind! I can’t see any bird but the gull, and I feel it should symbolize . . .
Oh, pardon me, there’s a swan, one two three swans, a great white swan, hahaha how pretty they are! Smack!
Oh! stop! help! yes, I see—disrespect for my superiors—forgive me, dear Zeus, nice Zeus, parabolic bird, O feathered excellence! white!
There is Achilles too, and there’s Ulysses, I’ve always wanted to see them,
And there is Helen of Troy, I suppose she is Zeus too, she’s so terribly pretty—hello, Zeus, my you are beautiful, Bang!
One more mistake and I get thrown out of the Modern Poetry Association, help! Why aren’t there any adjectives around?
Oh there are, there’s practically nothing else—look, here’s grey, utter, agonized, total, phenomenal, gracile, invidious, sundered, and fused, Elegant, absolute, pyramidal, and . . . Scream! but what can I describe with these words? States!
States symbolized and divided by two, complex states, magic states, states of consciousness governed by an aroused sincerity, cockadoodle doo!
Another bird! is it morning? Help! where am I? am I in the barnyard? oink oink, scratch, moo! Splash!
My first lesson. “Look around you. What do you think and feel?” Uhhh . . . “Quickly!” This Connecticut landscape would have pleased Vermeer. Wham! A-Plus. “Congratulations!” I am promoted.
OOOhhhhh I wish I were dead, what a headache! My second lesson: “Rewrite your first lesson line six hundred times. Try to make it into a magnetic field.” I can do it too. But my poor line! What a nightmare! Here comes a tremendous horse,
Trojan, I presume. No, it’s my third lesson. “Look, look! Watch him, see what he’s doing? That’s what we want you to do. Of course it won’t be the same as his at first, but . . .” I demur. Is there no other way to fertilize minds?
Bang! I give in . . . Already I see my name in two or three anthologies, a serving girl comes into the barn bringing me the anthologies,
She is very pretty and I smile at her a little sadly, perhaps it is my last smile! Perhaps she will hit me! But no, she smiles in return, and she takes my hand.
My hand, my hand! what is this strange thing I feel in my hand, on my arm, on my chest, my face—can it be . . . ? it is! AIR!
Air, air, you’ve come back! Did you have any success? “What do you think?” I don’t know, air. You are so strong, air.
And she breaks my chains of straw, and we walk down the road, behind us the hideous fumes!
Soon we reach the seaside, she is a young art student who places her head on my shoulder,
I kiss her warm red lips, and here is the Strangler, reading the Kenyon Review! Good luck to you, Strangler!
Goodbye, Helen! goodbye, fumes! goodbye, abstracted dried-up boys! goodbye, dead trees! goodbye, skunks!
Goodbye, manure! goodbye, critical manicure! goodbye, you big fat men standing on the east coast as well as the west giving poems the test! farewell, Valéry’s stern dictum!
Until tomorrow, then, scum floating on the surface of poetry! goodbye for a moment, refuse that happens to land in poetry’s boundaries! adieu, stale eggs teaching imbeciles poetry to bolster up your egos! adios, boring anomalies of these same stale eggs!
Ah, but the scum is deep! Come, let me help you! and soon we pass into the clear blue water. Oh GOODBYE, castrati of poetry! farewell, stale pale skunky pentameters (the only honest English meter, gloop gloop!) until tomorrow, horrors! oh, farewell! 
Hello, sea! good morning, sea! hello, clarity and excitement, you great expanse of green— 
O green, beneath which all of them shall drown!


^^EOP^^

                                                       I 
The leaves of blue came drifting down.
In the corner Madeleine Reierbacher was reading Lorna Doone.
The bay’s water helped to implement the structuring of the garden hose.
The envelope fell. Was it pink or was it red? Consult Lorna Doone.
There, voyager, you will find your answer. The savant grapeade stands
Remember Madeleine Reierbacher. Madeleine Reierbacher says,
“If you are happy, there is no one to keep you from being happy;
Don’t let them!” Madeleine Reierbacher went into the racing car.
The racing car was orange and red. Madeleine Reierbacher drove to Beale Street.
There Maddy doffed her garments to get into some more comfortable clothes.
Jazz was already playing in Beale Street when Madeleine Reierbacher arrived there.
Madeleine Reierbacher picked up the yellow horn and began to play.
No one had ever heard anything comparable to the playing of Madeleine Reierbacher.
What a jazz musician! The pianist missed his beats because he was so excited.
The drummer stared out the window in ecstasy at the yellow wooden trees.
The orchestra played “September in the Rain,” “Mugging,” and “I’m Full of Love.”
Madeleine Reierbacher rolled up her sleeves; she picked up her horn; she played “Blues in the Rain.”
It was the best jazz anyone had ever heard. It was mentioned in the newspapers. St. Louis!
Madeleine Reierbacher became a celebrity. She played with Pesky Summerton and Muggsy Pierce.
Madeleine cut numerous disks. Her best waxings are “Alpha Beta and Gamma”
And “Wing Song.” One day Madeleine was riding on a donkey
When she came to a yellow light; the yellow light did not change.
Madeleine kept hoping it would change to green or red. She said, “As long as you have confidence,
You need be afraid of nothing.” Madeleine saw the red smokestacks, she looked at the thin trees,
And she regarded the railroad tracks. The yellow light was unchanging. Madeleine’s donkey dropped dead
From his mortal load. Madeleine Reierbacher, when she fell to earth,
Picked up a blade of grass and began to play. “The Blues!” cried the workmen of the vicinity,
And they ran and came in great numbers to where Madeleine Reierbacher was.
They saw her standing in that simple field beside the railroad track
Playing, and they saw that light changing to green and red, and they saw that donkey stand up
And rise into the sky; and Madeleine Reierbacher was like a clot of blue
In the midst of the blue of all that sky, and the young farmers screamed
In excitement, and the workmen dropped their heavy boards and stones in their excitement,
And they cried, “O Madeleine Reierbacher, play us the ‘Lead Flint Blues’ once again!” 
O railroad stations, pennants, evenings, and lumberyards!
When will you ever bring us such a beautiful soloist again?
An argent strain shows on the reddish face of the sun.
Madeleine Reierbacher stands up and screams, “I am getting wet! You are all egotists!”
Her brain floats up into the lyric atmosphere of the sky.
We must figure out a way to keep our best musicians with us.
The finest we have always melt in the light blue sky!
In the middle of a concert, sometimes, they disappear, like anvils.
(The music comes down to us with sweet white hands on our shoulders.)
We stare up in surprise; and we hear Madeleine’s best-known tune once again,
“If you ain’t afraid of life, life can’t be afraid for you.”
Madeleine! Come back and sing to us!  
                                                      2 
Dick looked up from his blackboard.
Had he really written a history of the jazz age?
He stared at his television set; the technicolor jazz program was coming on.
The program that day was devoted to pictures of Madeleine Reierbacher
Playing her saxophone in the golden age of jazz.
Dick looked at his blackboard. It was a mass of green and orange lines.
Here and there a red chalk line interlaced with the others.
He stared attentively at the program. 
It was a clear and blue white day. Amos said, “The calibration is finished. Now there need be no more jazz.” 
In his mountain home old Lucas Dog laughed when he heard what Amos had said.
He smilingly picked up his yellow horn to play, but all that came out of it was steam.


^^EOP^^


                                           I 
O what a physical effect it has on me
To dive forever into the light blue sea
Of your acquaintance! Ah, but dearest friends,
Like forms, are finished, as life has ends! Still,
It is beautiful, when October
Is over, and February is over,
To sit in the starch of my shirt, and to dream of your sweet
Ways! As if the world were a taxi, you enter it, then
Reply (to no one), “Let’s go five or six blocks.”
Isn’t the blue stream that runs past you a translation from the Russian?
Aren’t my eyes bigger than love?
Isn’t this history, and aren’t we a couple of ruins?
Is Carthage Pompeii? is the pillow the bed? is the sun
What glues our heads together? O midnight! O midnight!
Is love what we are,
Or has happiness come to me in a private car
That’s so very small I’m amazed to see it there?  
                                           2 
We walk through the park in the sun, and you say, “There’s a spider
Of shadow touching the bench, when morning’s begun.” I love you.
I love you fame I love you raining sun I love you cigarettes I love you love
I love you daggers I love smiles daggers and symbolism.  
                                           3 
Inside the symposium of your sweetest look’s
Sunflower awning by the nurse-faced chrysanthemums childhood
Again represents a summer spent sticking knives into porcelain raspberries, when China’s
Still a country! Oh, King Edward abdicated years later, that’s
Exactly when. If you were seventy thousand years old, and I were a pill,
I know I could cure your headache, like playing baseball in drinking-water, as baskets
Of towels sweetly touch the bathroom floor! O benches of nothing
Appear and reappear—electricity! I’d love to be how
You are, as if
The world were new, and the selves were blue
Which we don
Until it’s dawn,
Until evening puts on
The gray hooded selves and the light brown selves of . . .
Water! your tear-colored nail polish
Kisses me! and the lumberyard seems new
As a calm
On the sea, where, like pigeons,
I feel so mutated, sad, so breezed, so revivified, and still so unabdicated—
Not like an edge of land coming over the sea!


^^EOP^^

          Before the God-bullied hull, call me—
          Before the God-bullied hull buckles, before 
          The red flag unfurled on water bucks and drowns,
          Before the sky-hawk dives down, before 
          The nail drives through the sky-hawk’s red-wing—
          Call me
                      the nail driven through the wing
          And call me the wing driven through.
                                                                A board
          On water is buoyant, I know: I cling to wood—
          A dictionary buckles and drowns. I know 
          I do not drown: I’m abridged, afloat, call me— 
Sir, when my book arrives, when each page
You’ve untied lets go the breath it held
That was my breath, then my breath will not be mine—
I think you’ll know. I know when doors open
I mean to keep closed: study-door, desk-drawer.
My wife found the key I hid beneath the fern.
My pens she did not touch. She did not touch
The hundred pages I left blank to fill other days.
She took the cracked compass I keep for luck
(the needle’s sharp, but stuck), took my green-glass
Ink-pot, and centering the compass on my desk,
Poured out each dark drop of ink unitl ink
Seeped through cracked glass and left the compass
Ink-full. The gold needle loosened, floated: a line. 
          Bent back, I am taking you inside my head
          Turning back. Ahab bent 
          The needle that refused North
                                                      back to a magnet’s tow—
          Did, Ahab did, after
          The needle’s faith answered our question: No. 
          How do you point at a horizon? Ask me. I know.
          Needle out your arm: close eyes: 
          And turn in a circle. Inscribe a zero on the wood-deck—
          The Equator on zero
                              latitudes lies. That is the truth, I know 
Sir, what name that bay a last page carves
Out of no shore: ice? glacier? greenland?
strand, shoal-of-white-sand? an artic-calm?

^^EOP^^

                                   The Magic of Numbers—1 
How strange it was to hear the furniture being moved around in the apartment upstairs!
I was twenty-six, and you were twenty-two.                                      The Magic of Numbers—2 
You asked me if I wanted to run, but I said no and walked on.
I was nineteen, and you were seven.                                      The Magic of Numbers—3 
Yes, but does X really like us?
We were both twenty-seven.                                      The Magic of Numbers—4 
You look like Jerry Lewis (1950).                                      The Magic of Numbers—5 
Grandfather and grandmother want you to go over to their house for dinner.
They were sixty-nine, and I was two and a half.                                      The Magic of Numbers—6 
One day when I was twenty-nine years old I met you and nothing happened.                                      The Magic of Numbers—7 
No, of course it wasn’t I who came to the library!
Brown eyes, flushed cheeks, brown hair. I was twenty-nine, and you were sixteen.                                     The Magic of Numbers—8 
After we made love one night in Rockport I went outside and kissed the road
I felt so carried away. I was twenty-three, and you were nineteen.                                     The Magic of Numbers—9 
I was twenty-nine, and so were you. We had a very passionate time.
Everything I read turned into a story about you and me, and everything I did was turned into a poem.


^^EOP^^

No reverie begs “light” in the blind eye.
Reverie says: dig this depth-of-blank 
Deeper. Dig deeper
With the Whale below the white-capped waves— 
A twitch of his tail, a twitch of his white tail
Birthed from ocean-bed the wave 
That broke calm water into each cracked plank
Of the harpooner’s boat, made that man sway, 
And cast him on the spear his arm meant to cast
At you. Beneath the sun’s evil weight 
Men burn nightwards but never darken
Past night. There’s always the moon’s hook 
On still water to deny them.
But Whale, you dive down 
Until the ocean’s ground begs you solid, “Stop.”
Whale, you do not stop. 
You beat your head against the jagged rocks.
Blind in depths so dark light itself is blind, 
You knock your head against the rocks to see
And scratch the god-itch from your thoughts. 
Flame is jealous of flame, once lit, it ever
Reaches higher. You wait, match-tip, White Whale. 
I see how you wait in silence for silence
To say: write it in, tell me who I am now.


^^EOP^^

I set forth one misted white day of June
Beneath the great Atlantic rainway, and heard:
“Honestly you smite worlds of truth, but
Lose your own trains of thought, like a pigeon.
Did you once ride in Kenneth’s machine?”
“Yes, I rode there, an old man in shorts, blind,
Who had lost his way in the filling station; Kenneth was kind.”
“Did he fill your motionless ears with resonance and stain?”
“No, he spoke not as a critic, but as a man.”
“Tell me, what did he say?” “He said,
‘My eyes are the white sky, the gravel on the groundway my sad lament.’”
“And yet he drives between the two. . . .” “Exactly, Jane, 
And that is the modern idea of fittingness,
To, always in motion, lose nothing, although beneath the
Rainway they move in threes and twos completely
Ruined for themselves, like moving pictures.”
“But how other?” “Formulalessness, to go from the sun
Into love’s sweet disrepair. He would fondly express
‘Rain trees’—which is not a poem, ‘rain trees. . . .’”
“Still, it is mysterious to have an engine
That floats bouquets! and one day in the rear-vision
Mirror of his car we vowed delight,
The insufficiency of the silverware in the sunlight,
The dreams he steals from and smiles, losing gain.” 
“Yet always beneath the rainway unsyntactical
Beauty might leap up!” “That we might sing
From smiles’ ravines, ‘Rose, the reverse of everything,
May be profaned or talked at like a hat.’”
“Oh that was sweet and short, like the minuet
Of stars, which would permit us to seem our best friends
By silver’s eminent lights! For nature is so small, ends
Falsely reign, distending the time we did
Behind our hope for body-work, riding with Kenneth.”
Their voicing ceased, then started again, to complain
That we are offered nothing when it starts to rain
In the same way, though we are dying for the truth.


^^EOP^^

I love you as a sheriff searches for a walnut
That will solve a murder case unsolved for years
Because the murderer left it in the snow beside a window
Through which he saw her head, connecting with
Her shoulders by a neck, and laid a red
Roof in her heart. For this we live a thousand years;
For this we love, and we live because we love, we are not
Inside a bottle, thank goodness! I love you as a
Kid searches for a goat; I am crazier than shirttails
In the wind, when you’re near, a wind that blows from
The big blue sea, so shiny so deep and so unlike us;
I think I am bicycling across an Africa of green and white fields
Always, to be near you, even in my heart
When I’m awake, which swims, and also I believe that you
Are trustworthy as the sidewalk which leads me to
The place where I again think of you, a new
Harmony of thoughts! I love you as the sunlight leads the prow
Of a ship which sails
From Hartford to Miami, and I love you
Best at dawn, when even before I am awake the sun
Receives me in the questions which you always pose.


^^EOP^^

On my desk there is a stone with the word “Amen” on it,
a triangular fragment of stone from a Jewish graveyard destroyed
many generations ago. The other fragments, hundreds upon hundreds,
were scattered helter-skelter, and a great yearning,
a longing without end, fills them all:
first name in search of family name, date of death seeks
dead man’s birthplace, son’s name wishes to locate
name of father, date of birth seeks reunion with soul
that wishes to rest in peace. And until they have found
one another, they will not find a perfect rest.
Only this stone lies calmly on my desk and says “Amen.”
But now the fragments are gathered up in lovingkindness
by a sad good man. He cleanses them of every blemish,
photographs them one by one, arranges them on the floor
in the great hall, makes each gravestone whole again,
one again: fragment to fragment,
like the resurrection of the dead, a mosaic,
a jigsaw puzzle. Child’s play.


^^EOP^^

He promises a canary dress, white gloves,
says they’ll eat chops, thick as her thighs,
that they’ll order doubles of the “finest,”
see all the Big Names when they arrive.
But it’s the thought of them dead:
half of what they own draped around them,
her head against his chest, his back slack
against the headboard, all their letters unopened,
bills not paid, long knocks, the notices tacked
outside their door. It’s not knowing
whether some smell would introduce them
to their neighbors or a landlord wheeling
them out into the hallway; the highboy
he chipped on the drive up, the silver
she inherited from her mother, her hatboxes,
stacked high next to them like a wedding cake
waiting to be buried. He heard that “up there”
the wind had talons sharp enough to hook
a grown man beneath his collarbone and carry
him a full city block. He heard that you learned
the months by measuring the length of their shadows
and even summer was like a quality of night.


^^EOP^^

Please! Keep
reading me
Blake
because you’re going to make
me the greatest
poet of
all time 
Keep smoothing
the stones in the
driveway
let me fry an egg
on your ass
& I’ll pick up
the mail. 
I feel your
absence in
the morning
& imagine your
instant mouth
let me move
in with you—
Travelling
wrapping your limbs
on my back
I grow man woman
Child
I see wild wild wild 
Keep letting the
day be massive
Unlicensed
Oh please have
my child
      I’m a little
      controlling
      Prose has some
      Magic. Morgan
had a
whore in
her lap. You
Big fisherman
I love my
Friends. 
I want to lean
my everything
with you
make home for your hubris
I want to read the words you circld over and over again
A slow skunk walking across the road
Yellow, just kind
of pausing
picked up the warm
laundry. I just saw a coyote
tippy tippy tippy
I didn’t tell you about the creature with hair
long hair, it was hit by cars on the highway
Again and again. It had long grey hair
It must’ve been a dog; it could’ve been
Ours. Everyone loses their friends. 
I couldn’t tell anyone about this sight.
Each defeat
Is sweet.


^^EOP^^




 
The morning air is all awash with angels—Richard Wilbur, “Love Calls Us to the Things of This World”
 




The eyes open to a blue telephone
In the bathroom of this five-star hotel. 
I wonder whom I should call? A plumber,
Proctologist, urologist, or priest? 
Who is blessed among us and most deserves
The first call? I choose my father because 
He’s astounded by bathroom telephones.
I dial home. My mother answers. “Hey, Ma,” 
I say, “Can I talk to Poppa?” She gasps,
And then I remember that my father 
Has been dead for nearly a year. “Shit, Mom,”
I say. “I forgot he’s dead. I’m sorry— 
How did I forget?” “It’s okay,” she says.
“I made him a cup of instant coffee 
This morning and left it on the table—
Like I have for, what, twenty-seven years— 
And I didn’t realize my mistake
Until this afternoon.” My mother laughs 
At the angels who wait for us to pause
During the most ordinary of days 
And sing our praise to forgetfulness
Before they slap our souls with their cold wings. 
Those angels burden and unbalance us.
Those fucking angels ride us piggyback. 
Those angels, forever falling, snare us
And haul us, prey and praying, into dust.


^^EOP^^

    I
My life is the gardener of my body. The brain—a hothouse closed tight
with its flowers and plants, alien and odd
in their sensitivity, their terror of becoming extinct.
The face—a formal French garden of symmetrical contours
and circular paths of marble with statues and places to rest,
places to touch and smell, to look out from, to lose yourself
in a green maze, and Keep Off and Don’t Pick the Flowers.
The upper body above the navel—an English park
pretending to be free, no angles, no paving stones, naturelike,
humanlike, in our image, after our likeness,
its arms linking up with the big night all around.
And my lower body, beneath the navel—sometimes a nature preserve,
wild, frightening, amazing, an unpreserved preserve,
and sometimes a Japanese garden, concentrated, full of
forethought. And the penis and testes are smooth
polished stones with dark vegetation between them,
precise paths fraught with meaning
and calm reflection. And the teachings of my father
and the commandments of my mother
are birds of chirp and song. And the woman I love
is seasons and changing weather, and the children at play
are my children. And the life my life. 
     2
I’ve never been in those places where I’ve never been
and never will be, I have no share in the infinity of light-years and dark-years,
but the darkness is mine, and the light, and my time
is my own. The sand on the seashore—those infinite grains
are the same sand where I made love in Achziv and Caesarea.
The years of my life I have broken into hours, and the hours into minutes
and seconds and fractions of seconds. These, only these,
are the stars above me
that cannot be numbered. 
     3
And what is my life span? I’m like a man gone out of Egypt:
the Red Sea parts, I cross on dry land,
two walls of water, on my right hand and on my left.
Pharaoh’s army and his horsemen behind me. Before me the desert,
perhaps the Promised Land, too. That is my life span. 
     4
Open closed open. Before we are born, everything is open
in the universe without us. For as long as we live, everything is closed
within us. And when we die, everything is open again.
Open closed open. That’s all we are. 
    5
What then is my life span? Like shooting a self-portrait.
I set up the camera a few feet away on something stable
(the one thing that’s stable in this world),
I decide on a good place to stand, near a tree,
run back to the camera, press the timer,
run back again to that place near the tree,
and I hear the ticking of time, the whirring
like a distant prayer, the click of the shutter like an execution.
That is my life span. God develops the picture
in His big darkroom. And here is the picture:
white hair on my head, eyes tired and heavy,
eyebrows black, like the charred lintels
above the windows in a house that burned down.
My life span is over. 
     6
I wasn’t one of the six million who died in the Shoah,
I wasn’t even among the survivors.
And I wasn’t one of the six hundred thousand who went out of Egypt.
I came to the Promised Land by sea.
No, I was not in that number, though I still have the fire and the smoke
within me, pillars of fire and pillars of smoke that guide me
by night and by day. I still have inside me the mad search
for emergency exits, for soft places, for the nakedness
of the land, for the escape into weakness and hope,
I still have within me the lust to search for living water
with quiet talk to the rock or with frenzied blows.
Afterwards, silence: no questions, no answers.
Jewish history and world history
grind me between them like two grindstones, sometimes
to a powder. And the solar year and the lunar year
get ahead of each other or fall behind,
leaping, they set my life in perpetual motion.
Sometimes I fall into the gap between them to hide,
or to sink all the way down. 
    7
I believe with perfect faith that at this very moment
millions of human beings are standing at crossroads
and intersections, in jungles and deserts,
showing each other where to turn, what the right way is,
which direction. They explain exactly where to go,
what is the quickest way to get there, when to stop
and ask again. There, over there. The second
turnoff, not the first, and from there left or right,
near the white house, by the oak tree.
They explain with excited voices, with a wave of the hand
and a nod of the head: There, over there, not that there, the other there,
as in some ancient rite. This too is a new religion.
I believe with perfect faith that at this very moment.


^^EOP^^

You’re like
a little fruit
you’re like
a moon I want
to hold
I said lemon slope
about your
hip
because it’s one
of my words
about you
I whispered
in bed
this smoothing
the fruit &
then alone
with my book
but writing
in it the pages
wagging
against my knuckles
in the
light like a
sail.


^^EOP^^

as freedom is a breakfastfood
or truth can live with right and wrong
or molehills are from mountains made
—long enough and just so long
will being pay the rent of seem
and genius please the talentgang
and water most encourage flame 
as hatracks into peachtrees grow
or hopes dance best on bald men’s hair
and every finger is a toe
and any courage is a fear
—long enough and just so long
will the impure think all things pure
and hornets wail by children stung 
or as the seeing are the blind
and robins never welcome spring
nor flatfolk prove their world is round
nor dingsters die at break of dong
and common’s rare and millstones float
—long enough and just so long
tomorrow will not be too late 
worms are the words but joy’s the voice
down shall go which and up come who
breasts will be breasts thighs will be thighs
deeds cannot dream what dreams can do
—time is a tree(this life one leaf)
but love is the sky and i am for you
just so long and long enough


^^EOP^^

What did I know, what did I know
Of gazing silences and terrored stone 
Brilliances; beauty of what’s hardbitten
The auroral darkness which is God 
Then you arrived, meditative, ironic
My head gripped in bony vice 
Mouth of agony shaping a cry it cannot utter
What did I know, what did I know 
Of a changing permanence
The stains and dirty tools of struggle 
Weaving a wish and a weariness together
Years before your time. Years and years 
I gaze through layered light
Within the rock of the undiscovered suns 
I see, I walk with you among
The landscape lush, metallic, flayed 
Behind us, beyond us now
The very sunlight here seems flammable


^^EOP^^

love is more thicker than forget
more thinner than recall
more seldom than a wave is wet
more frequent than to fail 
it is most mad and moonly
and less it shall unbe
than all the sea which only
is deeper than the sea 
love is less always than to win
less never than alive
less bigger than the least begin
less littler than forgive 
it is most sane and sunly
and more it cannot die
than all the sky which only
is higher than the sky


^^EOP^^

Like fishermen at dusk, the soldiers returned
from war with stories slumped over their shoulders;
their fingers firm at the knot, the netting, thick
and tangled with the names of the dead. 
None could explain how the flood of life all around
them escaped like water from between cupped hands,
how the bodies of men they loved began to crust
the earth like salt, how destruction danced slapdash
and unashamed everywhere, and still they survived. 
When I came home from college proud, my educated
mouth agape, a tackle box of words, slick and glossy
and I saw the names of my friends, the young men
I fought with, learned to drink with, and left behind  Lil’ Rocc, Pumpkin, Ulysses, Junebug, Aghoster
names spray-painted throughout our neighborhood
in memoriam, I couldn’t understand how a god
could make one life possible and strip the world
clean of so many, or how, like high-watermarks
the dead remind the living of the coming of storms.


^^EOP^^

This misalliance
follows the custom
for female children
To adhere to maternal practices 
While the atheist father presides over   
the prattle of the churchgoer
with ironical commentary    from his arm-chair 
But by whichever
religious route
to brute
reality
our forebears speed us 
There is often a pair
of idle adult
accomplices in duplicity
to impose upon their brood 
an assumed acceptance   
of the grace of God
defamed as human megalomania 
seeding the Testament
with inconcievable chastisement 
and of Christ
who
come with his light
of toilless lilies
To say “fear
not   it is I”
wanting us to be fearful 
He who bowed the ocean tossed   
with holy feet
which supposedly dead 
are suspended over head   
neat-
ly crossed in anguish   
wounded with red
varnish 
From these
slow-drying bloods of mysticism   
mysteriously
the something-soul emerges   
miserably 
and instinct (of economy)   
in every race
for reconstructing debris   
has planted an avenging face   
in outer darkness 
              . . . 
The lonely peering eye   
of humanity
looked into the Néant   
      and turned away 
              . . . 
Ova’s consciousness
impulsive to commit itself to justice   
—to arise and walk
its innate     straight way
out of the
accidence of circumstance— 
collects the levitate chattels   
of its will and makes for the   
magnetic horizon of liberty   
with the soul’s foreverlasting   
opposition
to disintegration 
So this child of Exodus
with her heritage of emigration
often
“sets out to seek her fortune”
in her turn
trusting to terms of literature
dodging the breeders’ determination
not to return “entities sent on consignment”   
by their maker Nature
except in a condition
of moral
effacement 
Lest Paul and Peter   
never
notice the creatures   
ever had had Fathers   
and Mothers 
They were disgraced in their duty
should such spirits
take an express passage
through the family bodies
to arrive at Eternity
as lovely     as they originally   
promised 
So on whatever days
she chose to “run away”
the very
street corners of Kilburn
close in upon Ova
to deliver her
into the hands of her procreators 
Oracle of civilization
‘Thou shalt not live by dreams alone   
but by every discomfort
that proceedeth out of
legislation’


^^EOP^^

Even the flags seemed frozen
to their poles, and the men
stamping their well-shod feet
resembled an army of overcoats. 
But we were young and fueled
by hope, our ardor burned away
the cold. We were the president’s,
and briefly the president would be ours. 
The old poet stumbled
over his own indelible words,
his breath a wreath around his face:
a kind of prophecy.


^^EOP^^

I.
Runs falls rises stumbles on from darkness into darkness
and the darkness thicketed with shapes of terror
and the hunters pursuing and the hounds pursuing
and the night cold and the night long and the river
to cross and the jack-muh-lanterns beckoning beckoning
and blackness ahead and when shall I reach that somewhere
morning and keep on going and never turn back and keep on going
                Runagate
                              Runagate
                                            Runagate
Many thousands rise and go
many thousands crossing over
                                                           O mythic North
                                               O star-shaped yonder Bible city 
Some go weeping and some rejoicing
some in coffins and some in carriages
some in silks and some in shackles 
                 Rise and go or fare you well 
No more auction block for me
no more driver’s lash for me 
         If you see my Pompey, 30 yrs of age,
         new breeches, plain stockings, negro shoes;
         if you see my Anna, likely young mulatto
         branded E on the right cheek, R on the left,
         catch them if you can and notify subscriber.
         Catch them if you can, but it won’t be easy.
         They’ll dart underground when you try to catch them,
         plunge into quicksand, whirlpools, mazes,
         turn into scorpions when you try to catch them. 
And before I’ll be a slave
I’ll be buried in my grave 
         North star and bonanza gold
         I’m bound for the freedom, freedom-bound
         and oh Susyanna don’t you cry for me 
                                 Runagate
  
                                               Runagate  
          II.
Rises from their anguish and their power, 
                                       Harriet Tubman, 
                                       woman of earth, whipscarred,
                                       a summoning, a shining 
                                       Mean to be free 
          And this was the way of it, brethren brethren,
          way we journeyed from Can’t to Can.
          Moon so bright and no place to hide,
          the cry up and the patterollers riding,
          hound dogs belling in bladed air.
          And fear starts a-murbling, Never make it,
          we’ll never make it. Hush that now,
          and she’s turned upon us, levelled pistol
          glinting in the moonlight:
          Dead folks can’t jaybird-talk, she says;
          you keep on going now or die, she says. 
Wanted     Harriet Tubman     alias The General
alias Moses     Stealer of Slaves 
In league with Garrison     Alcott     Emerson
Garrett     Douglas     Thoreau     John Brown 
Armed and known to be Dangerous 
Wanted     Reward     Dead or Alive 
          Tell me, Ezekiel, oh tell me do you see
          mailed Jehovah coming to deliver me? 
Hoot-owl calling in the ghosted air,
five times calling to the hants in the air.
Shadow of a face in the scary leaves,
shadow of a voice in the talking leaves: 
          Come ride-a my train 
          Oh that train, ghost-story train
          through swamp and savanna movering movering,
          over trestles of dew, through caves of the wish,
          Midnight Special on a sabre track movering movering,
          first stop Mercy and the last Hallelujah.

^^EOP^^

Money burns the pocket, pocket hurts,
          Bootleggers in silken shirts,
          Ballooned, zooming Cadillacs,
          Whizzing, whizzing down the street-car tracks.
 
   Seventh Street is a bastard of Prohibition and the War. A crude-boned, soft-skinned wedge of nigger life breathing its loafer air, jazz songs and love, thrusting unconscious rhythms, black reddish blood into the white and whitewashed wood of Washington. Stale soggy wood of Washington. Wedges rust in soggy wood. . . Split it! In two! Again! Shred it! . . the sun. Wedges are brilliant in the sun; ribbons of wet wood dry and blow away. Black reddish blood. Pouring for crude-boned soft-skinned life, who set you flowing? Blood suckers of the War would spin in a frenzy of dizziness if they drank your blood. Prohibition would put a stop to it. Who set you flowing? White and whitewash disappear in blood. Who set you flowing? Flowing down the smooth asphalt of Seventh Street, in shanties, brick office buildings, theaters, drug stores, restaurants, and cabarets? Eddying on the corners? Swirling like a blood-red smoke up where the buzzards fly in heaven? God would not dare to suck black red blood. A Nigger God! He would duck his head in shame and call for the Judgement Day. Who set you flowing?  
          Money burns the pocket, pocket hurts,
          Bootleggers in silken shirts,
          Ballooned, zooming Cadillacs,
          Whizzing, whizzing down the street-car tracks.


^^EOP^^

Nightingale singing—gale of Nanking 
Sing—mystery 
of Ming-dynasty 
sing 
ing 
in Ming 
Syringa 
Myringa    
Singer 
Song-winged 
sing-wind    
syringa 
ringer 
Song-wing    
sing long    
syringa 
lingerer


^^EOP^^

Sometimes my old man’s hand flutters over his knee, flapsin crazy circles, and falls back to his leg. Sometimes it leans for an hour on that bony ledge. And sometimes when my old man tries to speak, his hand wagglesin the air, chasing a word, then perches againon the bar of his walker or the arm of a chair.Sometimes when evening closes down his window and rainblackens into ice on the sill, it trembles like a sparrow in a storm.Then full dark falls, and it trembles less, and less, until it’s still.


^^EOP^^

                                        0.
the first line? “blackface is sometimes the truth.”
the poet knows this will make fire.
 
ponders performing in some dark room, squinting at the black type—
red gel spots like laser sights from a rifle big as a bus.   but here, the sniper stirs herbal tea, has a cell phone,
the number of a woman the color of thrush wings.  
for now: the sniper with the cell phone will be he.  
he misses the next line beneath the spoon clanging in the mug
like the clapper in a schooner’s alarm bell. the third line,  
perhaps: “. . . the smoldering cork testifies . . .” or “. . . the moldy corpse    terrifies . . .”
he considers each. and wonders about the second line  
—then about the girl he saw boarding the bus,
what her name sounds like whispered in a dim room  
of red candles, a radio where the poet is. “—ncing and bucking.
and the yes and suh . . .”—he misses something else,  
the new line of little to do with corks or corpses—courts, maybe—
and what’s “. . . un a gold coin promise, layaway heaven with teeth and    silence . . .”?  
he is lost between a poem, a cell and a thrush’s wing.  
so by this time the poet should probably place a refrain
as this is going to be a long poem, long enough to make the poet famous.                                            1.
blackface is sometimes the truth
but with added emphasis. a boldface where
the smoldering cork testifies.                                     [the issue is intent, nahmean?
                                   like what is nahmean when you see
                                   knows its way around the alleys
                                   of the tongue? what is nahmean, nahmean?
                                   and the intent is the issue, you see?] [nahmean?]
 
blackface is sometimes a lie
but with added detail. a bold face where
the smoldering cork testifies.                                            2. but to what? the sawdust packed pockets, the brogan’s salty shadow? to the straps? scraps off the hips of tin platters?   the train’s constant is a-comin? the minister’s constant that Someday what is the cork, still smelling of cheap wine, some doe-   eyed muscatel, a poor man’s dream-color of velvet, some sap fresh from a cicada tableau to a night club in a Sunday suit,   cardboard under his left sock, the bootblack ache slithering out above his ass, the bootblack cash kissed in waxy fingerprints   offered up, offered up to the waitress who won’t smile for a “what this get?” the bottle brought back, armpit warm? this cork, tossed to the floor   and kicked, a careless jig swung by a white chick, and rolled below a table awaiting some jittering negro, whose gig it is to eyeball   these corks, to swoop down, hands a pair of crows, to swoop up the cork, bear it backstage, to pull it from his pocket like a magician’s dove,   transform it into smoke and ovation.   what does this testify?   what is this truth?   why speak of the fire, the first kiss of flame to the cork?   watch Bamboozled. that’s all I did.   what does this testify?                                            3.
what is truth?
again reading
some magazine,   again waiting
for the dressing room
door to open:   fire gleaming off the platter
like a breakfast of stars,
burning cork   from Portugal, and cork
doesn’t sink in rough waters,
like fine schooners   from Portugal, and fire
splits the blackness of dark
like the fingers of sailors   from Portugal, whose tongues
teach new tongues to the lips
in the darkness of blacks   from Africa, and burn
the sea into their faces
like smoke in a blue lit   dressing room. and I
close the magazine
full of rappers swimming   in denim, ism smoke
and wait for the door
to open. the embers to ignite                                            4. dancing and bucking  
spotlight’s prison-break eye and the sweat that lifts from the skull
and the pancake sheen allowed for the cameras, the pancake  
that will not run, and the clothes that cling to the mouths of wetness
and the red gels that turn the words into spastic ants holding tiny cue cards!!!!!  
but the stomach churn of memorization, no no no, the revisions on the other
copy in the other notebook in the other room no no no the gimpy music stand   tilt, the red eye, the spotlight’s stomach, the prison-break sheen, the ants cling,
the pancake mouth, the spastic words, the cameras lift, the clothes’ wetness,   the skull tilt, churn
                           turn
                                   run
                                            no no
                                                       NO
                                                       DANCE                BUCK
  
                                             *   *   *   *
 
                                          the yes and sir 
the room.
the books.
hands telling
what I know
to a machine.
alone. dreaming,
yes, dreaming
of pinning myself
to journals like
a prized butterfly.
the ink of my beauty
fading on the white pages.                                            5.
a rusty bicycle is a copper skeleton against the mattress.
through the chain link, children kneeling on the concrete
 
look lined for butchering. chewed sedans bleed into the street,
into sewer bellies.
 
I’ve written these images too many times. DC is my ghetto—
every black poet should have one, as every white poet should have
 
a movie-house or a lake. white poets have attractions.  
black poets should also have grandmothers.
 
I have grandmothers—one living, one not. neither mopped
any floor but her own. if I stand on their memories, I am too tall
 
to be jammed into a tenement. black birds peck at my journals. my fingers
work grime into Elm Place in LeDroit Park, divine urine from Florida Ave
 
and goad fiends from T Street’s throat. these are not my muses.
an adjective. a noun. a simile. “ragged storefronts like beaten wives.”   I must imagine what might go on behind bricks, past the railing
climbing up the stoops like wrought iron centipedes. the windows are open   sometimes at night. it was hot,
one black grandmother had a pool. air conditioning. on days without smog,
 
you could see the sea or someone riding a horse
past the liquor store. no one needs horses in Altadena. here,   horses are diamond necklaces. diamond necklaces that shit in crosswalks.
in DC there is a different kind of horse, and I need it for poems as I need ink.   it is not my muse, nahmean? one black grandmother didn’t sit in
the back of buses. Raleigh lay before her, already mopped. the crows are waiting   at the edge of the page. see, the madhouse that seeped out into NE
before exploding into panhandlers stranded in phantom ants,   drifting mothers birthing flying dutchmen, that man who walked
all the way to 6th Street swinging a golf club like a white woman dancing—   these are not my muses.
they aren’t even mirrors.   they are cork awaiting flame.                                      blackface 
                                                                           IS     sometimes. 


^^EOP^^

If I must worry about how
I will live in my old age
without wealth
I would be without health now
and how can I live to be
old? 
If I must worry about how
I will live in my old age
without love
I would be without dreams now
and how can I go on living
another day? 
Allow me to sit in the sun
and listen to the sky.
I will love you gently.
 
Allow me to stay in my room
and weave my rainbows.
I will love you truly. 
Like a colt in the meadow
with no boundary
allow me 
to wander around 
till I hear the autumn
stealthily
strolling by my door. 
I will be waiting
to be with you
then.


^^EOP^^

I painted a phoenix in bright colors
cut it in nine pieces and cooked it
in a pot at the mountaintop.
I stirred it as if cranking reels of
a movie. Unraveled were a series
of faces in mosaic. 
Kurosawa appeared. He asked me
what my story was about.
Tongue-tied, I could not answer.
He handed me a token with a silvery
eagle engraved, ready to fly. 
How real I thought everything was
in my dream! 
In my waking hour, I see
the remnant of the war between
my head and heart. 
Now in cease-fire, my chest is filled
with the fresh breeze of serenity.
I begin to breathe gently as my story
is unraveled like in a movie. 
No longer haunted, my love of God soars
as I see my guardian angel smile
in the clear blue sky, transforming to
one gigantic phoenix. 
My wandering in the wilderness of
the mind has taught me a little wisdom.
I believe my dreams are real
as my life is a dream.


^^EOP^^

Awakened from a dream, I curl up
and turn. The roses on the dresser
smile and your words bloom.
The red roses for Valentine’s Day. 
Like in a film
thoughts of you unfold
moment by moment.
 
I vaguely hear
the sound of your spoon scooping cereal
the water stream in the shower
the buzzing noise of your electric razor
like a singing of cicada. 
Your footsteps in and out of the bedroom.
Your lips touching my cheek lightly.
And the sound of the door shutting. 
In your light
I fall asleep again under the warm quilt
happily like a child. 
Upon waking
on the kitchen counter I find a half
grapefruit carefully cut and sectioned.
Such a loving touch is a milestone
for my newly found happiness.


^^EOP^^

I was four in this photograph fishing
with my grandparents at a lake in Michigan.
My brother squats in poison ivy.
His Davy Crockett cap
sits squared on his head so the raccoon tail
flounces down the back of his sailor suit. 
My grandfather sits to the far right
in a folding chair,
and I know his left hand is on
the tobacco in his pants pocket
because I used to wrap it for him
every Christmas. Grandmother's hips
bulge from the brush, she's leaning
into the ice chest, sun through the trees
printing her dress with soft
luminous paws. 
I am staring jealously at my brother;
the day before he rode his first horse, alone.
I was strapped in a basket
behind my grandfather.
He smelled of lemons. He's died— 
but I remember his hands.


^^EOP^^

Each house smells of strangers:
cabbage boiling on the stove,
harsh soap at the rim of the sink,
starched sheets that scrape
against the skin in bed,
hard pillows shaped
by someone else’s head,
rotting bananas, sweaty feet and dust. 
Each time we come to a new place
I try to hide one shirt
beneath the mattress
just to keep the smell of home.
Sometimes they find it,
squeeze it through the wringer;
hid long enough, the cloth absorbs
the air around it, loses its memories. 
My brother smells like sour milk,
unwashed armpits and the school paste
he eats. He cries
when they hit us; I never do.
Each night I hear
his sniffles soak the pillow.
Come morning, I grab the damp case,
hold it to my nose and breathe.


^^EOP^^




—Bahram (Pakistani 14-year-old held in an Afghan prison) 



Like the pied piper
the mullah drives his battered truck
through dusty villages, his loudspeaker
singing: Join the battle against the infidels.
Fight for Jihad and live eternally with Allah.
Lift up your guns for Him and you shall never die.

^^EOP^^

The straight neck held up out of the lace
is bound with a black velvet band.
She holds her mouth the way she chooses,
the full underlip constrained by a small muscle. 
She doesn’t blink or look aside,
although her left eye is considering
a slant. She would smile
if she had time, but right now 
there is composure to be invented.
She stares at the photographer.
The black crepe settles. Emerging
from the sleeve, a shapely hand 
holds out a white, translucent blossom.
“They always say things which embarrass
my dog,” she tells the photographer.
She is amused, but not as much as he’d like.


^^EOP^^

Picture the upturned millipede, dead,
           and see the streets of Altadena:
palm tree rows against the concrete, stiff
           to the horizon.
There have been no birds big enough,
           we are comforted, to pluck
the chitins from before our yards
           and vanish
into the sun like dog-fighting MiGs.
           War bears litters of similes. 
Altadena, smog hugs the foothills like mustard gas
           where our rich peer through their blinds
into ravines, Santa Anas sway the mustard plants, yuccas
           bob, some man—his cigarette,
a full gas-can, an itch. We’ve known
           the orange alert, fires reaching for helicopters
like cartoon cats clawing at panicked birds.
 
Yesterday, fire engines and HAZMAT trucks
           jostled at Alameda and El Molino
like beetles eating a four-legged spider.
           That morning, radios warned of orange.
Neighborhood kids watched officers climb in
           and out an open manhole,
consulting the entrails of the great dead millipede.
           We watched the ground;
the sun hotter than all year.
           The mountains hid Santa Anas,
the smog went orange with dusk, the growing shadows
           of lingering birds.


^^EOP^^

The jolt that comes to bones inside a tumbled streetcar 
is what the painter considers as she strokes her-
self into story. There is less to the jolt that
 
comes as he shuts his eyes before the monitor, save 
what he imagines—a lightning bolt, a god tapping
the shoulder. He imagines the sky swelling
 
with ceiling fans or the guano of extinct birds,
 
a jolt riding from his shoulder
blades to his eyelids, dropping with roller
 
coaster clacks to his fingers. Here, he dreams of Frida 
Kahlo. Here, he says, let me spread my flesh out like a
table linen, let my bones be silver that touches,
 
making, again, that clack. My skull will be a glass,
 
set properly, I have class enough.

^^EOP^^

Barely twenty-five, he smells
of yesterday’s spit and vomit,
black beard droops in clumps
from his drawn, sun-savaged face. 
Hanging from a string
around his neck: a small holy book. 
This man was once a child
held against the breast of a mother
who kissed his small meaty hands
that smelled of milk and tears.


^^EOP^^




for C.



Like shoes
she chose for comfort,
not for style,
that fit her contours
without chafe
or blistering 
Here is sanity.
It took her years to arrive,
like an explorer
settling at last
into uneasy retirement,
a small cottage
at the edge of the sea.
How the breakers crash
against the underpinnings;
still, the walls hold firm.
Hearth blazing steadily,
she tries to warm to it 
tells herself
she is mature now,
this is good.
The days of stalking,
done,
the rabid pulse,
the blood-drenched kisses,
all behind her now.
Wearied, finally,
of careless cruelties,
she will stay here,
grow old
 
with you.
And, sensible,
lacking her gift
for self-deception,
you know she struggles
with devotion,
you listen as she
moans inside her dreams,
and watch, without remarking,
as she tracks the tap of high heels
just beyond the window,
their rhythm growing fainter
with each step.


^^EOP^^

Think of the woman who first touched fire
to a hollow stone filled with seal oil,
how she fiddled with fuel and flame
until blue shadows before and after her
filled her house, crowded
the underground, then
fled like sky-captains
chasing the aurora’s whale tale
green beyond the earth’s curve.
Her tenth summer, the elders let her
raise her issum, seal pup orphaned
when hunters brought in her mother,
their grins of plenty
broad, red. The women
slit the hard belly.
Plopped among the ruby innards
steaming on rough-cut planks
blinked a new sea-child
whose first sound
came out a question
in the old language, a question
that in one throaty bark
asked who, meaning What family
is this? What comfort
do you provide for guests?
Do you let strangers remain
strangers? The women rinsed the slick pup
in cool water, crafted a pouch
for her to suck. Then the young girl
whose hands held light
even when the room did not
brought this new being
beside her bed, let it scatter
babiche and split birch
gathered for snowshoes, let it
nose the caribou neck hairs
bearding her dance fans. They
held up the fans to their foreheads,
playing white hair, playing old.
In the time when women do not sew
the seal danced at her first potlatch.
And when the lamps burned down,
no one could see
any difference between waves
in rock, waves in sea.
The pup lifted her nose, licked
salt from seven stars, and slipped
light back among silvers and chum
light among the ghostly belugas
swimming far north to offer themselves.


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

At times they will fly under. The dome
contains jungles. Invent a sky under the dome. 
Creatures awake, asleep, at play, aglow:
they float – unbottled genii – under the dome. 
Southern Belle, a splash of black, dusted with gold,
dissembles, assembling, acts shy under the dome. 
Cattleheart, Giant Swallowtail, Clipper:
sail, navigate sky high under the dome. 
Like confetti – a wedding – bits of Rice
Paper: sheer mimicry under the dome. 
Magnificent Owl, in air, a pansy,
it feeds, wings up, eye to eye, under the dome.
 
Name them: Monarch, then Queen, last Viceroy.
What will scientists deify under the dome?
 
Basking against a leaf: a Banded Orange,
displayed like a bowtie under the dome. 
A living museum. Exist to be observed:
never migrate, but live, then die, under the dome. 
Lips, lashes, eyes. From outside in,
do beings magnify under the dome?  Lepidoptera. From the Greek: Scale-wing.
Chrysalis. Stay, butterfly, under the dome.


^^EOP^^

Not one star, not even the half moon         
       on the night you were born
Not the flash of salmon
       nor ridges on blue snow
Not the flicker of raven’s
       never-still eye
Not breath frozen in fine hairs
       beading the bull moose’s nostril
Not one hand under flannel
       warming before reaching
Not burbot at home under Tanana ice
       not burbot pulled up into failing light
Not the knife blade honed, not the leather sheath
Not raw bawling in the dog yard
       when the musher barks gee
Not the gnawed ends of wrist-thick sticks
       mounded over beaver dens
Not solar flares scouring the earth over China
Not rime crystals bearding a sleek cheek of snow
Not six minutes more of darkness each day
Not air water food words touch
Not art
Not anything we expect
Not anything we expect to keep
Not anything we expect to keep us alive 
Not the center of the sea
Not the birthplace of the waves
Not the compass too close to true north to guide us 
Then with no warning
       flukes of three orcas
                 rise, arc clear of sea water


^^EOP^^




Anna Kyle Brown. Osage.
1896-1921. Fairfax, Oklahoma.




Because she died where the ravine falls into water. 
Because they dragged her down to the creek. 
In death, she wore her blue broadcloth skirt. 
Though frost blanketed the grass she cooled her feet in the spring. 
Because I turned the log with my foot. 
Her slippers floated downstream into the dam. 
Because, after the thaw, the hunters discovered her body. 
 
Because she lived without our mother. 
Because she had inherited head rights for oil beneath the land. 
She was carrying his offspring. 
The sheriff disguised her death as whiskey poisoning. 
Because, when he carved her body up, he saw the bullet hole in her skull. 
Because, when she was murdered, the leg clutchers bloomed. 
But then froze under the weight of frost. 
During Xtha-cka Zhi-ga Tze-the, the Killer of the Flowers Moon. 
I will wade across the river of the blackfish, the otter, the beaver. 
I will climb the bank where the willow never dies.


^^EOP^^

The warping night air having brought the boom
Of an owl’s voice into her darkened room,
We tell the wakened child that all she heard
Was an odd question from a forest bird,
Asking of us, if rightly listened to,
“Who cooks for you?” and then “Who cooks for you?” 
Words, which can make our terrors bravely clear,
Can also thus domesticate a fear,
And send a small child back to sleep at night
Not listening for the sound of stealthy flight
Or dreaming of some small thing in a claw
Borne up to some dark branch and eaten raw.


^^EOP^^

He was a big man, says the size of his shoes
on a pile of broken dishes by the house;
a tall man too, says the length of the bed
in an upstairs room; and a good, God-fearing man,
says the Bible with a broken back
on the floor below the window, dusty with sun;
but not a man for farming, say the fields
cluttered with boulders and the leaky barn. 
A woman lived with him, says the bedroom wall
papered with lilacs and the kitchen shelves
covered with oilcloth, and they had a child,
says the sandbox made from a tractor tire.
Money was scarce, say the jars of plum preserves
and canned tomatoes sealed in the cellar hole.
And the winters cold, say the rags in the window frames.
It was lonely here, says the narrow country road. 
Something went wrong, says the empty house
in the weed-choked yard. Stones in the fields
say he was not a farmer; the still-sealed jars
in the cellar say she left in a nervous haste.
And the child? Its toys are strewn in the yard
like branches after a storm—a rubber cow,
a rusty tractor with a broken plow,
a doll in overalls. Something went wrong, they say.


^^EOP^^




A Picture from the Life
To serve with love,
And shed your blood,
        Approved may be above,
But here below
(Example shew,)
‘Tis dangerous to be good.

--Lord Oxford



Deep in a vale, a stranger now to arms,
Too poor to shine in courts, too proud to beg,
He, who once warred on Saratoga’s plains,
Sits musing o’er his scars, and wooden leg.
 
Remembering still the toil of former days,
To other hands he sees his earnings paid;-- They share the due reward—he feeds on praise.
Lost in the abyss of want, misfortune’s shade.
 
Far, far from domes where splendid tapers glare,
‘Tis his from dear bought peace no wealth to win,
Removed alike from courtly cringing ‘squires,
The great-man’s Levee, and the proud man’s grin.
 
Sold are those arms which once on Britons blazed,
When, flushed with conquest, to the charge they came;
That power repelled, and Freedom’s fabrick raised,
She leaves her soldier—famine and a name!


^^EOP^^

I. THEIR BASIC SAVAGERY Fat black bucks in a wine-barrel room, Barrel-house kings, with feet unstable, Sagged and reeled and pounded on the table, Pounded on the table, Beat an empty barrel with the handle of a broom, Hard as they were able, Boom, boom, BOOM, With a silk umbrella and the handle of a broom, Boomlay, boomlay, boomlay, BOOM. THEN I had religion, THEN I had a vision. I could not turn from their revel in derision. THEN I SAW THE CONGO, CREEPING THROUGH THE BLACK, CUTTING THROUGH THE FOREST WITH A GOLDEN TRACK. Then along that riverbank A thousand miles Tattooed cannibals danced in files; Then I heard the boom of the blood-lust song And a thigh-bone beating on a tin-pan gong. And “BLOOD” screamed the whistles and the fifes of the warriors, “BLOOD” screamed the skull-faced, lean witch-doctors, “Whirl ye the deadly voo-doo rattle, Harry the uplands, Steal all the cattle, Rattle-rattle, rattle-rattle, Bing. Boomlay, boomlay, boomlay, BOOM,” A roaring, epic, rag-time tune From the mouth of the Congo To the Mountains of the Moon. Death is an Elephant, Torch-eyed and horrible, Foam-flanked and terrible. BOOM, steal the pygmies, BOOM, kill the Arabs, BOOM, kill the white men, HOO, HOO, HOO. Listen to the yell of Leopold’s ghost Burning in Hell for his hand-maimed host. Hear how the demons chuckle and yell Cutting his hands off, down in Hell. Listen to the creepy proclamation, Blown through the lairs of the forest-nation, Blown past the white-ants’ hill of clay, Blown past the marsh where the butterflies play: — “Be careful what you do, Or Mumbo-Jumbo, God of the Congo, And all of the other Gods of the Congo, Mumbo-Jumbo will hoo-doo you, Mumbo-Jumbo will hoo-doo you, Mumbo-Jumbo will hoo-doo you.”


^^EOP^^

There are many people who come back
After the doctor has smoothed the sheet
Around their body
And left the room to make his call. 
They die but they live. 
They are called the dead who lived through their deaths,
And among my people
They are considered wise and honest. 
They float out of their bodies
And light on the ceiling like a moth,
Watching the efforts of everyone around them. 
The voices and the images of the living
Fade away. 
A roar sucks them under
The wheels of a darkness without pain.
Off in the distance
There is someone
Like a signalman swinging a lantern. 
The light grows, a white flower.
It becomes very intense, like music. 
They see the faces of those they loved,
The truly dead who speak kindly. 
They see their father sitting in a field.
The harvest is over and his cane chair is mended.
There is a towel around his neck,
The odor of bay rum.
Then they see their mother
Standing behind him with a pair of shears.
The wind is blowing.
She is cutting his hair. 
The dead have told these stories
To the living.


^^EOP^^

A march in the ranks hard-prest, and the road unknown,A route through a heavy wood with muffled steps in the darkness,Our army foil’d with loss severe, and the sullen remnant retreating,Till after midnight glimmer upon us the lights of a dim-lighted building,We come to an open space in the woods, and halt by the dim-lighted building,’Tis a large old church at the crossing roads, now an impromptu hospitalEntering but for a minute I see a sight beyond all the pictures and poems ever made,Shadows of deepest, deepest black, just lit by moving candles and lamps,And by one great pitchy torch stationary with wild red flame and clouds of smoke,By these, crowds, groups of forms vaguely I see on the floor, some in the pews laid down,At my feet more distinctly a soldier, a mere lad, in danger of bleeding to death, (he is shot in the abdomen,)I stanch the blood temporarily, (the youngster’s face is white as a lily,)Then before I depart I sweep my eyes o’er the scene fain to absorb it all,Faces, varieties, postures beyond description, most in obscurity, some of them dead,Surgeons operating, attendants holding lights, the smell of ether, the odor of blood,The crowd, O the crowd of the bloody forms, the yard outside also fill’d,Some on the bare ground, some on planks or stretchers, some in the death-spasm sweating,An occasional scream or cry, the doctor’s shouted orders or calls,The glisten of the little steel instruments catching the glint of the torches,These I resume as I chant, I see again the forms, I smell the odor,Then hear outside the orders given, Fall in, my men, fall in;But first I bend to the dying lad, his eyes open, a half-smile gives he me,Then the eyes close, calmly close, and I speed forth to the darkness,Resuming, marching, ever in darkness marching, on in the ranks,The unknown road still marching.


^^EOP^^

the winged thang built her dream palace
amid the fine green eyes of a sheltering bough
she did not know it was urban turf
disguised as serenely delusionally rural
nor did she know the neighborhood was rife
with slant-mawed felines and those long-taloned
swoopers of prey. she was ignorant of the acidity & oil
that slowly polluted the earth, and was never
to detect the serpent coiled one strong limb below 
following her nature she flitted and dove
for whatever blades twigs and mud
could be found under the humming blue
and created a hatchery for her spawn
not knowing all were doomed


^^EOP^^

You find yourself in a narrow bed you’ve never slept in,on a tree-lined grassy field you’ve never walked upon,on a cold toilet seat you have not sat on,in a place you now call your home, your learning, your future.Red stone pathways expose the buildings that will housethe knowledge you seek,and the information you want to gather.You crane your neck to look upat the 13-story brick tower rising from the ground,looming over you as you walk past. The melodiesand beats of different songs mix,create a sound of their own,flow from open windows. Crushed leeksTop Ramen noodles ground into a blueand speckled carpet attract armies of antsto the communal kitchen on the sixth floor.You pull your jacket tighter against your body,strong, salty wind whips off the Sound,and up the hill as you walk throughRed Square toward the clatter of knives,forks and digesting bellies.Finally, you are released like a white dovefrom the hands of its owner, allowed to flydiscovering your dreams,discovering what you are made of.


^^EOP^^

Beyond the field of grazing, gazing cows the great bull has a pasture to himself, monumental, black flanks barely twitching from the swarming flies. Only a few strands of wire separate us—how could I forget my childhood terror, the grownups warning that the old bull near my uncle’s farm would love to chase me, stomp me, gore me if I ever got too close. And so I skirted acres just to keep my distance, peeking through the leaves to see if he still was watching me, waiting for some foolish move— those fierce red eyes, the thunder in the ground— or maybe that was simply nightmares. It’s getting hard to tell, as years themselves keep gaining ground relentlessly, their hot breath on my back, and not a fence in sight.


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

There’s a farm auction up the road.
Wind has its bid in for the leaves.
Already bugs flurry the headlights
between cornfields at night.
If this world were permanent,
I could dance full as the squaw dress
on the clothesline.
I would not see winter
in the square of white yard-light on the wall.
But something tugs at me.
The world is at a loss and I am part of it
migrating daily.
Everything is up for grabs
like a box of farm tools broken open.
I hear the spirits often in the garden
and along the shore of corn.
I know this place is not mine.
I hear them up the road again.
This world is a horizon, an open sea.
Behind the house, the white iceberg of the barn.


^^EOP^^

    It begins as a house, an end terrace
in this case
    but it will not stop there. Soon it is
an avenue
    which cambers arrogantly past the Mechanics' Institute,
turns left
    at the main road without even looking
and quickly it is
    a town with all four major clearing banks,
a daily paper
    and a football team pushing for promotion. 
    On it goes, oblivious of the Planning Acts,
the green belts,
    and before we know it it is out of our hands:
city, nation,
    hemisphere, universe, hammering out in all directions
until suddenly,
    mercifully, it is drawn aside through the eye
of a black hole
    and bulleted into a neighbouring galaxy, emerging
smaller and smoother
    than a billiard ball but weighing more than Saturn. 
    People stop me in the street, badger me
in the check-out queue
    and ask "What is this, this that is so small
and so very smooth
    but whose mass is greater than the ringed planet?"
It's just words
    I assure them. But they will not have it.


^^EOP^^

“Oh where are you going with your love-locks flowing    On the west wind blowing along this valley track?”  “The downhill path is easy, come with me an it please ye,    We shall escape the uphill by never turning back.”  So they two went together in glowing August weather,     The honey-breathing heather lay to their left and right; And dear she was to dote on, her swift feet seemed to float on     The air like soft twin pigeons too sportive to alight.  “Oh what is that in heaven where gray cloud-flakes are seven,     Where blackest clouds hang riven just at the rainy skirt?”  “Oh that’s a meteor sent us, a message dumb, portentous,     An undeciphered solemn signal of help or hurt.”  “Oh what is that glides quickly where velvet flowers grow thickly,     Their scent comes rich and sickly?”—“A scaled and hooded worm.” “Oh what’s that in the hollow, so pale I quake to follow?”     “Oh that’s a thin dead body which waits the eternal term.”  “Turn again, O my sweetest,—turn again, false and fleetest:     This beaten way thou beatest I fear is hell’s own track.” “Nay, too steep for hill-mounting; nay, too late for cost-counting:    This downhill path is easy, but there’s no turning back.”


^^EOP^^

It was a time when they were afraid of him.
My father, a bare man, a gypsy, a horse
with broken knees no one would shoot.
Then again, he was like the orange tree,
and young women plucked from him sweet fruit.
To meet him, you must be in the right place,
even his sons and daughter, we wondered
where was papa now and what was he doing.
He held the mystique of travelers
that pass your backyard and disappear into the trees.
Then, when you follow, you find nothing,
not a stir, not a twig displaced from its bough.
And then he would appear one night.
Half covered in shadows and half in light,
his voice quiet, absorbing our unspoken thoughts.
When his hands lay on the table at breakfast,
they were hands that had not fixed our crumbling home,
hands that had not taken us into them
and the fingers did not gently rub along our lips.
They were hands of a gypsy that filled our home   
with love and safety, for a moment;
with all the shambles of boards and empty stomachs,
they filled us because of the love in them.
Beyond the ordinary love, beyond the coordinated life,   
beyond the sponging of broken hearts,
came the untimely word, the fallen smile, the quiet tear,
that made us grow up quick and romantic.
Papa gave us something: when we paused from work,
my sister fourteen years old working the cotton fields,
my brother and I running like deer,
we would pause, because we had a papa no one could catch,
who spoke when he spoke and bragged and drank,
he bragged about us: he did not say we were smart,
nor did he say we were strong and were going to be rich someday.   
He said we were good. He held us up to the world for it to see,
three children that were good, who understood love in a quiet way,
who owned nothing but calloused hands and true freedom,
and that is how he made us: he offered us to the wind,
to the mountains, to the skies of autumn and spring.
He said, “Here are my children! Care for them!”
And he left again, going somewhere like a child
with a warrior’s heart, nothing could stop him.
My grandmother would look at him for a long time,
and then she would say nothing.
She chose to remain silent, praying each night,
guiding down like a root in the heart of earth,
clutching sunlight and rains to her ancient breast.
And I am the blossom of many nights.
A threefold blossom: my sister is as she is,
my brother is as he is, and I am as I am.
Through sacred ceremony of living, daily living,
arose three distinct hopes, three loves,
out of the long felt nights and days of yesterday.


^^EOP^^

The Crow call this time of year the Black Cherry Moon
when the rose hips are blood-bright,
spattered on their overwrought stems, and the creek
calls so clearly in words almost our own
as we come sliding down the bank.
Last night, we covered the gardens in plastic.
The chickadees were back after their wide diet of summer.
We ate the last trout, its spine curved from disease.
So much can go wrong, I want to know
what you will promise me as our hands reach in and in
through the copper, the carmine leaves.
I know you are lonely, alone with your grief
for your parents who are not my parents, for your life,
which, despite all, is not my life. The cherries
are thick here, hanging in clusters, purple-black from frost.
It started to rain and I am chilled by it.
Each day, we promise, we will talk of our fears
of intimacy, how we still expect to be hurt when we love.
You bring me a coat from the back of the truck,
but I want to stop our task now, to sit in the cab
of the truck while the gray spills, slick with thunder.
What if I kissed you there in depth.
After so many years, I can misunderstand the difference
between instinct and obligation, how my hand
continues to grasp the stems. Keats said
poems should come easy as leaves off the trees,
but see how they cling and wrestle with their ties.
And now, the sun shines. It is not this grace
I had imagined. When Keats said poems, I meant   
love. The chokecherries roll easily
into my palm, then fall into the plastic bag that binds
my writs. Over and over, until we have enough,
until our fingers are bruised with their dark juices.


^^EOP^^

It ever was allow’d, dear Madam,   
Ev’n from the days of father Adam,   
Of all perfection flesh is heir to,   
Fair patience is the gentlest virtue;
This is a truth our grandames teach,   
Our poets sing, and parsons preach;   
Yet after all, dear Moll, the fact is   
We seldom put it into practice;   
I’ll warrant (if one knew the truth)   
You’ve call’d me many an idle youth,   
And styled me rude ungrateful bear,   
Enough to make a parson swear.    
      I shall not make a long oration   
      In order for my vindication,   
      For what the plague can I say more   
      Than lazy dogs have done before;   
      Such stuff is nought but mere tautology,   
      And so take that for my apology.    
First then for custards, my dear Mary,   
The produce of your dainty dairy,   
For stew’d, for bak’d, for boil’d, for roast,   
And all the teas and all the toast;   
With thankful tongue and bowing attitude,   
I here present you with my gratitude:   
Next for you apples, pears and plums   
Acknowledgment in order comes;   
For wine, for ale, for fowl, for fish—for   
Ev’n all one’s appetite can wish for:   
But O ye pens, and O ye pencils,   
And all ye scribbling utensils,   
Say in what words and in what metre,
Shall unfeign’d admiration greet her,   
For that rich banquet so refin’d   
Her conversation gave the mind;   
The solid meal of sense and worth,   
Set off by the desert of mirth;   
Wit’s fruit and pleasure’s genial bowl,   
And all the joyous flow of soul;   
For these, and every kind ingredient   
That form’d your love—your most obedient.


^^EOP^^

I tell you, hopeless grief is passionless;  That only men incredulous of despair,  Half-taught in anguish, through the midnight air  Beat upward to God’s throne in loud access  Of shrieking and reproach. Full desertness,  In souls as countries, lieth silent-bare  Under the blanching, vertical eye-glare  Of the absolute heavens. Deep-hearted man, express  Grief for thy dead in silence like to death—  Most like a monumental statue set  In everlasting watch and moveless woe  Till itself crumble to the dust beneath.  Touch it; the marble eyelids are not wet:  If it could weep, it could arise and go. 


^^EOP^^




“The Knights of the Joyous Venture”—Puck of Pook’s Hill



What is a woman that you forsake her,
And the hearth-fire and the home-acre,
To go with the old grey Widow-maker? 
She has no house to lay a guest in—
But one chill bed for all to rest in,
That the pale suns and the stray bergs nest in. 
She has no strong white arms to fold you,
But the ten-times-fingering weed to hold you—
Out on the rocks where the tide has rolled you. 
Yet, when the signs of summer thicken,
And the ice breaks, and the birch-buds quicken,
Yearly you turn from our side, and sicken— 
Sicken again for the shouts and the slaughters.
You steal away to the lapping waters,
And look at your ship in her winter-quarters. 
You forget our mirth, and talk at the tables,
The kine in the shed and the horse in the stables—
To pitch her sides and go over her cables. 
Then you drive out where the storm-clouds swallow,
And the sound of your oar-blades, falling hollow,
Is all we have left through the months to follow. 
Ah, what is Woman that you forsake her,
And the hearth-fire and the home-acre,
To go with the old grey Widow-maker ?


^^EOP^^

I am four in this photograph, standing   
on a wide strip of Mississippi beach,   
my hands on the flowered hips 
of a bright bikini. My toes dig in,   
curl around wet sand. The sun cuts   
the rippling Gulf in flashes with each    
tidal rush. Minnows dart at my feet
glinting like switchblades. I am alone
except for my grandmother, other side    
of the camera, telling me how to pose.   
It is 1970, two years after they opened   
the rest of this beach to us,    
forty years since the photograph   
where she stood on a narrow plot   
of sand marked colored, smiling, 
her hands on the flowered hips   
of a cotton meal-sack dress.


^^EOP^^

Put my glad rags in a cardboard box—
This old jiggerboo never grew mature.
Is everthing in its place except me?
Don’t be surprised; I called all day 
And the only person I could reach was
The operator; and it’s a sorry day when
Nothing is coming down but your foot.
And how deep is your stomach cause 
That’s how far your heart will fall!
When I’m gone I might come back cause
I’m always forgetting something special.
A crease in my overalls, my collar stiff, 
I cried as many tears as I have teeth.
And I only got two in my mouth. Son of the
Sun look out: as you get black you burn.
Is everything in its place except me?


^^EOP^^

                                            REDThe skim on the surface of your soup, or the cut on your platein the Café des Anges, juices swamping the willow-pattern skiffas she dabs her mouth with her napkin, your blind, blind date,leaving a smudge, lipstick-and-gore, though there’s still a wormof gristle in the gap between her teeth.Mood music, candlelight, wine, low voices in a world of harm,   the creature brought down, hindquarters heavy, hind legsbroken by the dogs, its head held up, eyes wide,the tangle and drag as a gralloch knife unpegsthe bulk, all slippage and seepage, and the way she thumbsa morsel into your mouth, or smiles your smileback at you, lets you know that everything’s just as it seems,then back at the small hotel, she strips off quicker than youmight have hoped, pink as a new-skinned cat, all too eager to have you by heart. Her cry tells you nothing new.

^^EOP^^

You are for me as you cannot beFor yourself, chaos without demandTo speak, the amethyst nothingHidden inside the trinket shop’s stone,Dark eyes dark asterisks where lightFootnotes a margin left blank. YouDon’t look up to look up at the sky. Your ears parenthesize nothingThat occurs, that I keep from occurring,In the poem, on the page, as you areFor me, not a shadow, but a shadeWhose darkness drops from no objectBut is itself yourself, a form of timeSpanning nothing, never is your name. 

^^EOP^^

We can never be with loss too long.Behind the warped door that sticks,the wood thrush calls to the monks,pausing upon the stone crucifix,singing: “I am marvelous alone!”Thrash, thrash goes the hayfield:rows of marrow and bone undone.The horizon’s flashing fastens tight,sealing the blue hills with vermilion.Moss dyes a squirrel’s skull green.The cemetery expands its borders—little milky crosses grow like teeth.How kind time is, altering spaceso nothing stays wrong; and light,more new light, always arrives.

^^EOP^^




If thy own hand . . . offend thee      —Matthew 18:8



Self-hatred? No, no dear: that seems inflated—chagrin: the shame you feel when friends withdrawfor reasons they leave tactfully unstated,leaving you to guess at your faux pasFrom all you did and didn’t say for ages,as in some vast congressional report,your sin, at last, is lost among the pages;a snow of detail cuts inquiry short.In downtown windows where late sunlight glares,you see yourself, as if you’d never met.Who is this rumpled lookalike who wearsa blouse like yours, the armpits dark with sweat?Your eighth grade diary still makes you cringesaved—for what?—that you might now despisepages time has lent a jaundiced tingepouring forth their daisy-dotted 

^^EOP^^

Now I can see: even the trees 

^^EOP^^

We are dropping one and gaining two—.The things I cannot doinclude to sleep,to calm the spillway of the blood,to face an auditorium,wishing it were churchy pillbox hats—recital mothers’—with no sense of Vogue or the Baroque.I’ve other pillsto tramp on grief, estrange pain,and hatch the part of waking that is dreams,double one dose to un-depressand to write less and lessa chronicle of anxiety.I spot-treata spate of addictionin this faint dusk world of peach sky and plum leaflets—a woman in her prime,pilled together.

^^EOP^^

On opening a long unopened book,what odor rises from the parting pages,what genie is released, what dark spell broken,as if some spirit trapped inside for ages,By this hinge swung open were set free?My father’s hand has jotted in the marginsits own blunt text of what must belecture notes, and planted his place markerLike a flag among “The Dry Salvages”—a UC

^^EOP^^

If you sleep the night inside someone, her cells,saltwater-stained, fuse with yours like the blood of twins. Apes in Mauritania grow stronger, Galileo tells us, influenced by the sphere of angels. Here, then—thumbnail sketches for zoning changes along the riparian bankof the species boundary, for a chimera. Like fiber optics, human nerveslay along glassy bone 

^^EOP^^

Now and againI am here nowAnd now is whenI’m here again

^^EOP^^

I am the people—the mob—the crowd—the mass.
Do you know that all the great work of the world is done through me?
I am the workingman, the inventor, the maker of the world’s food and clothes.
I am the audience that witnesses history. The Napoleons come from me and the Lincolns. They die. And then I send forth more Napoleons and Lincolns.
I am the seed ground. I am a prairie that will stand for much plowing. Terrible storms pass over me. I forget. The best of me is sucked out and wasted. I forget. Everything but Death comes to me and makes me work and give up what I have. And I forget.
Sometimes I growl, shake myself and spatter a few red drops for history to remember. Then—I forget.
When I, the People, learn to remember, when I, the People, use the lessons of yesterday and no longer forget who robbed me last year, who played me for a fool—then there will be no speaker in all the world say the name: “The People,” with any fleck of a sneer in his voice or any far-off smile of derision.
The mob—the crowd—the mass—will arrive then.


^^EOP^^

Eyes that spurn yet inviteLike spikes in the sunlightOf Manhattan’s high-rise—Babylon’s ladies outshineDaughters of Jerusalem,Zion is no easy climb

^^EOP^^

Fat bed, lick the black cat in my mouth each morning. Unfasten all the bones that make a head, and let me rest: unknown among the oboe-throated geese gone south  to drop their down and sleep beside the out- 

^^EOP^^

As was my custom, I’d risen a full hour before the house had woken to make surethat everything was in order with The Lie,his drip changed and his shackles all secure.I was by then so practiced in this choreI’d counted maybe thirteen years or moresince last I’d felt the urge to meet his eye.Such, I liked to think, was our rapport.I was at full stretch to test some ligaturewhen I must have caught a ragged thread, and tore his gag away; though as he made no cry,I kept on with my checking as before.

^^EOP^^

Must I, in this question I am asking, include myselfAsking it? Must I include my face—My face that I cannot see—through which I speakThis question about my eyes, about the fieldOf vision, in which my hands press down these lettersUnattached to my arms? The sunlightComes in the window and lights up my handsAs they work. The world is not being kindBut there is the sensation of kindness. There is an appeal to a rule when we realize a termBehaves uncomfortably. God falls down Into grammar and says 

^^EOP^^

What was it for the longest time but lore, lure;A heard-tell growing gold in the mind.Word said (and word’d spread) it was well on backThrough the underwood by Bowen’s Canal.

^^EOP^^

What needs my Shakespeare for his honoured bones,The labor of an age in pilèd stones,Or that his hallowed relics should be hid   Under a star-ypointing pyramid? Dear son of Memory, great heir of fame, What need’st thou such weak witness of thy name?Thou in our wonder and astonishment Hast built thyself a live-long monument. For whilst to th’ shame of slow-endeavouring art,   Thy easy numbers flow, and that each heart   Hath from the leaves of thy unvalued book Those Delphic lines with deep impression took,   Then thou, our fancy of itself bereaving,   Dost make us marble with too much conceiving; And so sepúlchred in such pomp dost lie,That kings for such a tomb would wish to die.


^^EOP^^

Ancients threw the masks down the cenote—the faces smashed first in little ways before the long drop, an eye or an ear broken, a mouth snapped in half. Then, lifted from the well, two thousand years later, still grinning and golden. The loose spooling of two people fast unravels—how we let go of time spent, how heat fades, how a body forgets fully what it knew. I have learned your face as you will never.The third day we met you gave me all your secrets until I held an ocean in a cradle. Now all I ask for is more.

^^EOP^^

Let’s make believeI am happy, I laughBlack poison, all of meIts bottleful,Become sparkling water

^^EOP^^

Achilles slays the man who slayed his friend, pierces the corpsebehind the heels and drags itbehind his chariot like the cans that traila bride and groom. Then he lays outa banquet for his men, oxen and goatsand pigs and sheep; the soldiers eatuntil a greasy moonbeam lights their beards.The first slaughter is for victory, but the second slaughter is for grief—

^^EOP^^

A moth lies open and lieslike an old bleached beech leaf,a lean-to between window frame and sill. Its death protects a collection of tinier deaths and other dirts beneath.Although the white paint is water-stained, on it death is dirt, and hapless.The just-severed tiger lily is drinking its glass of water, I hope.This hope is sere.This hope is severe.What you ruin ruins you, tooand so you hope for favor.I mean I do.The underside of a ladybug wanders the window. I wanderthe continent, my undercarriage not as evident,so go more perilously, it seems to me.But I am only me; to you it seems clearI mean to disappear, and am meanand project on you some ancient fear.If I were a bug, I hope I wouldn’t bethis giant winged thing, spindly like a crane fly,skinny-legged like me, kissing the cold ceiling, fumbling for the face of the other, seeking.It came in with me last night when I turned on the light.I lay awake, afraid it would touch my face.It wants out. I want out, too.

^^EOP^^

I think of the man who satbehind my grandmother’s sisterin church and told herthe percentage of Indian in her blood, calling it outover the white pews.I wonder what madehim want to count it like coins or a grade.I wish I could hear himnow when I think of hersaying that all the Wampanoag bloodin her body wouldfit in one finger,discounting the percentageit seemed, but why was she such a historian, tracingthe genealogy of the lastWampanoag up to her ownchildren, typing it all on see-throughpaper? Maybe like meshe felt a little self-consciouscaring about whatwe’re made of instead of simply beingsatisfied dressingour bodies and drivingthem around. Maybe she felt shyfor loving someoneshe’d never met, I meanI do. I think of the knife cutting into flesh and the fork carrying it 

^^EOP^^




For John Thornton



Fellow fugitiveForgive yourselfAnd me therebyThus we can liveWhatever’s leftOf time for us,Each day a giftWe take on trust

^^EOP^^

White hail pelting the frozen bog,I’m stuck in the first line of January,following my host’s dogon his walk through the stone century,around the quarry, slices of marble and mud,past a herd of miners exhaling smoke,past a barn smelling of merde,and back to where I’m stuck and broke.The fucking dog barks at the night,mad at the stars all his life and then again.I rethink kicking him out,but being cool, I let him in.

^^EOP^^

No, no! Go from me. I have left her lately.
I will not spoil my sheath with lesser brightness,   
For my surrounding air hath a new lightness;
Slight are her arms, yet they have bound me straitly   
And left me cloaked as with a gauze of æther;   
As with sweet leaves; as with subtle clearness.   
Oh, I have picked up magic in her nearness
To sheathe me half in half the things that sheathe her.   
No, no! Go from me. I have still the flavour,   
Soft as spring wind that’s come from birchen bowers.   
Green come the shoots, aye April in the branches,
As winter’s wound with her sleight hand she staunches,   
Hath of the trees a likeness of the savour:
As white their bark, so white this lady’s hours.


^^EOP^^




For Russ



I’ll tell you, if you really want to know:remember that day you lost two years agoat the rockpool where you sat and played the jewelerwith all those stones you’d stolen from the shore?Most of them went dark and nothing more,but sometimes one would blink the secret colorit had locked up somewhere in its stony sleep.This is how you knew the ones to keep.So I collect the dull things of the dayin which I see some possibilitybut which are dead and which have the surpriseI don’t know, and I’ve no pool to help me tell—so I look at them and look at them untilone thing makes a mirror in my eyesthen I paint it with the tear to make it bright.This is why I sit up through the night.

^^EOP^^

I am a student of wrens. When the mother bird returns to her brood, beak squirming with winged breakfast, a shrill clamor rises like jingling from tiny, high-pitched bells. Who’d have guessed such a small house contained so many voices? The sound they make is the pure sound of life’s hunger. Who hangs our house in the world’s branches, and listens when we sing from our hunger? Because I love best those songs that shake the house of the singer, I am a student of wrens.


^^EOP^^

Some day, when trees have shed their leaves
     And against the morning’s white
The shivering birds beneath the eaves
     Have sheltered for the night,
We’ll turn our faces southward, love,
     Toward the summer isle
Where bamboos spire the shafted grove
     And wide-mouthed orchids smile. 
And we will seek the quiet hill
     Where towers the cotton tree,
And leaps the laughing crystal rill,
     And works the droning bee.
And we will build a cottage there
     Beside an open glade,
With black-ribbed blue-bells blowing near,
     And ferns that never fade.


^^EOP^^

When I know you are coming home
I put on this necklace:
glass beads on a silken thread,
a blue that used to match my eyes.
I like to think I am remembering you.
I like to think you don’t forget. 
The necklace lies heavy on my skin,
it clatters when I reach down
to lift my screaming child.
I swing her, roll her in my arms until she forgets.
The beads glitter in the flicker of a TV set
as I sit her on my lap
and wish away the afternoon. 
I wait until I hear a gate latch lift
the turn of key in lock.
I sit amongst toys and unwashed clothes,
I sit and she fingers the beads until you speak
in a voice that no longer seems familiar, only strange.
I turn as our child tugs at the string.
I hear a snap and a sound like falling rain.


^^EOP^^

All dark morning long the clouds are rising slowly up
beneath us, and we are fast asleep.
The mountains unmove 
intensely. And so do we. Meadows
look down. 
A city there looks up and
stirs a little. Adrift the rolling tiled roofs of
buildings, the deadly 
trains of grinding sand and morning—
a spy unfolds his paper, 
the coffee’s served. 
A bride and groom stand shivering on a tarmac
in the mist, and
they are happy. Each one 
and all of us entangled, the room is moist with us,
the house unfinished, windowless, 
and we are fast asleep. 
The brother of the groom can’t get
close enough. He leans against the brightest ridge
and ladder, the sucking 
sound of memory
as heaven picks up speed and 
hurtles through his burning skin
its frozen blankets
to the sun.


^^EOP^^

Nothing remained: Nothing, the wanton name
That nightly I rehearsed till led away
To a dark sleep, or sleep that held one dream. 
In this a huge contagious absence lay,
More space than space, over the cloud and slime,
Defined but by the encroachments of its sway. 
Stripped to indifference at the turns of time,
Whose end I knew, I woke without desire,
And welcomed zero as a paradigm. 
But now it breaks—images burst with fire
Into the quiet sphere where I have bided,
Showing the landscape holding yet entire: 
The power that I envisaged, that presided
Ultimate in its abstract devastations,
Is merely change, the atoms it divided 
Complete, in ignorance, new combinations.
Only an infinite finitude I see
In those peculiar lovely variations. 
It is despair that nothing cannot be
Flares in the mind and leaves a smoky mark
Of dread.
               Look upward. Neither firm nor free, 
Purposeless matter hovers in the dark.


^^EOP^^

The snail pushes through a green
night, for the grass is heavy
with water and meets over
the bright path he makes, where rain
has darkened the earth’s dark. He
moves in a wood of desire, 
pale antlers barely stirring
as he hunts. I cannot tell
what power is at work, drenched there
with purpose, knowing nothing.
What is a snail’s fury? All
I think is that if later 
I parted the blades above
the tunnel and saw the thin
trail of broken white across
litter, I would never have
imagined the slow passion
to that deliberate progress.


^^EOP^^

Terror is not – Ed –
sitting in one’s piss.
I know – I’ve sat there – 
I’ve slept there and did
most of my childhood.
That was warmth – in fact – 
and comfort – in spite
of the unconcealed
unconcealable 
smell. Terror? That was
and always will be
Mother cursing Dad 
and there there I am
alone in that night
hearing that door slam.


^^EOP^^

Here, she said, put this on your head.
She handed me a hat. You ’bout as white as your dad,
and you gone stay like that.

^^EOP^^




1978-1979
for Vincent Woodard



It is not just my problem. It belongs
to us all. I have been cajoled into
coming to the emergency room where
everything scares me. Black folk
shoot and cut each other until they end
here where guards have guns. I refuse
to be taken upstairs and locked away.
I was trying to think of a poem. It got me
to this place. With my mother, I stand
against the wall, guards on either side.
They have guns, and this is my mother.
It is now everybody’s problem. A bird
is singing in my hair, more important
than Thorazine. My head is a tree
stretching its leaves to burn in the sun.
They say if I make a treaty to take
the medicine, I can leave with my family
since my family is crazy. I look at the guns
on the hips of the guards and know I must
be as still and quiet as death or this will
turn into psychosis as sick as nightmares.
I am angry that they would have me here
with my mother, angry at white doctors.
I am in a whale in the ocean. Who can
swim out to me? Who can cast a line?
If I take out the first guard by breaking
his neck, I can protect my mother, but
it is more important that we are all now
underwater, inside a whale who laughs.
Later the therapist they say likes me
keeps talking about the appointment.
She is doing something subliminal with
the word “come,” repeating, repeating.
She leans to me when she says it.
It bothers me that such people think
crazy people are stupid, but it is more
important that my head is a tree
with a bird singing in it inside a whale
in the ocean. The most important thing
of all is that this whale that ate us
likes to laugh a lot. He has the blues.


^^EOP^^

The way she puts her fingers to his chest when she greets him. 
The way an old man quiets himself, 
or that another man waits, and waits a long time, before speaking.
It’s in the gaze that steadies, a music 
he grows into—something about
Mexico, I imagine, how he first learned about light there. 
It’s in the blank face of every child,
a water that stands still amid the swirling current, 
water breaking apart as it leaves the cliff and falls forever
through its own, magnificient window. 
The way a young woman holds out a cupped hand, and doves come to her. 
The way a man storms down the street as if to throw open every door. 
And the word she mouths to herself as she looks up from her book—for
that word, as she repeats it, 
repeats it.


^^EOP^^

I wake up cold, I who
Prospered through dreams of heat   
Wake to their residue,   
Sweat, and a clinging sheet.    
My flesh was its own shield:   
Where it was gashed, it healed. 
I grew as I explored   
The body I could trust   
Even while I adored
The risk that made robust, 
A world of wonders in
Each challenge to the skin. 
I cannot but be sorry
The given shield was cracked,
My mind reduced to hurry,   
My flesh reduced and wrecked. 
I have to change the bed,   
But catch myself instead 
Stopped upright where I am   
Hugging my body to me   
As if to shield it from   
The pains that will go through me,
         
As if hands were enough   
To hold an avalanche off.


^^EOP^^

Nightmare of beasthood, snorting, how to wake.
I woke. What beasthood skin she made me take? 
Leathery toad that ruts for days on end,
Or cringing dribbling dog, man’s servile friend, 
Or cat that prettily pounces on its meat,
Tortures it hours, then does not care to eat: 
Parrot, moth, shark, wolf, crocodile, ass, flea.
What germs, what jostling mobs there were in me. 
    These seem like bristles, and the hide is tough.
No claw or web here: each foot ends in hoof. 
Into what bulk has method disappeared?
Like ham, streaked. I am gross—grey, gross, flap-eared. 
The pale-lashed eyes my only human feature.
My teeth tear, tear. I am the snouted creature 
That bites through anything, root, wire, or can.
If I was not afraid I’d eat a man. 
Oh a man’s flesh already is in mine.
Hand and foot poised for risk. Buried in swine. 
    I root and root, you think that it is greed,
It is, but I seek out a plant I need. 
Direct me gods, whose changes are all holy,
To where it flickers deep in grass, the moly: 
Cool flesh of magic in each leaf and shoot,
From milky flower to the black forked root. 
From this fat dungeon I could rise to skin
And human title, putting pig within. 
I push my big grey wet snout through the green,
Dreaming the flower I have never seen.


^^EOP^^

Posterity, this me is Now—
Record this Now. Virginia, 1705
Not always settled. I am settled
Over history’s yellow pages, blank
Pages, must I write my old dark
Thoughts: Does time mask or unmask
Mind? This sweet almond now
In my mouth as in their mouths
Then, sweet in its rind, but silent
I think: I am blood at oak, my hand
A blood petal unfurled over oak,
My desk, my wooded den, a pistil,
A pen. Believe me: I speak honest
And true.  First. 
Economy ravishing and jealous
In woods, the virgin woods.
Sap is sweet so sap quarrels
On the tongue. What is worth
Worth? Sap sweet so sap ambers;
In the virgin woods none can cut
The profit from the tongue. Amber
Gold so gold whispers at the edge
Of each, our minds. The Natives
Wear skins on skin; the women
Bare their breasts and do not
Blush. Was she a King’s daughter?
She walked below the branches;
The sun thin in silken lines
The sated spiders left. Her brothers
Showed us what seeds to sow.
Glass beads contain light, a miracle
To trade. Her skin a syrup
Tone, the beads gold against her
Wrist glowed. Midnight her crown
Of hair plaited with one strand
Of gold, thin as day’s edge when dusk
Both dulls and hones that glow.
“We’ll barter it.” Her brother feels
Cheated when we offer a bolt
Less of wool than he asks. Write it
Down. Profit in black ink. They close
Their eyes, quick as bark blinks
Down dark on axe’s silver bite,
When the deal is done. The ledger’s
Honest, “I am a liar. Be aware.”  Then. 
Pluck the withered gold at hand,
The pumpkin leaves yellow,
Sere and dust. Neglect the acre.
Let the green aphids multiply
And suck. We teethed our vision:
A yellow sort of isinglass dust,
Sunlit in silt, under the water
Of our stream. The squash blossom
Closed its eye; we squinted to see
Beneath the stream. That summer
We fed our hearts on dust. We grew
Dust in gardens. We grew rich
Until the gold sheen disclosed
It was but gilded dust. We lived
Some time on mussel, crab, berry,
Those fruits of the wild earth. No one
Spoke the word “starving.” We were
Forced to be content with what fell
Just in our mouths.  Earlier Than First. 
Thought in the forest speaks
A wooden chorus. My own voice
Multiplied the almond by the pine. Roanoke, 1588. Repaired the houses
Now grown up with weeds.
We make wooden houses. How quiet
One voice, mumbling verses out
The wilderness, by the fire
In the corner. Bibles clothed in skin
As the Natives come clothed. Exodus
A comfort: to be chosen, safe,
God spoke in smoke by day, in light
By night. A manna faith—of manna. 
When Mr. White arrived, late August
1590,

^^EOP^^

I see myself in the shadows of a leaf
compressed to the green blades growing
to a point like the shards of miles of mirrors
falling and cracking to perfect gardens. 
I never inspect the withered assumption
of my face’s petty dialogue in raindrops,
the deceptive spreading of the words
oozing from the skin to the edges of water
etched on the ground by gravity and wishing. 
Passing for the seriousness of my eye,
platitudes of my white collar or
the perfect posture of my lips, it skirts
from the leaves of the plant hiding me
and sits stoic like stone in my pupil,
mute and unassuming, like Rashi. 
To gather myself I will swim naked
in the wind, bending my blind elbows
in circles, stopping now to dance
like the cherubic gold on the ark,
and gather myself from the particles
of this excitement another structure,
one closely resembling the beginning.


^^EOP^^

Far down, down through the city’s great gaunt gut
      The gray train rushing bears the weary wind;
In the packed cars the fans the crowd’s breath cut,
      Leaving the sick and heavy air behind.
And pale-cheeked children seek the upper door
      To give their summer jackets to the breeze;
Their laugh is swallowed in the deafening roar
      Of captive wind that moans for fields and seas;
Seas cooling warm where native schooners drift
      Through sleepy waters, while gulls wheel and sweep,
Waiting for windy waves the keels to lift
      Lightly among the islands of the deep;
Islands of lofty palm trees blooming white
      That led their perfume to the tropic sea,
Where fields lie idle in the dew-drenched night,
      And the Trades float above them fresh and free.


^^EOP^^

The world is full of mostly invisible things,
And there is no way but putting the mind’s eye,
Or its nose, in a book, to find them out,
Things like the square root of Everest
Or how many times Byron goes into Texas,
Or whether the law of the excluded middle
Applies west of the Rockies. For these
And the like reasons, you have to go to school
And study books and listen to what you are told,
And sometimes try to remember. Though I don’t know
What you will do with the mean annual rainfall
On Plato’s Republic, or the calorie content
Of the Diet of Worms, such things are said to be
Good for you, and you will have to learn them
In order to become one of the grown-ups
Who sees invisible things neither steadily nor whole,
But keeps gravely the grand confusion of the world
Under his hat, which is where it belongs,
And teaches small children to do this in their turn.


^^EOP^^

What are they looking for
running to the summit of lost time?

^^EOP^^

When we are out of gas,
a headache haloes the roof,
darkening the skin of everyone who has a full tank. 
I was told that the nectar of shoelaces,
if squeezed hard enough,
turns to water and trickles from the caribou’s snout. 
A glacier nibbled from its center
spiders a story of the Southern Cross,
twin brothers
dancing in the back room lit with cigarettes
break through the drum’s soft skin—
      There bone faces atlas
            a grieving century.

^^EOP^^

      1
Is this writing mine
Whose name is this
Did I underline
What I was to miss? 
      2
An upheaval of leaves
Enlightens the tree
Rooted it receives   
Gusts on a spree 
      3
Beauty makes me sad
Makes me grieve
I see what I must leave 
      4
Scaffold, gallows
Do whose will
Who hallows wood
To build, kill 
      5
Blind man, anvil
No hammer strikes
Your eyes are spikes


^^EOP^^

This is the field where the battle did not happen,
where the unknown soldier did not die.
This is the field where grass joined hands,
where no monument stands,
and the only heroic thing is the sky. 
Birds fly here without any sound,
unfolding their wings across the open.
No people killed—or were killed—on this ground
hallowed by neglect and an air so tame
that people celebrate it by forgetting its name.


^^EOP^^

Here,     With my beer I sit, While golden moments flit:     Alas!     They pass Unheeded by: And, as they fly, I, Being dry,     Sit, idly sipping here     My beer.  O, finer far Than fame, or riches, are The graceful smoke-wreaths of this free cigar!     Why     Should I     Weep, wail, or sigh?     What if luck has passed me by? What if my hopes are dead,—  My pleasures fled?     Have I not still     My fill Of right good cheer,— Cigars and beer?      Go, whining youth,     Forsooth! Go, weep and wail, Sigh and grow pale,     Weave melancholy rhymes     On the old times, Whose joys like shadowy ghosts appear,—But leave me to my beer!     Gold is dross,—     Love is loss,—So, if I gulp my sorrows down, Or see them drown In foamy draughts of old nut-brown, Then do I wear the crown,     Without the cross!


^^EOP^^

Openly, yes,          With the naturalness          Of the hippopotamus or the alligator When it climbs out on the bank to experience the  Sun, I do these Things which I do, which please          No one but myself.  Now I breathe and now I am sub-          Merged; the blemishes stand up and shout when the object  In view was a Renaissance; shall I say          The contrary?  The sediment of the river which          Encrusts my joints, makes me very gray but I am used  To it, it may Remain there; do away          With it and I am myself done away with, for the          Patina of circumstance can but enrich what was  There to begin With.  This elephant skin          Which I inhabit, fibered over like the shell of          The coco-nut, this piece of black glass through which no light  Can filter—cut Into checkers by rut          Upon rut of unpreventable experience—          It is a manual for the peanut-tongued and the  Hairy toed.  Black But beautiful, my back          Is full of the history of power.  Of power?  What          Is powerful and what is not?  My soul shall never  Be cut into By a wooden spear; through-          Out childhood to the present time, the unity of          Life and death has been expressed by the circumference  Described by my Trunk; nevertheless, I          Perceive feats of strength to be inexplicable after          All; and I am on my guard; external poise, it  Has its centre Well nurtured—we know          Where—in pride, but spiritual poise, it has its centre where ?          My ears are sensitized to more than the sound of The wind.  I see And I hear, unlike the          Wandlike body of which one hears so much, which was made          To see and not to see; to hear and not to hear,  That tree trunk without   Roots, accustomed to shout          Its own thoughts to itself like a shell, maintained intact            By who knows what strange pressure of the  atmosphere; that    Spiritual   Brother to the coral          Plant, absorbed into which, the equable sapphire light          Becomes a nebulous green.  The I of each is to  The I of each, A kind of fretful speech          Which sets a limit on itself; the elephant is?          Black earth preceded by a tendril?  It is to that  Phenomenon The above formation,            Translucent like the atmosphere—a cortex merely—          That on which darts cannot strike decisively the first  Time, a substance Needful as an instance          Of the indestructibility of matter; it            Has looked at the electricity and at the earth-  Quake and is still Here; the name means thick.  Will          Depth be depth, thick skin be thick, to one who can see no          Beautiful element of unreason under it?


^^EOP^^

Their eggs are laid on lupine. Tiny jade
hairstreaks I could easily mistake for dew.
Too precious. Too incidental,
and besides that, blue, these trills that flounce
in my potato patch, drawn
from dryland origins to the domestic
stain of water from my hose.
What an old woman would study, I think
as you hand me the guidebook, distracted
by the replica of a parasol
growing out of a bleached cow pie.
The Siamese kitten with his butterfly eyes
comes running, his mouth full
of swallowtail, his breath smelling of borax
and sugar I have poured
over the ant hills in the garden.
He is young and intent on eating poison.
We bushwhack through Paradise,
what is there to say except to lament
the daily evidence of its passing.
How the common blues scatter from my shade.
And you, so fragile, so sick, so thin,
your diet restricted, keep pointing out
the bearded face of larkspur.
When the angels fell, a fifteenth-centruy bishop says,
there were 133, 306, 668 of them.
It takes us all afternoon to cross the field.
The body, it is so sad what happens to it.
If you fell, you would dry up instantly.
But these are not angel wings
who disguise themselves as leaf or shred of bark,
who are named after the stops
in meaning our language must make room for:
the comma whose wings look battered,
or the violet underside of the question mark.
To keep the mind from clenching, you say,
is the main thing. Even the most
beautiful days always seem to have death in them.
As Valentinus said; our fall into love and sleep.
You especially like the dark alpines
with their furred bodies and lack of marking.
And the sulphurs, yellowed scraps that fall
from a myth of origin that doesn’t include us.
When we find them, we will wonder
who is still alive. We speak of our souls with such
surface ease. But who will take such care for us?
You bend and bend to the scrappy blue sea,
your back turned to the moon fluttering above you.
I have been thinking so much of strength
this week, yours and mine, I mean,
the field of attention that can be strengthened.


^^EOP^^




Closed Mondays



is music    is men
off early from work    is waiting
for the chance at the chair
while the eagle claws holes
in your pockets    keeping
time    by the turning
of rusty fans    steel flowers with
cold breezes    is having nothing
better to do    than guess at the years
of hair    matted beneath the soiled caps
of drunks    the pain of running
a fisted comb through stubborn
knots    is the dark dirty low
down blues    the tender heads
of sons fresh from cornrows    all
wonder at losing    half their height
is a mother gathering hair    for good
luck    for a soft wig    is the round
difficulty of ears    the peach
faced boys asking Eddie
to cut in parts and arrows
wanting to have their names read
for just a few days    and among thin
jazz    is the quick brush of a done
head    the black flood around
your feet    grandfathers
stopping their games of ivory
dominoes    just before they reach the bone
yard    is winking widowers announcing cut it clean off    I’m through courting
and hair only gets in the way

^^EOP^^

How to explain my heroic courtesy? I feel
          that my body was inflated by a mischievous boy. 
Once I was the size of a falcon, the size of a lion,
          once I was not the elephant I find I am. 
My pelt sags, and my master scolds me for a botched
          trick. I practiced it all night in my tent, so I was 
somewhat sleepy. People connect me with sadness
          and, often, rationality. Randall Jarrell compared me 
to Wallace Stevens, the American poet. I can see it
          in the lumbering tercets, but in my mind 
I am more like Eliot, a man of Europe, a man
          of cultivation. Anyone so ceremonious suffers    
breakdowns. I do not like the spectacular experiments
          with balance, the high-wire act and cones. 
We elephants are images of humility, as when we
          undertake our melancholy migrations to die. 
Did you know, though, that elephants were taught
          to write the Greek alphabet with their hooves? 
Worn out by suffering, we lie on our great backs,
          tossing grass up to heaven—as a distraction, not a prayer. 
That’s not humility you see on our long final journeys:
          it’s procrastination. It hurts my heavy body to lie down.


^^EOP^^

A hackneyed burden, to a hackneyed air,— “I love thee only,—thou art wondrous fair!” Alas! the poets have worn the theme threadbare!  Can I not find some words less tame and old, To paint thy form and face of perfect mould, Thy dewy lips, thy hair of brown and gold?  Can I not sing in somewhat fresher strain The love I lavish and receive again,— The thrilling joy, so like to thrilling pain?  Can I not, by some metaphor divine, Describe the life I quaff like nectared wine In being thine, and knowing thou art mine?  Ah, no! this halting verse can naught express; No English words can half the truth confess, That have not all been rhymed to weariness!  So let me cease my scribbling for to-day, And maiden, turn thy lovely face this way,—Words will not do, but haply kisses may!


^^EOP^^

A telephone line goes cold;
birds tread it wherever it goes.
A farm back of a great plain
tugs an end of the line. 
I call that farm every year,
ringing it, listening, still;
no one is home at the farm,
the line gives only a hum. 
Some year I will ring the line
on a night at last the right one,
and with an eye tapered for braille
from the phone on the wall 
I will see the tenant who waits—
the last one left at the place;
through the dark my braille eye
will lovingly touch his face. 
“Hello, is Mother at home?” No one is home today.
“But Father—he should be there.” No one—no one is here. 
“But you—are you the one . . . ?”
Then the line will be gone
because both ends will be home:
no space, no birds, no farm. 
My self will be the plain,
wise as winter is gray,
pure as cold posts go
pacing toward what I know.


^^EOP^^

                    
                    
                    Several of my cousins lean up against the house, taking long drags
from the pack of Marlboros we share. We have always been this way
—addicted and generous. A pow wow tape plays from inside the open
garage where two old uncles are thinking to themselves in the safety
of its shadows. Our aunties are in the kitchen, preparing the boiled meat
and chokecherry soup and laughing about old jokes they still hang onto
because these things are a matter of survival. Outside, we ask about
who was driving around with who last night, where so-and-so got beat
up, whose girlfriend left him for someone else. (But she’ll go back to
him, we all think to ourselves.) Aunties carry the full pots and pans to the
picnic table, an uncle prays over our food in Assiniboine. We all want to
forget that we don’t understand this language, we spend lots of time
trying to forget in different ways. No one notices that the wild turnips
are still simmering in a pot on the stove.
                

^^EOP^^

Man, looking into the sea— taking the view from those who have as much right to it as you have it to yourself— it is human nature to stand in the middle of a thing but you cannot stand in the middle of this: the sea has nothing to give but a well excavated grave. The firs stand in a procession—each with an emerald turkey-foot at the top— reserved as their contours, saying nothing; repression, however, is not the most obvious characteristic of the sea; the sea is a collector, quick to return a rapacious look. There are others besides you who have worn that look— whose expression is no longer a protest; the fish no longer investigate them for their bones have not lasted; men lower nets, unconscious of the fact that they are desecrating a grave, and row quickly away—the blades of the oars   moving together like the feet of water-spiders as if there were no such thing as death. The wrinkles progress upon themselves in a phalanx—beautiful under networks of foam, and fade breathlessly while the sea rustles in and out of the seaweed; the birds swim through the air at top speed, emitting cat-calls as heretofore— the tortoise-shell scourges about the feet of the cliffs, in motion beneath them and the ocean, under the pulsation of light-houses and noise of bell-buoys, advances as usual, looking as if it were not that ocean in which dropped things are bound to sink— in which if they turn and twist, it is neither with volition nor consciousness.


^^EOP^^

I approached the luminous stranger who came to me
from darkness in a gown of lettuce leaves, in a velvet 
cloak of green that appeared at first another piece of dark,
but pulled apart into the glow-sphere that danced 
in swaying steps, the lucent majesty that slipped toward me
from the reigning silence black above my cage. 
Oh extravagant—and were my teeth too sharp to greet
or sharp enough? I do not understand now what was meant 
to happen and what was a mistake—but know the bursting,
the sickening snap of ecstasy wrenched back to the body 
and the green gown flung in crippled circles traced
like diagrams of wasting moons above my head—or portals 
to another world, I thought, but as I thought, the shriek
dissolved, the body crumpled from the air and landed 
on its side beneath the salt lick. All night I tended
the wasted skin and careful, brought it water, 
alfalfa, made a bed of cedar chips and tried to gather
molecules of breath that floated from the plant shelf. 
When I remembered morning, I began to cry, began to pray
for night to stay until the green took shape again 
and if that shape were gone, I prayed for night
to stay, to be held in the same forever-dark
 
in which I first looked up and saw the gentle body,
and saw the graceful swaying of the stranger coming   as if for me—now I do not know—but then,
as if for me, and all my loneliness gone.


^^EOP^^

and hue 
to have unheld a scale— 
silver dishes little mirrors on their chains— 
they go that way, This 
         and hoist 
It’s not like looking into a pool,
to let your intelligence run away with you 
Come back quarter size, apricot moon 
A changeling is a child who
appeared under cover
of the ordinary, in exchange 
The morning came
                  I have such pretty handwriting
                  no one said but I myself thought it
                  to myself so I matted it
                  like the grasses or a canvas or some
                  uncombed hair. It became a mess
                  which was the research of where things go. 
A child could figure it out 
if there is such a thing as “out” 
in the sense of being figured
               in 
the thinking was like Origami,
everyone folded out of birds, into specific 
kinds of birds
         I call you      
                            hickory 
                            category 
                            dot


^^EOP^^

The night the world was going to end
when we heard those explosions not far away
and the loudspeakers telling us
about the vast fires on the backwater
consuming undisclosed remnants
and warning us over and over
to stay indoors and make no signals
you stood at the open window
the light of one candle back in the room
we put on high boots to be ready
for wherever we might have to go
and we got out the oysters and sat
at the small table feeding them
to each other first with the fork
then from our mouths to each other
until there were none and we stood up
and started to dance without music
slowly we danced around and around
in circles and after a while we hummed
when the world was about to end
all those years all those nights ago


^^EOP^^




Esto no es realismo mágico



Dear Martín:
In Izalco, while Christ waits for Easter
in his glass tomb in the cathedral
a single long note is blown on a trumpet
en el parque central. Los perros flacco
forage at the feet of la gente.   
Los poetas mount the stage in a shower of rose petals
thrown by old ladies.   
The Mayor opens his arms wide.
In the audience are campesinos, hijitos, shopkeepers,
viejos, the town trauma surgeon, and a generous contigent
of la policia con pistolas, escopetas y M16s.
Solamente el volcán duerme esta noche.
Los perros flaccos jump into the big blue garbage cans.   
Martín, you will certainly believe this.   
Each poeta is introduced with a fireworks rocket.
Los perros flaccos jump out of the big blue garbage cans.
Poetas de Argentina, Taiwan, Guatemala, España,   
Peru, Nicaragua, France, Costa Rica, Brazil, Venezuela, Chile, y
Los Estados Unidas open their mouths.   
Out come pajaros, serpientes, y duendes,   
hombres, mujeres, y alquimistas with flasks of aether;
out come revolutionaries in diapers, ambassadors
in limousines of obsidian, the Virgin in a Madonna T-shirt,   
y los Indios with flutes made of thigh bones
and bombs made of skulls; out come
the dead dictators chained together by ectoplasm
swinging censors that emit the stink of money,
priests with rifles, nuns with giant beasts
whose names are forgotten hidden in the musk
of their habits; out come conquistadores on roller skates,
Moros in black on black motorcycles, Mad Max
with tattoos de los Maras Salvatruche.
When los poetas have finished, there are more fireworks.   
They are swarmed by hijitos, viejos y otros
wanting autographs. Their hands are as soft as their hearts.
Death does not hide here but lives among them dressed in
white lace with earrings rattling on her skull. Life does not hide
here but steps through irony as if it were the vanishing fog.


^^EOP^^

Save these words for a while because
of something they remind you of
although you cannot remember
what that is a sense that is part
dust and part the light of morning 
you were about to say a name
and it is not there I forget
them too I am learning to pray
to Perdita to whom I said
nothing at the time and now she
cannot hear me as far as I
know but the day goes on looking 
the names often change more slowly
than the meanings whole families
grow up in them and then are gone
into the anonymous sky
oh Perdita does the hope go on
after the names are forgotten 
and is the pain of the past done
when the calling has stopped and those
betrayals so long repeated
that they are taken for granted
as the shepherd does with the sheep


^^EOP^^

Today outside your prison I stand
and rattle my walking stick: Prisoners, listen;
you have relatives outside. And there are
thousands of ways to escape. 
Years ago I bent my skill to keep my
cell locked, had chains smuggled to me in pies,
and shouted my plans to jailers;
but always new plans occured to me,
or the new heavy locks bent hinges off,
or some stupid jailer would forget
and leave the keys. 
Inside, I dreamed of constellations—
those feeding creatures outlined by stars,
their skeletons a darkness between jewels,
heroes that exist only where they are not. 
Thus freedom always came nibbling my thought,
just as—often, in light, on the open hills—
you can pass an antelope and not know
and look back, and then—even before you see—
there is something wrong about the grass.
And then you see. 
That’s the way everything in the world is waiting. 
Now—these few more words, and then I’m
gone: Tell everyone just to remember
their names, and remind others, later, when we
find each other. Tell the little ones
to cry and then go to sleep, curled up
where they can. And if any of us get lost,
if any of us cannot come all the way—
remember: there will come a time when
all we have said and all we have hoped
will be all right. 
There will be that form in the grass.


^^EOP^^

Long after Ovid’s story of Philomela
      has gone out of fashion and after the testimonials
of Hafiz and Keats have been smothered in comment
      and droned dead in schools and after Eliot has gone home
from the Sacred Heart and Ransom has spat and consigned
      to human youth what he reduced to fairy numbers
after the name has become slightly embarrassing
      and dried skins have yielded their details and tapes have been
slowed and analyzed and there is nothing at all
      for me to say one nightingale is singing
nearby in the oaks where I can see nothing but darkness
      and can only listen and ride out on the long note’s
invisible beam that wells up and bursts from its
      unknown star on on on never returning
never the same never caught while through the small leaves
      of May the starlight glitters from its own journeys
once in the ancestry of this song my mother visited here
      lightning struck the locomotive in the mountains
it had never happened before and there were so many
      things to tell that she had just seen and would never
have imagined now a field away I hear another
      voice beginning and on the slope there is a third
not echoing but varying after the lives
      after the goodbyes after the faces and the light
after the recognitions and the touching and tears
      those voices go on rising if I knew I would hear
in the last dark that singing I know how I would listen


^^EOP^^

The nightclub’s neon light glows red with anxiety
as I wait on the turning lane. Cars blur past,
their headlights white as charcoal.
I trust each driver not to swerve. I trust each stranger
not to kill me and let me cross
the shadow of his smoky path.
Trust is all I have for patrons at the bar:
one man offers me a line, one man buys the kamikaze,
another drinks it. Yet another wraps his arm
around my waist. I trust him not to harm my body
as much as he expects his body to remain unharmed.
One man asks me to the dance floor, one asks me
to a second drink, another asks me home.
I dance, I drink, I follow.
I can trust a man without clothes.
Naked he conceals no weapons, no threat
but the blood in his erection. His bed unfamiliar,
only temporarily. Pillows without loyalty
absorb the weight of any man, betray
the scent of the men who came before.
I trust a stranger’s tongue to tell me
nothing valuable. It makes no promises
of truth or lies, it doesn’t swear commitments.
The stranger’s hands take their time exploring.
Undisguised, they do not turn to claws or pretend
artistic skill to draw configurations on my flesh. They
are only human hands with fingertips
unsentimental with discoveries, without nostalgia
for what they leave behind. I trust this stranger
not to stay inside me once he enters me.
I trust him to release me from the blame
of pleasure. The pain I exit with no greater
than the loneliness that takes me to the bar.
He says good night, I give him back
those words, taking nothing with me that is his.
The front door shuts behind me, the gravel
driveway ushers me away. The rearview mirror
loses sight of threshold, house, sidewalk, street.
Driving by the nightclub I pass a car
impatient on the turning lane. My hands are cold
and itch to swerve the wheel, to brand
his fender with the fury of my headlights.
But I let this stranger live
to struggle through the heat and sweat
of false affections, anonymous and
borrowed like the glass that washed my prints
to hold another patron’s drink.


^^EOP^^

                    
                    
                    I

   Here is your eye. Here are the alleles which give color to your eye, the mixed routes of reference, the million times more than anybody could ever be missed. Flock. The idea of flock. Hundreds of agitated birds swooping over the bridge. Our blessèd moments. Shapes of soft parts, a quantifiable relation to objects, we turn now to your vitreous humor. Shut the lights off, turn the meat down, cover your head. I started doing my duty. Graphs of a dancer’s movements. Ten sections of a neural issue. As from air to the cornea. Who in the person is larval or asexual. Who in the person will sit in. Hachure. A parallel walk. From one density to a different density. I was you, once. Come, come, under your skin. In the body receiving itself or its analogies. The my. The bow down before you. White pine to white pine. White pine to redwing to lantern fish.


   II

   She was full.

   She was full with it.


   III

   and then though

   through though


   and then through the loop just made


   IV

   Believe it or not I would swap his desire to see patterns gathering. Believe it or not we set off several long-haired bodies. Believe it or not that was the whole of our aestivation. Believe it or not stop talking about me as if I were not in the room. Pop open a new one. The developing figure was a monk bent over. Come allow us to see the sower sow. She contested the waters. Get thee behind. Something in her eye kept giving you the needle. Something in her eye kept falling out of line. Believe it or not three persons in one shadow. Believe it or not could you spare a mind. It clawed each thing as if a temporal sequence. It clawed each thing as if a temporal w/hole. Believe it or not six or eight ways of counting on your reticence. Believe it or not these long thin rods and the wider cones.
                

^^EOP^^

When we river,
blood fills cracks in bullet shells,
oars become fingers scratching windows into dawn,
and faces are stirred from mounds of mica. 
I notice the back isn’t as smooth anymore,
      the river crests at the moment of blinking;
its blood vessels stiffen and spear the drenched coat of flies
collecting outside the jaw. 
Night slows here,
      the first breath held back,
clenched like a tight fist in the arroyo under shattered glass.
But we still want to shake the oxygen loose from flypaper,
hack its veins,
divert its course,
      and reveal its broken back,  the illusion of a broken back.


^^EOP^^

After I found out that you were a sheep,
it was always afternoon, and I stood trembling
at the pasture fence, my hands full of dandelion
and the longer grasses. How could I call you 
to come near? We had no names and only
this place, this sun, the hill and its limitless sky
held together by your gentle outline as you leaned
toward tufts of grass. How beautiful you were, 
so still, so close to moving. I gathered
bouquets of clover, strung violets from the fence slats.
Sometimes I whispered, but the words disappeared
before I knew what they were or what they meant.    
Once I saw darkness. I remember my eyes were open
and there was nothing, only black, and my heart aching
as I felt for my face and I was still human. While I cried,
stars came and traced sheep in the sky and the voice that knew 
never spoke. I fell asleep mistaking the scent of hay
for your breath. To wake once from the sleep in which
you are held, in which your name emanates without utterance
from the being that cradles you—There is no other sleep. 
Now it is always afternoon. How can I call you
when we have no names? I search
for the clover and violets. There are always enough.
My shadow is always the same length and shaped 
with arms and legs. Between us, the distance of field is green
and exact; the sun gleams from its cloudless height—I know
that there is enough time, that there is always enough.   
Please. Come to me, remember me: undo this world.


^^EOP^^

Fifty was poignant, heavy pear
departs the tree and the poem
a sigh between branch and mulch.
But no more. Another decade,
I’m all song and scruff,
the mind’s hot wire threading joint to joint.
I’ll tell you straight out what I think,
no sweetener. Nor has Aphrodite left me
collapsed in a stairwell
and don’t you father-flirt me, girl.
This morning the world unbelts her robe,
rose fleshed and randy.
I like the rats that skitter
under the subway’s hot rails.   
The little black dog
who’s afraid of no one,
not even the dope dealer’s pitbulls.   
Montaigne said sickness
is God’s way of weaning us from life
but I don’t think yet. I like the way
soul clings to gristle like a newspaper
wrapped around a light pole in a storm.
Death’s a street away
walking parallel and at my pace. He gets a nod.


^^EOP^^

Timing’s everything. The vapor rises
high in the sky, tossing to and fro,
then freezes, suddenly, and crystalizes
into a perfect flake of miraculous snow.
For countless miles, drifting east above
the world, whirling about in a swirling free-
for-all, appearing aimless, just like love,
but sensing, seeking out, its destiny.
Falling to where the two young skaters stand,
hand in hand, then flips and dips and whips
itself about to ever-so-gently land,
a miracle, across her unkissed lips:
as he blocks the wind raging from the south,
leaning forward to kiss her lovely mouth.


^^EOP^^




after Thomas James



The strangers in the woods must mimic squirrels and crackle
with the undergrowth. They must not flinch at the cruelty
of breaking golden leaves with their feet, or of interring stones.
And like any of these deciduous trees in autumn they must be 
stingy with shadow and move deceptively across the sludge.
I listen to these strangers stirring with the evenings. I invent paths
for them to the soft edge of the lake. Each descent is as graceful
as a sinking ship, but less tragic somehow because these strangers 
don’t possess a lung. I cannot hear them breathe, yet the air
is all whispers, all sighs—the same ethereal muscle that rubs
the color off the foliage. I lost my way out of the woods on the night
every bird went south or numb. A plump rat snatched the moon 
and dragged it by the white rope of its tail. The strangers were
a cloak of silhouettes flattening against a trunk like bark.
I must have disappeared among them because the mouth I touched
was not my own and was cruelly closing in on someone’s rib. I carried 
such a bite on me, an arc of green and yellow on my side from the man
who said he loved me. In that darkness I knew as much about him
as I did of the amputee swimming his way up the hill with his
only arm. So this is the home of the unturned stone where 
the fugitive keeps his kiss! Archeologists will discover a paradise
in the place no touch died of neglect. Is it any wonder all things
forgotten or abandoned find their way here? The winter is back, so too
the bloated body of a book I tossed over the bridge last week. 
And there on the bench, is my old smoking habit, a cigarette
glowing on my mouth like a beacon. I’m patient, waiting for the fugitive
to claim me as his own. I’m as wise as any stranger here, alone but with
the knowledge that the grief of separation is always brief.


^^EOP^^

I 
Near Lion, 
       Bliss mimes. 
Shy.  Fish hat, two bandaids. 
       pith : flee 
cat light 
fat cloak   
                                       Dear Orion,    
                                              This rhymes. 
                                       I.  Wish that, you had stayed. 
                                              with : me 
                                       that night 
                                       that broke   
      2 
Hear Why an 
    oar slides 
off the boat. 
See thin 
blue chance 
hum there a fourth 
in rows.   
                                       Dear Orion 
                                           More rhymes. 
                                       Cough.  A throat. 
                                       Begin 
                                       to dance 
                                       somewhere the north 
                                       wind blows.   
      3 
Clear My One 
    clogged throat. 
Reverse rhyme. 
Switch surface, 
depth.  Carry across 
the two 
of me, from 
you, or 
you. 
                                       Dear Orion 
                                           Bog, moat. 
                                       Perverse sign. 
                                       Hitch surfeit, 
                                       step. Wary of dross 
                                       a new 
                                       love she, some 
                                       clue. For, 
                                       to.   
       I 
Steer Me 
       Bliss chimes. 
Why, dish-flat 
too bad, frayed. 
       Flint sea. 
Sad height 
at float 
                                       Dear She 
                                              This rhymes. 
                                       I, wish-that 
                                       you had, stayed. 
                                              With me. 
                                       That night 
                                       that broke


^^EOP^^

Comet of stillness princess of what is over
       high note held without trembling without voice without sound
aura of complete darkness keeper of the kept secrets
       of the destroyed stories the escaped dreams the sentences
never caught in words warden of where the river went
       touch of its surface sibyl of the extinguished
window onto the hidden place and the other time
       at the foot of the wall by the road patient without waiting
in the full moonlight of autumn at the hour when I was born
       you no longer go out like a flame at the sight of me
you are still warmer than the moonlight gleaming on you
       even now you are unharmed even now perfect
as you have always been now when your light paws are running
       on the breathless night on the bridge with one end I remember you
when I have heard you the soles of my feet have made answer
       when I have seen you I have waked and slipped from the calendars
from the creeds of difference and the contradictions
       that were my life and all the crumbling fabrications
as long as it lasted until something that we were
       had ended when you are no longer anything
let me catch sight of you again going over the wall
       and before the garden is extinct and the woods are figures
guttering on a screen let my words find their own
       places in the silence after the animals


^^EOP^^

Blessed are the marble breasts of Venus,
those ancient miracles, for they are upright and milk white
and they point above the heads of the crowd in the casino.
Blessed are the crowds that play, and whose reflections
sway in the polish of her eggshell eyes,
for they circle like birds around the games,
and they are beautiful and helpless.
Bless the fast glances that handle the waitress,
bless her miniskirt toga and the flame-gold scotch,
and bless the gamblers who gaze at the stage.
Remember also the dancer and remember her dance,
her long neck arched like a wild white goose,
the tassels on her nipples that shoot like sparks,
and bless the legs and bless the breasts
for they are fruit and honey and they are generous to the eyes.
Have mercy on my wallet, the dollars I punch into the slot,
and grace the wheels swapping clubs and hearts.
Mercy on me too, as I stumble as if in a hashish haze
watching the reels spin away, for I am a blown fuse
and I need someone to bless me before it’s too late.
Honor the chance in a million, the slot machine jolting,
the yellow light flashing, honor the voice that calls jackpot,
and the coins that crush into the brushed steel tray,
for there is a time for winning and a time for losing
and if you cast your bread upon the waters
you will find it again after many days.
Pity the crowd around the blessed winner
all patting his back as if it rubs off,
this juice, this force, this whatever
that might save them from their own cursed luck.
And pity the poor winner whose hand claws back
into his bucket of coins and who cannot walk away,
because he’d do anything for the feeling he had
when the great pattern rose from the chaos
of cherries and lemons and diamonds and stars
and he knew for that moment he was blessed.


^^EOP^^




“Philadelphia isn’t as bad as Philadelphians say it is.”
—Billboard on Interstate 95



Paris in the Spring, Autumn in New York,
Singers pair a city with a season
As though it belonged to it all year long.
They should try to put a few more to work:
Trenton in winter needs a good reason;
Scranton in summer seems so very wrong.
How about Cincinnati in the spring?
Autumn in Passaic, or in Oakland?
Some cities just lack glamour and appeal,
And there is no point arguing the thing.
No one reads through stacks of brochures to spend
A honeymoon in Allentown. Let’s get real.
Most places on the map, you must believe,
No one wants to visit, only to leave.


^^EOP^^

                    
                    
                    Instead of having sex all the time I like to hold you and not get into some involved discussion of what life means. I want you to tell me something I don’t know about you. Something about the day before that photograph in which you’re standing on your head. I want to know about softball and the team picture. Why are you so little next to the others? Were you younger? Were you small as a girl? What I want most is to have been a girl with you and played on the opposite team so I could have liked you and competed against you at the same time.
                

^^EOP^^

                    
                    
                    The bird’s-eye view abstracted from the bird. Cover me, says the soldier on the screen, I’m going in. We have the sense of being convinced, but of what? And by whom? The public is a hypothetical hole, a realm of pure disappearance, from which celestial matter explodes. I believe I can speak for everyone, begins the president, when I say famous last words.
                

^^EOP^^

                                  I 
Africans in the hold fold themselves
to make room for hope. In the afternoon’s
ferocity, tar, grouting the planks like the glue
of family, melts to the run of a child’s licorice stick. 
Wet decks crack, testing the wood’s mettle.
Distilled from evaporating brine, salt
dusts the floor, tickling with the measure
into time and the thirst trapped below.  
                                  II 
The captain’s new cargo of Igbos disturbs him.
They stand, computing the swim back to land.
Haitians still say: Igbo pend’c or’ a ya!
But we do not hang ourselves in cowardice.  
                                  III 
Sold six times on the journey to the coast,
once for a gun, then cloth, then iron
manilas, her pride was masticated like husks
of chewing sticks, spat from morning-rank mouths. 
Breaking loose, edge of handcuffs held high
like the blade of a vengeful axe, she runs
across the salt scratch of deck,
pain deeper than the blue inside a flame.  
                                  IV 
The sound, like the break of bone
could have been the Captain’s skull
or the musket shot dropping her
over the side, her chains wrapped
around his neck in dance.


^^EOP^^

Turning your back, you button your blouse. That’s new.
You redirect the conversation. A man
has entered it. Your therapist has given you
permission to discuss this with me, the word
you’ve been looking for in desire.
You can now say “heterosexual” with me. We mean 
different things when we say it. I mean
the life I left behind forever. For you, it’s a new
beginning, a stab at being normal again, a desire
to enter the world with a man
instead of a woman, and of course, there’s the word
you won’t claim for yourself anymore, you 
who have children to think of, you
who have put me in line behind them and mean
to keep the order clear. It’s really my word
against yours anymore in this new
language, in this battle over how a man
is about to enter this closed room of desire 
we’ve gingerly exchanged keys to, but desire
isn’t what’s at issue anyway, you
say to me. Instead I learn a man
can protect you in a way a woman only means
to but never can, and my world is too new
when there’s real life out there, word 
after word for how normal looks, each word
cutting like scissors a profile of desire—
a man facing a woman, nothing particularly new
or interesting to me. I’ve wanted only to face you
and the world simultaneously, say what I mean
with my body, my choice to not be a man, 
to be a woman with you, forget the man’s
part or how his body is the word
for what touch can contain, what love means.
If this were only about desire,
you say, I’d still desire you.
But it isn’t passion we’re defining, new 
consequences emerge when a man and desire
are part of the words we hurl, you
changing how you mean loving—this terrible final news.


^^EOP^^

It was the hornbill that spoke it.
In the nothing, becoming nothing,
begetting nothing; this is everything. 
The world is old, the world is new 
How does the darkness hide?
In the nothing, becoming nothing,
begetting nothing; this is everything. 
The world is old, the world is new 
The sun is no bigger than a crab.
In the nothing, becoming nothing,
begetting nothing; this is everything. 
The world is old, the world is new 
Hot soup is devoured from the edges.
In the nothing, becoming nothing,
begetting nothing; this is everything. 
The world is old, the world is new 
The blood sign is red; burning like fire.
In the nothing, becoming nothing,
begetting nothing; this is everything. 
The world is old, the world is new 
It has no name; silence is its name.
In the nothing, becoming nothing,
begetting nothing; this is everything. 
The world is old, the world is new.


^^EOP^^

She’s a copperheaded waitress,
tired and sharp-worded, she hides
her bad brown tooth behind a wicked
smile, and flicks her ass
out of habit, to fend off the pass
that passes for affection.
She keeps her mind the way men
keep a knife—keen to strip the game
down to her size. She has a thin spine,
swallows her eggs cold, and tells lies.
She slaps a wet rag at the truck drivers
if they should complain. She understands
the necessity for pain, turns away
the smaller tips, out of pride, and
keeps a flask under the counter. Once,
she shot a lover who misused her child.
Before she got out of jail, the courts had pounced
and given the child away. Like some isolated lake,
her flat blue eyes take care of their own stark
bottoms. Her hands are nervous, curled, ready
to scrape.
The common woman is as common
as a rattlesnake.


^^EOP^^

She holds things together, collects bail,
makes the landlord patch the largest holes.
At the Sunday social she would spike
every drink, and offer you half of what she knows,
which is plenty. She pokes at the ruins of the city
like an armored tank; but she thinks
of herself as a ripsaw cutting through
knots in wood. Her sentences come out
like thick pine shanks
and her big hands fill the air like smoke.
She’s a mud-chinked cabin in the slums,
sitting on the doorstep counting
rats and raising 15 children,
half of them her own. The neighborhood
would burn itself out without her;
one of these days she’ll strike the spark herself.
She’s made of grease
and metal, with a hard head
that makes the men around her seem frail.
The common woman is as common as
a nail.


^^EOP^^

It’s like flying in your dreams, she said. You empty
Yourself out and just lift off. Soar. It’s like that. 
                                       * 
Red.               Red.                Red. 
          Just that word. Sometimes. 
                                       * 
Yang & Yin. Like twins tumbling through summer.
        He, the rooster crowing sun; desperate—afraid—
                   As only men can be. 
And Yin? Let’s say she has long hair—
          No, that won’t work. If we are to believe
the ancient Chinese, she was a dog
                          howling moon. 
                                       * 
When I counted out the pills, it was a slowing down.
          Like the delay between when the car goes through
the dip and your stomach falls away—
                          And won’t stop. 
                                       * 
Of course it was because she didn’t fit my mold.
So I punished her. And why? And why? And why?
          You did it, I said. You did it.
Wouldn’t fill my world. 
                                       * 
And eventually we all kill our mothers.
Their eyes a tenderness that doesn’t flinch
          from it. Knowing. Eventually.
       
                                       * 
What else is there? 
                                       * 
Paula’s paintings are real. The women thick, visceral,
like stubborn cliffs the sea cannot contain—or drown. 
                                       * 
Or dogs. And such as these drove Homer to despair—
And his cry: Oh to see! To see! To see! 
                                       * 
So Paula says: To be a dog woman is bestial is good.
          Eating, snarling.
Utterly believable.
                                   Gross. 
                                       * 
Like when Cesaria Evora breaks your heart with a smile
          all melancholy and sea and salt. 
                                   Assim ’m ta pidi mar
                                   Pa ’l leva ’me pa ’me ca voeta 
And it doesn’t matter that you don’t know what
          the words mean. Some things are beyond that. 
                                       * 
So. Tanya bought the record because Cesaria’s face
          is beautiful with all the lost love of the world
and darker than the blue of the sun setting over the Atlantic. 
                                       * 
It’s in the angle of light washing her hair
with sun into a puddle that catches in the throat 
The wood deck creaks from the weight
of all that air and sun and silence
Water chuckling in the tiny fountain in the corner
holding up the song of wind chimes and flies 
And it’s all here. Fire. Water. Stone. Wood. 
                                       * 
All caught up in Yeats and the cuckoo
          that wasn’t a real bird but cried
with all the agony of the desire for flight
hemmed by wooden wings, and springs and cogs. 
I think. 
                                       * 
Or looking for Rilke—
          How the panther is like the rage
of a doll’s soul caught in the body: but
to say: under an open window, a violin 
Accomplishment though is another matter—
Just ask Baudelaire and so I
          thought I could do it. 
Necromancer, necromancer, necromancer
          make me a mate
only one of my ribs pray take. 
So why won’t women fit into that space? 
                                       * 
Is that why in the photograph David plays
an inflatable lyre? Does his smile make it all artifice? 
                                       * 
But life is this and it will not
be contained. The Igbo say:
No one can outrun their shadow.
And this is good. This is hope.
Because, or maybe, we cannot outrun love. 
                                       * 
To drive down a road, she said. Until it stops
at the edge of the sea. An ocean vast and immense,
she said. If you are lucky, she said. It fills you.


^^EOP^^

Maybe you’ve heard about this. Maybe not.
A man came home and chucked his girlfriend’s cat
In the wood chipper. This really happened.
Dinner wasn’t ready on time. A lot
Of other little things went wrong. He spat
On her father, who came out when he learned
About it. He also broke her pinky,
Stole her checks, and got her sister pregnant.
But she stood by him, stood strong, through it all,
Because she loved him. She loved him, you see.
She actually said that, and then she went
And married him. She felt some unique call.
Don’t try to understand what another
Person means by love. Don’t even bother.


^^EOP^^




for Jean



And sleep to grief as air is to the rain,
upon waking, no explanation, just blue 
spoons of the eucalyptus measuring
and pouring torrents. A kind of winter. 
As if what is real had been buried
and all sure surfaces blurred. Is it me 
or the world, risen from beneath?
Mind refining ruin, or an outside 
unseen hand, working—as if with
a small brush, for clarity—the details? 
To open my eyes is the shape of a city
rising slowly through sand. Cloudy 
quartz, my throat, cut unadorned
from the quarry, stone of city cemetery 
and roads, to breathe is a mausoleum
breached. To think of Eden is speech 
to fill a grave, tree in which knowledge
augurs only its limits, the word snake 
a thought crawling in the shadow
of its body. Was it, Adam, like this 
always, intellect in the mind’s small sty
miming confinement for meaning, sleep 
to grief as air is to the rain, upon waking,
the world’s own weapons turned against it—


^^EOP^^




[apocalypsis—L. to uncover, disclose]



i. “I am the sign of the Letter, / . . .” 
No seed. Flat beneath my hand:
bone. Pelvis a field, but no seed.
Because there was no punishment
like fucking, its whip burned
Adam and nothing after. Because
shine took flight like two parrots
so deep green they seemed black.
And though the field tilted and split
forth meant two ways, though
far into the garden meant I lost
love, even a god could honor that.
“Cell by cell unsexed, I will light the
female,” said the snake, and what was
I was lost. What was shine fell;
a shed skin white as water falling.
Wisdom, when did it descend
weeping into each thing? I saw
too much to know who I was:
asleep in each molecule, chaos’s
energy. I couldn’t speak of this
change, how apocalypse once
gave tongue to each new skin
between my legs, twin parishioners,
bent prayer books inside me. Dominus
was Eden in me, and the Tree
the world had imagined, except:
interior, what asked for a mind
to hew with wounds. Except memory:
jibe, jilt, jest. What was real died
as its own elegy, as Adam did not.     
ii. “. . . and the designation of the division.”  
Mons: venus-field held horizon by sharp
fuckless months, field lain fallow. I lost him.
I did not love. Because bitterness lit me
strung tongue to gut. Because god loved
the way the snake shook shine into the tree,
leavening air with matte magnolia leaves.
My mouth opened to ask the snake’s name.
Like his tongue from which each word went
each way the meaning bent—leading me
the way back—, I never doubted what I didn’t
change down to the syllable, molecule,
shift between dahlia and dalliance, male to
woman, behold, becoming her, became me.
The tree wept cheap greenery; the snake left
what was knowledge, what was the given
matter: until Adam found me again, I put
weeping even inside myself: I knew
I could not explain I saw the end of things
static in anxious limitless rage. It was male,
and yet Adam found me the way language
meant to uncover: gladly he lent his mouth,
his hands, husband one, and one lover, here the church, here the steeple: knuckles knelt, o Deus, I remember: Self and Other,
and between us every elegy, all the fallen
language that couldn’t hold its own
and wouldn’t give it back, had no flesh
except how long dust keeps our alphabets.
It came alive outside the mind, intellect.
I loved it. He could not touch me there.  
iii. “I am the sign of the Letter,
                  and the designation of the division.”  
No seed. Flat beneath my hand:
                  mons: venus-field held horizon by sharp 
bone. Pelvis a valley but no seed:
                  fuckless months, field lain fallow. I lost him 
because there was no punishment
                  I did not love. Because bitterness lit me 
like fucking, its wicked burn   
                  strung tongue to gut. Because god loved 
Adam and nothing after. Because
                  the way the snake shook shine into the tree, 
the shine took flight like two parrots,
                  leavening air with matte magnolia leaves 
so deep green they seemed black.
                  My mouth opened to ask the snake’s name; 
and though the field tilted and split
                  like his tongue from which each word went 
forth meant two ways, though
                  each way the meaning bent—leading me 
far into the garden—meant I lost
                  the way back, I never doubted what I didn’t 
love, even a god could honor that.
                  “Change down to the syllable, molecule, 
cell by cell unsexed, I will light the
                  shifts between dahlia and dalliance, male-to- 
female,” said the snake, and what was
                  woman, behold, becoming her, became me. 
“I” was lost. What was shine fell;
                  the tree wept cheap greenery; the snake left 
a shed skin white as water falling.
                  What was knowledge, what was the given 
wisdom, when did it descend into
                  matter: until Adam again found me, I put 
weeping inside each thing I saw.
                  Weeping even inside myself: I knew 
too much to know who I was;
                  I could not explain I saw the end of things 
asleep in each molecule, chaos
                  static in anxious limitless rage. It was male 
energy. I couldn’t speak of this
                  and yet Adam found me the way language 
changed, how apocalypse once
                  meant to uncover: gladly he lent his mouth, 
gave tongue to each new skin.
                  His hands, husband one, and one lover, 
between my legs, twin parishioners,
                  here the church, here the steeple: knuckles knelt 
bent prayer books inside me, Dominus, 
                  o Deus, I remember: Self and Other 
was Eden in me and the Tree
                  between us every elegy, all the falls 
the world had imagined except
                  language, what couldn’t hold its own 
interior, what asked for a mind
                  and wouldn’t give it back, had no flesh 
to hew with wounds, no memory
                  except how long dust keeps our alphabets. 
Jibe, jilt, jest: what was real died as
                  it came alive outside the mind, intellect  
its own elegy, and Adam did not
                  love it. He could not touch me there.


^^EOP^^

Gertrude Stein.
We could end there.
But we won’t.
Because we want to make meaning.
Of something.
to say something.
Of value.
In order that.
It’s absolutely.
The professor said.
Wiggling his ears.
In a satisfied way.
And the students all said, Amen.
That’s the way with critical acclaim.
Absolutely.
There are rooms.
There are builders.
There is a clock.
There is a cake.
There is a rope.
There is a sounding to depths.
But when she dies, what then?
Who knew what it all meant?
And when all the modernists are dead?
The critics will babble and frenzy
forever to find the nouns she never wrote
between the crowded verbs and adverbs.


^^EOP^^

What I like about your country
she tells me is the toilets
I wouldn’t mind bringing one home
but it wouldn’t do much good
she says she likes the bathtubs
and the refrigerators
but she is not so crazy
about the tortillas
which are not made properly
or the cilantro which tastes like soap
Also the freeways ruin the landscape
and the children watch television
when they could be playing soccer
and the teenagers stare at their parents
with bare faces that say
give it to me
and the abuelitos are like dogs
to the children
the children walk by with no respect
mangoes here are not so good
not enough rain
and the women here have so many clothes
I think your country has the most wonderful bathrooms
and everyone has a house
although tents would be nicer
I think or boats
or even just sleeping in a tree
My family has a tree
we live under
but the tree has no toilet
I grant you that.


^^EOP^^

my mother put down her knife and fork,
pulled her wedding ring from its groove,
placing it contemplatively on her middle
finger. So natural was the move,
so tender, I almost didn’t notice.
Five years, she said, five years, once a week,
I wrote a letter to your father. And waited
until time was like ash on my tongue.
Not one letter back, not a single note.
She sighed, smiling, the weight gone. This
prime rib is really tender, isn’t it? she asked.


^^EOP^^

My father’s dying
resembles nothing so much
as a small village
building itself
in the mind of a traveler
who reads about it
and thinks to go there. 
The journey is imagined
in a way not even felt
as when years ago
I knew my father would die someday. 
The idea came up as fast
as a curve in a road
which opens out
to an unexpected vista, 
and now in this journey
the road gravel crunches
under my tires. I miss
some of the streets,
get lost, get lost. 
I find I’m no tourist anymore
and settle into the oldest human assignment.
Bury your father and live forever
as a stranger in that town.


^^EOP^^




for Sappho



Let my music be found wanting
in comparison
to yours (as it must) 
let me be found loving
(as you were)
extravagantly the beautiful 
let me find you
and the song (forever)
between us 
in these terrible times


^^EOP^^




“Violence is as American as cherry pie.”
            —H. Rap Brown, former Black Panther justice minister



Thanks for the violence. Thanks for Walt’s rude muscle
pushing through the grass, for tiny Gulliver crushed
between the giant’s breasts. Thanks for Moby’s triangular hump
and Ahab’s castrated leg. Thanks for the harpoons.
Thanks for this PBS history of the automatic pistol. 
The good machine is simple, few moving parts,
an efficiency of what’s preserved and what is wasted,
so with each shot the recoil cocks the gun to shoot again,
then recoil, cock and shoot again, recoil, cock,
and so on till the target buys it, or your ammo’s spent. 
Thanks for the poem, which is really a little pistol:
load and cock, point and aim, then the trigger,
the hammer, the powder, the discharge, the bullet,
the target, the recoil, the crime. No smoking gun,
just ballistics, caliber, powder marks, the question why. 
My life is like a loaded gun, and when I aim it at you
I hope to take off the top of your head,
no safety on, no playing nice, just the spark,
the flash, the damage, just red American
cherry pie violence. So, thank you 
for the harpoon gun we aim at God and death
and all the unknown world, and for the spear-stuck beast,
rope ripping through torn hands, for what
refuses to be caught and what we fathom only by
riding the whale down into the deep, refusing to let go.


^^EOP^^

                    
                    
                    When he read in the obituary section that he was dead, the famous author was at first amused and flattered. They love me so much, he thought, they have imagined me dead because they fear the loss of my genius above all else. So he put on his hat, combed his goatee to a waxed point, and sauntered out of his flat to attend his own funeral. How literary, he thought, like Huck Finn, and Everyone will be weeping.
       He was perturbed, however, when he found that the funeral home was in a bad section of town, next to a tattoo parlor named The Desultory Slut. He walked in past the unmanned front desk, to a back room of frayed velvet and gilt columns, where his coffin was on display, a faux mahogany monstrosity with painted pewter handles. The only people in attendance were four young professors from the local college, with leather patches on the elbows of their ill-fitting tweed jackets and long cruel faces of foxes and rats. He recognized one of them, a gangly fellow with pimply cheeks who had shaken his hand after his last reading and reverently asked for his signature.
       Do you have one of my books to sign? the author had asked.
       Oh no, the young professor had cried, baring his hairless chest, can you please sign here?
       Now the pimply fellow was sitting in a pew, whispering loudly to his neighbor, Isn’t it great, he said, The old bastard finally kicked.
       His neighbor nodded silently.
       Deeply disturbed, but well aware of the dramatic potential of the moment, the author took this as his cue to step boldly into the room, with a loud Ta daaa!
       For some reason, the professors ignored him, and continued their whispering.
       For a moment, he was afflicted with a strange vertigo, and stood like a clay golem, without a will of his own. Then a sudden rage took him, and the author snapped out of the spell and strode to the front of the room, waving his arms. Wait, I’m not dead at all. Here I am. It was all a mistake, he cried.
       But the professors did not see him. In fact one walked right through him, as if he were merely a ghost or spirit, and rushed up to the coffin. Do you realize what this means? the professor cried, This means we’re free, and he grabbed the body in the coffin and dragged it to the floor. The shocked author saw in the body his own likeness, lips and cheeks rouged into a grotesque semblance of life.
       He’s dead, he’s dead. Our enemy is finally dead, they chanted in a frenzy and the professors began trampling on the corpse, weeping with joy and relief.
                

^^EOP^^

He called her:  golden dawn
She called him:  the wind whistles 
He called her:  heart of the sky
She called him:  message bringer 
He called her:  mother of pearl
           barley woman, rice provider,
           millet basket, corn maid,
           flax princess, all-maker, weef 
She called him:  fawn, roebuck,
           stag, courage, thunderman,
           all-in-green, mountain strider
           keeper of forests, my-love-rides 
He called her:  the tree is
She called him:  bird dancing 
He called her:  who stands,
           has stood, will always stand
She called him:  arriver 
He called her:  the heart and the womb
           are similar
She called him:  arrow in my heart.


^^EOP^^

Crooks run the whole world, and the Dow just fell.
Crap rules the airwaves. All your best plans stall.
The air is dirty, and you don’t feel well.
Your wife won’t listen. Friends no longer call.
Sad songs from youth no longer cast a spell.
Cancer research has run into a wall.
Some inflated hack just won the Nobel.
You witness clear signs of decline and fall.
The neighbors are cold, and your house won’t sell.
Your cat has bad teeth. Your paychecks feel small.
Maybe you’re really sick. It’s hard to tell.
Up ahead, traffic has slowed to a crawl.
The world didn’t just start going to hell.
You just noticed for the first time, that’s all.


^^EOP^^

The first four leaders had broken knees
The four old dams had broken knees
The flock would start to run, then freeze
The first four leaders had broken knees 
‘Why is the flock so docile?’ asked the hawk.
‘Yes, why is the flock so docile,’ laughed the dog, 
‘The shepherd’s mallet is in his hand,
The shepherd’s hand is on the land,
The flock will start to run, then freeze—
The four old dams have broken knees,’
The dog explained. 
The hawk exclaimed:
‘The shepherd leads an easy life!’ 
‘I know, I know,’ cried the shepherd’s wife,
‘He dresses me out in a narrow skirt
and leaves me home to clean his dirt.
Whenever I try to run, I freeze— All the old dams have broken knees.’ 
‘Well, I’m so glad he doesn’t dare
to bring his breaking power to bear
on me,’ said the hawk, flying into the sun;
while the dog warned, in his dog run:
‘Hawk—the shepherd has bought a gun!’ 
‘Why is the hawk so docile?’ asked the flock, 
‘He fell to the ground in a feathery breeze;
He lies in a dumb lump under the trees,
We believe we’d rather have broken knees
Than lose our blood and suddenly freeze
Like him.’ 
But the oldest dam gave her leg a lick,
And said, ‘Some die slow and some die quick,
A few run away and the rest crawl,
But the shepherd never dies at all—
Damn his soul. 
I’d will my wool to the shepherd’s wife
If she could change the shepherd’s life,
But I myself would bring him low
If only, only I knew how.’


^^EOP^^

am I not    olden olden olden
it is unwanted. 
wanting, wanting
am I not    broken
stolen    common 
am I not crinkled cranky poison
am I not glinty-eyed and frozen 
am I not    aged
shaky    glazing
am I not    hazy
guarded    craven 
am I not    only
stingy    little
am I not    simple
brittle    spitting 
was I not    over
over    ridden? 
it is a long story
will you be proud to be my version? 
it is unwritten. 
writing, writing
am I not    ancient
raging    patient 
am I not    able
charming    stable
was I not    building
forming    braving 
was I not    ruling
guiding    naming
was I not    brazen
crazy    chosen 
even the stones would do my bidding? 
it is a long story
am I not proud to be your version? 
it is unspoken. 
speaking, speaking
am I not    elder
berry
brandy 
are you not wine before you find me
in your own beaker?


^^EOP^^

Today is a Tuesday, one of many.
He has a girl he loves every Tuesday,
her day off. He burns
at the fine fire of her conscience, 
tells her they’ll be married
someday. He has a wife,
Doreen, a freckle-faced fat thing
who harbors resentment that during her Tuesday 
at her mother’s, he insists on going to the movies.
Rose petals he picks up in the neighbor’s yard
end up at Tuesday’s feet and
sprinkled through the sheets. 
Of course they must make love,
since he sees her only once a week.
Doreen requires sex after seeing her mother.
He feels like an ox on Tuesday, powerful and massive. 
He tells this to Tuesday
and to Doreen.
Doreen tells him he is an ox
a brute master of the air and his rightful bed. 
But Tuesday, who knows oxen
are slow moving, dim witted,
and castrated at birth,
follows him home instead of playing her dulcimer, 
climbs the wall, watches him mounting his wife,
leaves rose petals on his doorstep,
takes the train to cornfields, steers and heifers
watches the city disappear in rain. 
Thinks briefly of how tenderly
he rose in her fingers
while the remains of their breakfast,
eggs and potatoes 
cooled on the wooden table
with the tattered tablecloth.


^^EOP^^

There were words I had to leave behind,
moonlight, backward ponies.
Leaving flowers out seemed safest.
Trying for something surreal,
A trouble free rise of smoke and lavender. 
No not lavender. Any shade
of purple is best left alone.
Perhaps a jaundiced smoke
rising in my poetry
would be best, although I like violet haze. 
Many a summer morning,
while other folks are
eating bagels, lox,
cinnamon rolls,
I rummage through old cider houses, 
find words like obdurate,
bipolar, manic, cold heeled.
But writing about love, well,
not even searches to junkyards
as far away as Peking 
turn up the slightest unused vowel.
So, I make words up, create my own language.
You Chinese me in the roofy mornings.
You Japanese my legs in the spidery evenings.
Our children are the leggy offspring 
of centipede afternoons. Our bedroom
is the Acropolis. You temple me backward.
I could bless you all the way to shadowland.
If we were not already steepled there,
our undergarments ruffianed off onto chairs. 
You catapulted silence,
dogkissed, catlicked my paws
held my squeaks and rattles.
Where the rest had said, What’s this?
You said, it’s mine.


^^EOP^^

                    
                    
                    I called you names, for the further processing of color or movement, all you were able to get into, a sort of blur. She leaned out against the water. Lay me down like anthozoa to anthozoa, with the other light things that brush against the earth. Breathe. Don't breathe. Breathe. A figure in a constellation was staring off. Did it turn up three days later, did it accept inside its body, a no for universal application, an only mine or yours? Gate One. Open your mouth. If you would only open your mouth. Gate Two. To bridle, to curb, to dam. Gate Three. Anagnorisis. Gate Four. Closed. Gate Five. Hold up. Gate Six. If everywhere that Mary went, the brain was public and exposed. Gate Seven. Do you mind, do you. Gate Eight. Fish moving in the boat's direction will be recorded in our diagram with the more substantial marks. Gate Nine. The rhythm and interval between objects. Gate Ten. Our simplest subject. Our lightest lights. Our darkest darks.
                

^^EOP^^

This is all I am to her now: a pair of legs in running shoes, two arms strung with braided wire. She heaves a carton sagging with CDs  at me and I accept it gladly, lifting with my legs, not bending over,      raising each foot high enough to clear the step. Fortunate to be  of any use to her at all, I wrestle, stooped and single-handed,  with her mattress in the stairwell, saying nothing as it pins me,  sweating, to the wall. Vacuum cleaner, spiny cactus, five-pound sacks  of rice and lentils slumped against my heart: up one flight  of stairs and then another, down again with nothing in my arms.


^^EOP^^

At six I lived for spells:
how a few Hawaiian words could call
up the rain, could hymn like the sea
in the long swirl of chambers
curling in the nautilus of a shell,
how Amida’s ballads of the Buddhaland
in the drone of the priest’s liturgy
could conjure money from the poor
and give them nothing but mantras,
the strange syllables that healed desire. 
I lived for stories about the war
my grandfather told over hana cards,
slapping them down on the mats
with a sharp Japanese kiai. 
I lived for songs my grandmother sang
stirring curry into a thick stew,
weaving a calligraphy of Kannon’s love
into grass mats and straw sandals. 
I lived for the red volcano dirt
staining my toes, the salt residue
of surf and sea wind in my hair,
the arc of a flat stone skipping
in the hollow trough of a wave. 
I lived in a child’s world, waited
for my father to drag himself home,
dusted with blasts of sand, powdered
and the strange ash of raw cement,
his deafness made worse by the clang
of pneumatic drills, sore in his bones
from the buckings of a jackhammer. 
He’d hand me a scarred lunchpail,
let me unlace the hightop G.I. boots,
call him the new name I’d invented
that day in school, write it for him
on his newspaper. He’d rub my face
with hands that felt like gravel roads,
tell me to move, go play, an then he’d
walk to the laundry sink to scrub,
rinse the dirt of his long day
from a face brown and grained as koa wood. 
I wanted to take away the pain
in his legs, the swelling in his joints,
give him back his hearing,
clear and rare as crystal chimes,
the fins of glass that wrinkled
and sparked the air with their sound. 
I wanted to heal the sores that work
and war had sent to him,
let him play catch in the backyard
with me, tossing a tennis ball
past papaya trees without the shoulders
of pain shrugging back his arms. 
I wanted to become a doctor of pure magic,
to string a necklace of sweet words
fragrant as pine needles and plumeria,
fragrant as the bread my mother baked,
place it like a lei of cowrie shells
and pikake flowers around my father’s neck,
and chant him a blessing, a sutra.


^^EOP^^

Take this kiss upon the brow!And, in parting from you now,Thus much let me avow —You are not wrong, who deemThat my days have been a dream;Yet if hope has flown awayIn a night, or in a day,In a vision, or in none,Is it therefore the less gone?  All that we see or seemIs but a dream within a dream.I stand amid the roarOf a surf-tormented shore,And I hold within my handGrains of the golden sand —How few! yet how they creepThrough my fingers to the deep,While I weep — while I weep!O God! Can I not grasp Them with a tighter clasp?O God! can I not saveOne from the pitiless wave?Is all that we see or seemBut a dream within a dream?


^^EOP^^

My bands of silk and miniverMomently grew heavier;The black gauze was beggarly thin;The ermine muffled mouth and chin;I could not suck the moonlight in.Harlequin in lozengesOf love and hate, I walked in theseStriped and ragged rigmaroles;Along the pavement my footsolesTrod warily on living coals.Shouldering the thoughts I loathed,In their corrupt disguises clothed,Morality I could not tearFrom my ribs, to leave them bareIvory in silver air.There I walked, and there I raged;The spiritual savage cagedWithin my skeleton, raged afreshTo feel, behind a carnal mesh,The clean bones crying in the flesh.


^^EOP^^




(excerpt)



Thou know’st my praise of nature most sincere, And that my raptures are not conjur’d up To serve occasions of poetic pomp, But genuine, and art partner of them all. How oft upon yon eminence our pace Has slacken’d to a pause, and we have borne The ruffling wind, scarce conscious that it blew, While admiration, feeding at the eye, And still unsated, dwelt upon the scene. Thence with what pleasure have we just discern’d The distant plough slow-moving, and beside His lab’ring team, that swerv’d not from the track, The sturdy swain diminish’d to a boy! Here Ouse, slow winding through a level plain Of spacious meads with cattle sprinkled o’er, Conducts the eye along its sinuous course Delighted.  There, fast rooted in his bank, Stand, never overlook’d, our fav’rite elms, That screen the herdsman’s solitary hut; While far beyond, and overthwart the stream That as with molten glass inlays the vale, The sloping land recedes into the clouds; Displaying on its varied side the grace Of hedge-row beauties numberless, square tow’r, Tall spire, from which the sound of cheerful bells Just undulates upon the list’ning ear, Groves, heaths, and smoking villages remote. Scenes must be beautiful which daily view’d Please daily, and whose novelty survives Long knowledge and the scrutiny of years. Praise justly due to those that I describe.  . . .   But though true worth and virtue, in the mild And genial soil of cultivated life Thrive most, and may perhaps thrive only there, Yet not in cities oft.  In proud and gay And gain-devoted cities; thither flow, As to a common and most noisome sewer, The dregs and fæculence of ev’ry land. In cities foul example on most minds Begets its likeness.  Rank abundance breeds In gross and pamper’d cities sloth and lust, And wantonness and gluttonous excess. In cities, vice is hidden with most ease, Or seen with least reproach; and virtue, taught By frequent lapse, can hope no triumph there Beyond th’ atchievement of successful flight. I do confess them nurs’ries of the arts, In which they flourish most: where, in the beams Of warm encouragement, and in the eye Of public note, they reach their perfect size. Such London is, by taste and wealth proclaim’d The fairest capital of all the world, By riot and incontinence the worst. There, touch’d by Reynolds, a dull blank becomes A lucid mirror, in which Nature sees All her reflected features.  Bacon there Gives more than female beauty to a stone, And Chatham’s eloquence to marble lips.  . . .   God made the country, and man made the town: What wonder then, that health and virtue, gifts That can alone make sweet the bitter draught That life holds out to all, should most abound And least be threaten’d in the fields and groves? Possess ye therefore, ye who, borne about In chariots and sedans, know no fatigue But that of idleness, and taste no scenes But such as art contrives, possess ye still Your element; there only ye can shine, There only minds like yours can do no harm. Our groves were planted to console at noon The pensive wand’rer in their shades.  At eve The moon-beam, sliding softly in between The sleeping leaves, is all the light they wish, Birds warbling all the music.  We can spare The splendour of your lamps, they but eclipse Our softer satellite. Your songs confound Our more harmonious notes: the thrush departs Scar’d, and th’ offended nightingale is mute. There is a public mischief in your mirth, It plagues your country.  Folly such as your’s, Grac’d with a sword, and worthier of a fan, Has made, which enemies could ne’er have done, Our arch of empire, steadfast but for you, A mutilated structure, soon to fall.


^^EOP^^




(excerpt)



England, with all thy faults, I love thee stillMy country! and while yet a nook is left Where English minds and manners may be found, Shall be constrain’d to love thee.  Though thy clime Be fickle, and thy year, most part, deform’d With dripping rains, or wither’d by a frost, I would not yet exchange thy sullen skies And fields without a flow’r, for warmer France With all her vines; nor for Ausonia’s groves Of golden fruitage and her myrtle bow’rs. To shake thy senate, and from heights sublime Of patriot eloquence to flash down fire Upon thy foes, was never meant my task: But I can feel thy fortunes, and partake Thy joys and sorrows with as true a heart As any thund’rer there.  And I can feel Thy follies too, and with a just disdain Frown at effeminates, whose very looks Reflect dishonour on the land I love. How, in the name of soldiership and sense, Should England prosper, when such things, as smooth And tender as a girl, all essenc’d o’er With odors, and as profligate as sweet, Who sell their laurel for a myrtle wreath, And love when they should fight; when such as these Presume to lay their hand upon the ark Of her magnificent and awful cause? Time was when it was praise and boast enough In ev’ry clime, and travel where we might, That we were born her children.  Praise enough To fill th’ ambition of a private man, That Chatham’s language was his mother tongue, And Wolfe’s great name compatriot with his own. Farewell those honors, and farewell with them The hope of such hereafter!  They have fall’n Each in his field of glory: one in arms, And one in council.  Wolfe upon the lap Of smiling victory that moment won, And Chatham, heart-sick of his country’s shame. They made us many soldiers.  Chatham still Consulting England’s happiness at home, Secur’d it by an unforgiving frown If any wrong’d her.  Wolfe, where’er he fought, Put so much of his heart into his act, That his example had a magnet’s force, And all were swift to follow whom all loved. Those suns are set.  Oh rise some other such! Or all that we have left is empty talk Of old achievements, and despair of new. . . .    There is a pleasure in poetic pains Which only poets know.  The shifts and turns, Th’ expedients and inventions multiform To which the mind resorts, in chase of terms Thought apt, yet coy, and difficult to win— T’ arrest the fleeting images that fill The mirror of the mind, and hold them fast, And force them sit, ’till he has pencill’d off A faithful likeness of the forms he views; Then to dispose his copies with such art That each may find its most propitious light, And shine by situation, hardly less, Than by the labor and the skill it cost, Are occupations of the poet’s mind So pleasing, and that steal away the thought With such address from themes of sad import, That lost in his own musings, happy man! He feels th’ anxieties of life, denied Their wonted entertainment, all retire. Such joys has he that sings.  But ah! not such, Or seldom such, the hearers of his song. Fastidious, or else listless, or perhaps Aware of nothing arduous in a task They never undertook, they little note His dangers or escapes, and haply find There least amusement where he found the most. But is amusement all?  studious of song, And yet ambitious not to sing in vain, I would not trifle merely, though the world Be loudest in their praise who do no more. Yet what can satire, whether grave or gay? It may correct a foible, may chastise The freaks of fashion, regulate the dress, Retrench a sword-blade, or displace a patch; But where are its sublimer trophies found? What vice has it subdu’d? whose heart reclaim’d By rigour, or whom laugh’d into reform? Alas! Leviathan is not so tam’d:Laugh’d at, he laughs again; and, stricken hard, Turns to the stroke his adamantine scales, That fear no discipline of human hands.   The pulpit, therefore (and I name it, fill’d With solemn awe, that bids me well beware With what intent I touch that holy thing)The pulpit (when the sat’rist has at last, Strutting and vap’ring in an empty school, Spent all his force and made no proselyte) I say the pulpit (in the sober use Of its legitimate, peculiar pow’rs) Must stand acknowledg’d, while the world shall stand, The most important and effectual guard, Support and ornament of virtue’s cause.


^^EOP^^




(excerpt)



Hark! ’tis the twanging horn! o’er yonder bridge,That with its wearisome but needful length Bestrides the wintry flood, in which the moon Sees her unwrinkled face reflected bright; He comes, the herald of a noisy world, With spatter’d boots, strapp’d waist, and frozen locks, News from all nations lumb’ring at his back. True to his charge, the close-pack’d load behind, Yet careless what he brings, his one concern Is to conduct it to the destin’d inn: And having dropp’d th’ expected bag—pass on. He whistles as he goes, light-hearted wretch, Cold and yet cheerful: messenger of grief Perhaps to thousands, and of joy to some, To him indiff’rent whether grief or joy. Houses in ashes, and the fall of stocks, Births, deaths, and marriages, epistles wet With tears, that trickled down the writer’s cheeks, Fast as the periods from his fluent quill, Or charg’d with am’rous sighs of absent swains, Or nymphs responsive, equally affect His horse and him, unconscious of them all. But oh th’ important budget! usher’d in With such heart-shaking music, who can say What are its tidings? have our troops awak’d? Or do they still, as if with opium drugg’d, Snore to the murmurs of th’ Atlantic wave? Is India free? and does she wear her plum’d And jewell’d turban with a smile of peace, Or do we grind her still? The grand debate, The popular harangue, the tart reply, The logic, and the wisdom, and the wit, And the loud laugh—I long to know them all; I burn to set th’ imprison’d wranglers free, And give them voice and utt’rance once again.   Now stir the fire, and close the shutters fast, Let fall the curtains, wheel the sofa round, And, while the bubbling and loud-hissing urn Throws up a steamy column, and the cups, That cheer but not inebriate, wait on each, So let us welcome peaceful ev’ning in. Not such his ev’ning, who with shining face Sweats in the crowded theatre, and squeez’d And bor’d with elbow-points through both his sides, Out-scolds the ranting actor on the stage: Nor his, who patient stands till his feet throb, And his head thumps, to feed upon the breath Of patriots, bursting with heroic rage, Or placemen, all tranquility and smiles. This folio of four pages, happy work! Which not ev’n critics criticise; that holds Inquisitive attention, while I read, Fast bound in chains of silence, which the fair, Though eloquent themselves, yet fear to break; What is it but a map of busy life, Its fluctuations, and its vast concerns? . . .    Oh Winter! ruler of th’ inverted year, Thy scatter’d hair with sleet like ashes fill’d, Thy breath congeal’d upon thy lips, thy cheeks Fring’d with a beard made white with other snows Than those of age; thy forehead wrapt in clouds, A leafless branch thy sceptre, and thy throne A sliding car, indebted to no wheels, But urg’d by storms along its slipp’ry way;I love thee, all unlovely as thou seem’st, And dreaded as thou art!  Thou hold’st the sun A pris’ner in the yet undawning East, Short’ning his journey between morn and noon, And hurrying him, impatient of his stay, Down to the rosy West; but kindly still Compensating his loss with added hours Of social converse and instructive ease, And gathering at short notice, in one group, The family dispers’d, and fixing thought, Not less dispers’d by day-light and its cares. I crown thee King of intimate delights, Fire-side enjoyments, home-born happiness, And all the comforts that the lowly roof Of undisturb’d retirement, and the hours Of long uninterrupted evening, know. No ratt’ling wheels stop short before these gates; No powder’d pert proficient in the art Of sounding an alarm, assaults these doors Till the street rings; no stationary steeds Cough their own knell, while, heedless of the sound, The silent circle fan themselves, and quake: But here the needle plies its busy task, The pattern grows, the well-depicted flow’r,Wrought patiently into the snowy lawn, Unfolds its bosom; buds, and leaves, and sprigs, And curling tendrils, gracefully dispos’d, Follow the nimble finger of the fair; A wreath that cannot fade, or flow’rs that blow With most success when all besides decay. The poet’s or historian’s page, by one Made vocal for th’ amusement of the rest; The sprightly lyre, whose treasure of sweet sounds The touch from many a trembling chord shakes out; And the clear voice symphonious, yet distinct, And in the charming strife triumphant still, Beguile the night, and set a keener edge On female industry; the threaded steel Flies swiftly, and unfelt the task proceeds. The volume clos’d, the customary rites Of the last meal commence.  A Roman meal; Such as the mistress of the world once found Delicious, when her patriots of high note, Perhaps by moonlight, at their humble doors, And under an old oak’s domestic shade, Enjoy’d, spare feast! a radish and an egg. Discourse ensues, not trivial, yet not dull, Nor such as with a frown forbids the play Of fancy, or proscribes the sound of mirth: Nor do we madly, like an impious world, Who deem religion frenzy, and the God That made them an intruder on their joys, Start at his awful name, or deem his praise A jarring note.  Themes of a graver tone, Exciting oft our gratitude and love, While we retrace with mem’ry’s pointing wand, That calls the past to our exact review, The dangers we have ’scap’d, the broken snare, The disappointed foe, deliv’rance found Unlook’d for, life preserv’d and peace restor’d, Fruits of omnipotent eternal love. Oh ev’nings worthy of the Gods! exclaim’d The Sabine bard.  Oh ev’nings, I reply, More to be priz’d and coveted than yours, As more illumin’d, and with nobler truths, That I and mine, and those we love, enjoy.


^^EOP^^




(excerpt)



’Tis morning; and the sun with ruddy orb Ascending, fires the horizon: while the clouds That crowd away before the driving wind, More ardent as the disk emerges more, Resemble most some city in a blaze, Seen through the leafless wood.  His slanting ray Slides ineffectual down the snowy vale, And tinging all with his own rosy hue, From ev’ry herb and ev’ry spiry blade Stretches a length of shadow o’er the field. Mine, spindling into longitude immense, In spite of gravity, and sage remark That I myself am but a fleeting shade, Provokes me to a smile.  With eye askance I view the muscular proportion’d limb Transform’d to a lean shank.  The shapeless pair, As they design’d to mock me, at my side Take step for step; and as I near approach The cottage, walk along the plaster’d wall, Prepost’rous sight! the legs without the man. The verdure of the plain lies buried deep Beneath the dazzling deluge; and the bents, And coarser grass upspearing o’er the rest, Of late unsightly and unseen, now shine Conspicuous, and in bright apparel clad, And fledg’d with icy feathers, nod superb. The cattle mourn in corners where the fence Screens them, and seem half petrified to sleep In unrecumbent sadness.  There they wait Their wonted fodder; not like hung’ring man Fretful if unsupply’d, but silent, meek, And patient of the slow-pac’d swain’s delay. He from the stack carves out th’ accustom’d load, Deep-plunging, and again deep plunging oft His broad keen knife into the solid mass; Smooth as a wall the upright remnant stands, With such undeviating and even force He severs it away: no needless care Lest storms should overset the leaning pile Deciduous, or its own unbalanc’d weight.  . . .   ’Tis liberty alone that gives the flow’r Of fleeting life its lustre and perfume, And we are weeds without it.  All constraint, Except what wisdom lays on evil men, Is evil; hurts the faculties, impedes Their progress in the road of science; blinds The eyesight of discov’ry, and begets, In those that suffer it, a sordid mind Bestial, a meagre intellect, unfit To be the tenant of man’s noble form. Thee therefore still, blame-worthy as thou art, With all thy loss of empire, and though squeez’d By public exigence till annual food Fails for the craving hunger of the state, Thee I account still happy, and the chief Among the nations, seeing thou art free! My native nook of earth! . . .     But there is yet a liberty unsung By poets, and by senators unprais’d, Which monarchs cannot grant, nor all the powers Of earth and hell confed’rate take away. A liberty, which persecution, fraud, Oppression, prisons, have no pow’r to bind, Which whoso tastes can be enslav’d no more. ’Tis liberty of heart, deriv’d from heav’n, Bought with HIS blood who gave it to mankind, And seal’d with the same token.  It is held By charter, and that charter sanction’d sure By th’ unimpeachable and awful oath And promise of a God.  His other gifts All bear the royal stamp that speaks them his, And are august, but this transcends them all. 


^^EOP^^




(excerpt)



Thus heav’n-ward all things tend. For all were once Perfect, and all must be at length restor’d. So God has greatly purpos’d; who would else In his dishonour’d works himself endure Dishonour, and be wrong’d without redress. Haste then, and wheel away a shatter’d world, Ye slow-revolving seasons! we would see, (A sight to which our eyes are strangers yet) A world that does not dread and hate his laws, And suffer for its crime; would learn how fair The creature is that God pronounces good, How pleasant in itself what pleases him. Here ev’ry drop of honey hides a sting, Worms wind themselves into our sweetest flow’rs, And ev’n the joy that haply some poor heart Derives from heav’n, pure as the fountain Is sully’d in the stream; taking a taint From touch of human lips, at best impure. Oh for a world in principle as chaste As this is gross and selfish! over which Custom and prejudice shall bear no sway, That govern all things here, should’ring aside The meek and modest truth, and forcing her To seek a refuge from the tongue of strife In nooks obscure, far from the ways of men: Where violence shall never lift the sword, Nor cunning justify the proud man’s wrong, Leaving the poor no remedy but tears: Where he that fills an office, shall esteem Th’ occasion it presents of doing good More than the perquisite: Where law shall speak Seldom, and never but as wisdom prompts And equity; not jealous more to guard A worthless form, than to decide aright: Where fashion shall not sanctify abuse, Nor smooth good-breeding (supplemental grace) With lean performance ape the work of love.  . . .   He is the happy man, whose life ev’n now Shows somewhat of that happier life to come; Who, doom’d to an obscure but tranquil state, Is pleas’d with it, and, were he free to chuse, Would make his fate his choice; whom peace, the fruit Of virtue, and whom virtue, fruit of faith, Prepare for happiness; bespeak him one Content indeed to sojourn while he must Below the skies, but having there his home. The world o’erlooks him in her busy search Of objects more illustrious in her view; And, occupy’d as earnestly as she, Though more sublimely, he o’erlooks the world. She scorns his pleasures, for she knows them not; He seeks not hers, for he has prov’d them vain. He cannot skim the ground like summer birds Pursuing gilded flies, and such he deems Her honors, her emoluments, her joys. Therefore in contemplation is his bliss, Whose pow’r is such, that whom she lifts from earth She makes familiar with a heav’n unseen, And shows him glories yet to be reveal’d. . . . So life glides smoothly and by stealth away, More golden than that age of fabled gold Renown’d in ancient song; not vex’d with care Or stain’d with guilt, beneficent, approv’d Of God and man, and peaceful in its end. So glide my life away! and so at last, My share of duties decently fulfill’d, May some disease, not tardy to perform Its destin’d office, yet with gentle stroke, Dismiss me weary to a safe retreat, Beneath a turf that I have often trod. It shall not grieve me, then, that once, when call’d To dress a Sofa with the flow’rs of verse, I play’d awhile, obedient to the fair, With that light task; but soon, to please her more Whom flow’rs alone I knew would little please, Let fall th’ unfinish’d wreath, and rov’d for fruit; Rov’d far, and gather’d much: some harsh, ’tis true, Pick’d from the thorns and briars of reproof, But wholesome, well-digested; grateful some To palates that can taste immortal truth, Insipid else, and sure to be despis’d. But all is in his hand whose praise I seek. In vain the poet sings, and the world hears, If he regard not, though divine the theme. ’Tis not in artful measures, in the chime And idle tinkling of a minstrel’s lyre, To charm his ear, whose eye is on the heart; Whose frown can disappoint the proudest strain, Whose approbation—prosper even mine. 


^^EOP^^

Argument

^^EOP^^

I have to thank God I'm a woman,
For in these ordered days a woman only
Is free to be very hungry, very lonely. 
It is sad for Feminism, but still clear
That man, more often than woman, is pioneer.
If I would confide a new thought,
First to a man must it be brought. 
Now, for our sins, it is my bitter fate
That such a man wills soon to be my mate,
And so of friendship is quick end:
When I have gained a love I lose a friend. 
It is well within the order of things
That man should listen when his mate sings;
But the true male never yet walked
Who liked to listen when his mate talked. 
I would be married to a full man,
As would all women since the world began;
But from a wealth of living I have proved
I must be silent, if I would be loved. 
Now of my silence I have much wealth,
I have to do my thinking all by stealth.
My thoughts may never see the day;
My mind is like a catacomb where early Christians pray. 
And of my silence I have much pain,
But of these pangs I have great gain;
For I must take to drugs or drink,
Or I must write the things I think. 
If my sex would let me speak,
I would be very lazy and most weak;
I should speak only, and the things I spoke
Would fill the air awhile, and clear like smoke. 
The things I think now I write down,
And some day I will show them to the Town.
When I am sad I make thought clear;
I can re-read it all next year. 
I have to thank God I'm a woman,
For in these ordered days a woman only
Is free to be very hungry, very lonely.


^^EOP^^

All things within this fading world hath end,   Adversity doth still our joyes attend; No ties so strong, no friends so dear and sweet,   But with death’s parting blow is sure to meet.   The sentence past is most irrevocable,   A common thing, yet oh inevitable. How soon, my Dear, death may my steps attend,   How soon’t may be thy Lot to lose thy friend,   We are both ignorant, yet love bids me   These farewell lines to recommend to thee,   That when that knot’s untied that made us one,   I may seem thine, who in effect am none.   And if I see not half my dayes that’s due, What nature would, God grant to yours and you;   The many faults that well you know I have   Let be interr’d in my oblivious grave;   If any worth or virtue were in me,   Let that live freshly in thy memory   And when thou feel’st no grief, as I no harms,   Yet love thy dead, who long lay in thine arms. And when thy loss shall be repaid with gains   Look to my little babes, my dear remains.   And if thou love thyself, or loved’st me,These o protect from step Dames injury. And if chance to thine eyes shall bring this verse,With some sad sighs honour my absent Herse;   And kiss this paper for thy loves dear sake, Who with salt tears this last Farewel did take.


^^EOP^^

The nicest child I ever knew Was Charles Augustus Fortescue. He never lost his cap, or tore His stockings or his pinafore:    In eating Bread he made no Crumbs,    He was extremely fond of sums, To which, however, he preferred The Parsing of a Latin Word— He sought, when it was within his power, For information twice an hour, And as for finding Mutton-Fat Unappatising, far from that! He often, at his Father’s Board, Would beg them, of his own accord, To give him, if they did not mind, The Greasiest Morsels they could find— His Later Years did not belie The Promise of his Infancy.    In Public Life he always tried    To take a judgement Broad and Wide; In Private, none was more than he Renowned for quiet courtesy. He rose at once in his Career, And long before his Fortieth Year Had wedded Fifi, Only Child Of Bunyan, First Lord Aberfylde. He thus became immensely Rich, And built the Splendid Mansion which Is called The Cedars, Muswell Hill, Where he resides in affluence still, To show what everybody might Become by SIMPLY DOING RIGHT.


^^EOP^^

1 
People who have no children can be hard:
Attain a mail of ice and insolence:
Need not pause in the fire, and in no sense
Hesitate in the hurricane to guard.
And when wide world is bitten and bewarred
They perish purely, waving their spirits hence
Without a trace of grace or of offense
To laugh or fail, diffident, wonder-starred.
While through a throttling dark we others hear
The little lifting helplessness, the queer
Whimper-whine; whose unridiculous
Lost softness softly makes a trap for us.
And makes a curse. And makes a sugar of
The malocclusions, the inconditions of love. 
2 
What shall I give my children? who are poor,
Who are adjudged the leastwise of the land,
Who are my sweetest lepers, who demand
No velvet and no velvety velour;
But who have begged me for a brisk contour,
Crying that they are quasi, contraband
Because unfinished, graven by a hand
Less than angelic, admirable or sure.
My hand is stuffed with mode, design, device.
But I lack access to my proper stone.
And plenitude of plan shall not suffice
Nor grief nor love shall be enough alone
To ratify my little halves who bear
Across an autumn freezing everywhere. 
3 
And shall I prime my children, pray, to pray?
Mites, come invade most frugal vestibules
Spectered with crusts of penitents’ renewals
And all hysterics arrogant for a day.
Instruct yourselves here is no devil to pay.
Children, confine your lights in jellied rules;
Resemble graves; be metaphysical mules.
Learn Lord will not distort nor leave the fray.
Behind the scurryings of your neat motif
I shall wait, if you wish: revise the psalm
If that should frighten you: sew up belief
If that should tear: turn, singularly calm
At forehead and at fingers rather wise,
Holding the bandage ready for your eyes.


^^EOP^^

Sky’s gray sheet spreads icy rain.
Through the night we heard the branches cracking.
Now they bend with the bowed ache of apostrophes.
Backs to the window, sitting on the couch, we listen
as the radio announces the list of schools closed. 
An hour earlier I inched my way along
the road, tires spinning toward the ditch.
Now I read aloud to a teenage daughter,
who tolerates my foolishness, my claim
that Lao Tzu traversed a more slippery world. 
With two books open on my lap, one in my hand,
two on the floor, I’m surrounded by imperfect
translations: a gathering chaos; something
mysteriously formed; without beginning,
without end; formless and perfect. 
She responds, Sure,
I knew that, so what? I persist:
that existed before the heavens and the earth;
before the universe was born. She’s ready to go
upstairs and listen to the radio. I ask, 
What was her face before her parents were born?
she answers, Nothing. I ask again.
She says it again. Where are the angels,
nights on humble knees, the psalms of faith,
the saints of daylight? She walks out of the room. 
I’m surrounded by thin books.
How pointless to go anywhere on this day,
or maybe any other, but then
the time comes when there is
no other way but to stand firm on ice.


^^EOP^^




O quam te memorem virgo ... 



Stand on the highest pavement of the stair—
Lean on a garden urn—
Weave, weave the sunlight in your hair—
Clasp your flowers to you with a pained surprise—
Fling them to the ground and turn
With a fugitive resentment in your eyes:
But weave, weave the sunlight in your hair. 
So I would have had him leave,
So I would have had her stand and grieve,
So he would have left
As the soul leaves the body torn and bruised,
As the mind deserts the body it has used.
I should find
Some way incomparably light and deft,
Some way we both should understand,
Simple and faithless as a smile and shake of the hand. 
She turned away, but with the autumn weather
Compelled my imagination many days,
Many days and many hours:
Her hair over her arms and her arms full of flowers.
And I wonder how they should have been together!
I should have lost a gesture and a pose.
Sometimes these cogitations still amaze
The troubled midnight and the noon’s repose.


^^EOP^^

When I put my finger to the hole they've cut for a dimmer switch   
in a wall of plaster stiffened with horsehair   
it seems I've scratched a two-hundred-year-old itch      with a pink and a pink and a pinkie-pick.   
When I put my ear to the hole I'm suddenly aware   
of spades and shovels turning up the gain   
all the way from Raritan to the Delaware      with a clink and a clink and a clinky-click.   
When I put my nose to the hole I smell the floodplain   
of the canal after a hurricane   
and the spots of green grass where thousands of Irish have lain   with a stink and a stink and a stinky-stick.   
When I put my eye to the hole I see one holding horse dung to the rain   
in the hope, indeed, indeed,   
of washing out a few whole ears of grain   with a wink and a wink and a winkie-wick.   
And when I do at last succeed   
in putting my mouth to the horsehair-fringed niche   
I can taste the small loaf of bread he baked from that whole seed   with a link and a link and a linky-lick. 


^^EOP^^

Exert thy voice, sweet harbinger of spring!     This moment is thy time to sing,     This moment I attend to praise, And set my numbers to they lays.     Free as thine shall be my song;     As they music, short, or long. Poets, wild as thee, were born,     Pleasing best when unconfined,     When to please is least designed, Soothing but their cares to rest;     Cares do still their thoughts molest,     And still th' unhappy poet's breast, Like thine, when best he sings, is placed against a thorn. She begins, Let all be still!     Muse, they promise now fulfill! Sweet, oh! sweet, still sweeter yet Can thy words such accents fit, Canst thou syllables refine, Melt a sense that shall retain Still some spirit of the brain, Till with sounds like these it join.     'Twill not be! then change thy note;     Let division shake thy throat. Hark! Division now she tries; Yet as far the Muse outflies.     Cease then, prithee, cease thy tune;     Trifler, wilt thou sing till *June*? Till thy business all lies waste, And the time of building's past!     Thus we poets that have speech,                                              Unlike what they forests teach,     If a fluent vein be shown     That's transcendant to our own, Criticize, reform, or preach, Or censure what we cannot reach.


^^EOP^^

Hail, happy day, when, smiling like the morn,
Fair Freedom rose New-England to adorn:
The northern clime beneath her genial ray,
Dartmouth, congratulates thy blissful sway:
Elate with hope her race no longer mourns,
Each soul expands, each grateful bosom burns,
While in thine hand with pleasure we behold
The silken reins, and Freedom's charms unfold.
Long lost to realms beneath the northern skies 
She shines supreme, while hated faction dies:
Soon as appear'd the Goddess long desir'd,
Sick at the view, she languish'd and expir'd;
Thus from the splendors of the morning light
The owl in sadness seeks the caves of night.
No more, America, in mournful strain
Of wrongs, and grievance unredress'd complain,
No longer shalt thou dread the iron chain,
Which wanton Tyranny with lawless hand
Had made, and with it meant t' enslave the land. 
Should you, my lord, while you peruse my song,
Wonder from whence my love of Freedom sprung,
Whence flow these wishes for the common good,
By feeling hearts alone best understood,
I, young in life, by seeming cruel fate
Was snatch'd from Afric's fancy'd happy seat:
What pangs excruciating must molest,
What sorrows labour in my parent's breast?
Steel'd was that soul and by no misery mov'd
That from a father seiz'd his babe belov'd:
Such, such my case. And can I then but pray
Others may never feel tyrannic sway? 
For favours past, great Sir, our thanks are due,
And thee we ask thy favours to renew,
Since in thy pow'r, as in thy will before,
To sooth the griefs, which thou did'st once deplore.
May heav'nly grace the sacred sanction give
To all thy works, and thou for ever live
Not only on the wings of fleeting Fame,
Though praise immortal crowns the patriot's name,
But to conduct to heav'ns refulgent fane,
May fiery coursers sweep th' ethereal plain,
And bear thee upwards to that blest abode,
Where, like the prophet, thou shalt find thy God.


^^EOP^^

My husband has a crush on Myrna Loy,
and likes to rent her movies, for a treat.
It makes some evenings harder to enjoy. 
The list of actresses who might employ
him as their slave is too long to repeat.
(My husband has a crush on Myrna Loy, 
Carole Lombard, Paulette Goddard, coy
Jean Arthur with that voice as dry as wheat ...)
It makes some evenings harder to enjoy. 
Does he confess all this just to annoy
a loyal spouse? I know I can’t compete.
My husband has a crush on Myrna Loy. 
And can’t a woman have her dreamboats? Boy,
I wouldn’t say my life is incomplete,
but some evening I could certainly enjoy 
two hours with Cary Grant as my own toy.
I guess, though, we were destined not to meet.
My husband has a crush on Myrna Loy,
which makes some evenings harder to enjoy.


^^EOP^^

We have not long to love. Light does not stay. The tender things are those we fold away. Coarse fabrics are the ones for common wear. In silence I have watched you comb your hair. Intimate the silence, dim and warm. I could but did not, reach to touch your arm. I could, but do not, break that which is still. (Almost the faintest whisper would be shrill.) So moments pass as though they wished to stay. We have not long to love. A night. A day....  


^^EOP^^




Highlight Actions
Enable or disable annotations




                                  1  
When the world turns completely upside down
You say we’ll emigrate to the Eastern Shore
Aboard a river-boat from Baltimore;
We’ll live among wild peach trees, miles from town,
You’ll wear a coonskin capcoonskin cap A cap made from a raccoon pelt, and I a gown
Homespun, dyed butternutbutternut A shade of yellow similar to khaki. In the Civil War, some Confederate soldiers wore butternut-colored uniforms, leading them to be nicknamed Butternuts. Southern sympathizers in the North were also referred to as Butternuts.’s dark gold color.
Lost, like your lotus-eating ancestorlotus-eating ancestor An allusion to the Lotos (Lotus) Eaters of Homer’s Odyssey. Odysseus’ men who ate the lotos lost the desire to return home. In Robert Fitzgerald’s translation: “but those who ate this honeyed plant, the Lotos / never cared to report, nor to return: / they longed to stay forever, browsing on / that native bloom, forgetful of their homeland” (Book IX, lines 101-104).,
We’ll swim in milk and honeymilk and honey Attributes of the Promised Land mentioned several times in the Bible, first at Exodus 3.8, where God promises the Israelites “a land flowing with milk and honey” (New Revised Standard Version) till we drown. 
The winter will be short, the summer long,
The autumn amber-hued, sunny and hot,
Tasting of cider and of scuppernongscuppernong A type of wine made from the scuppernong grape, native to the surrounding area of the Scuppernong River in North Carolina; All seasons sweetAll seasons sweet Echoes Samuel Taylor Coleridge’s lines, “Therefore all seasons shall be sweet to thee”, from his poem “Frost at Midnight”, but autumn best of all.
The squirrels in their silver fur will fall
Like falling leaves, like fruit, before your shot.                                     2  
The autumn frosts will lie upon the grass
Like bloom on grapes of purple-brown and gold.
The misted early mornings will be cold;
The little puddles will be roofed with glass.
The sun, which burns from copper into brass,
Melts these at noon, and makes the boys unfold
Their knitted mufflersmufflers Heavy scarves; full as they can hold
Fat pockets dribble chestnuts as they pass. 
Peaches grow wild, and pigs can live in clover;
A barrel of salted herrings lasts a year;
The spring begins before the winter’s over.
By February you may find the skins
Of garter snakes and water moccasinswater moccasins A venomous water snake, also known as cottonmouth
Dwindled and harsh, dead-white and cloudy-clear.                                     3  
When April pours the colors of a shell
Upon the hills, when every little creek
Is shot with silver from the ChesapeakeChesapeake The Chesapeake Bay in Virginia and Maryland
In shoalsshoals Sandbars new-minted by the ocean swell,
When strawberries go begging, and the sleek
Blue plums lie open to the blackbird’s beak,
We shall live well — we shall live very well. 
The months between the cherries and the peaches
Are brimming cornucopias which spill
Fruits red and purple, sombre-bloomed and black;
Then, down rich fields and frosty river beaches
We’ll trample bright persimmons, while you kill
Bronze partridge, speckled quail, and canvasbackcanvasback A wild duck “so called from the color of the back” (A Dictionary of Americanisms, 1951).                                     4  
Down to the Puritan marrow of my bonesPuritan marrow of my bones The Puritans were a persecuted religious group of English Protestants, in the 16th and 17th centuries that wanted to reform or “purify” the Church of England from within. Some Puritans eventually came to New England in the 1630s and 40s, supporting the founding of the Massachusetts Bay Colony. “Puritan” has been used as a pejorative term to describe strict moralists against all worldly pleasures. Marrow is a fatty substance found in the cavities of bones, where blood cells are produced. Marrow provides moisture to bones, which give them further strength. “Marrow of my bones” is a phrase common back to the Bible, referring less literally to the center or core of a thing or issue.
There’s something in this richness that I hate.
I love the look, austere, immaculate,
Of landscapes drawn in pearly monotones.
There’s something in my very blood that owns
Bare hills, cold silver on a sky of slate,
A thread of water, churned to milky spateSpate Freshet or flood
Streaming through slanted pastures fenced with stones. 
I love those skies, thin blue or snowy gray,
Those fields sparse-planted, rendering meagre sheavesSheaves A bundle of cut stalks of grain tied together after reaping;
That spring, briefer than apple-blossom’s breath,
Summer, so much too beautiful to stay,
Swift autumn, like a bonfire of leaves,
And sleepy wintersleepy winter In the same volume, Nets to Catch the Wind, Wylie published the poem “Winter Sleep.”, like the sleep of death.


^^EOP^^

I am inside someone
who hates me. I look
out from his eyes. Smell
what fouled tunes come in
to his breath. Love his
wretched women. 
Slits in the metal, for sun. Where
my eyes sit turning, at the cool air
the glance of light, or hard flesh
rubbed against me, a woman, a man,
without shadow, or voice, or meaning. 
This is the enclosure (flesh,
where innocence is a weapon. An
abstraction. Touch. (Not mine.
Or yours, if you are the soul I had
and abandoned when I was blind and had
my enemies carry me as a dead man
(if he is beautiful, or pitied. 
It can be pain. (As now, as all his
flesh hurts me.) It can be that. Or
pain. As when she ran from me into
that forest.
                Or pain, the mind
silver spiraled whirled against the
sun, higher than even old men thought
God would be. Or pain. And the other. The yes. (Inside his books, his fingers. They
are withered yellow flowers and were never
beautiful.) The yes. You will, lost soul, say
‘beauty.’ Beauty, practiced, as the tree. The
slow river. A white sun in its wet sentences. 
Or, the cold men in their gale. Ecstasy. Flesh
or soul. The yes. (Their robes blown. Their bowls
empty. They chant at my heels, not at yours.) Flesh
or soul, as corrupt. Where the answer moves too quickly.
Where the God is a self, after all.) 
Cold air blown through narrow blind eyes. Flesh,
white hot metal. Glows as the day with its sun.
It is a human love, I live inside. A bony skeleton
you recognize as words or simple feeling. 
But it has no feeling. As the metal, is hot, it is not,
given to love. 
It burns the thing
inside it. And that thing
screams.


^^EOP^^

I am not resigned to the shutting away of loving hearts in the hard ground.
So it is, and so it will be, for so it has been, time out of mind:
Into the darkness they go, the wise and the lovely.  Crowned
With lilies and with laurel they go; but I am not resigned. 
Lovers and thinkers, into the earth with you.
Be one with the dull, the indiscriminate dust.
A fragment of what you felt, of what you knew,
A formula, a phrase remains,—but the best is lost. 
The answers quick and keen, the honest look, the laughter, the love,—
They are gone.  They are gone to feed the roses.  Elegant and curled
Is the blossom.  Fragrant is the blossom.  I know.  But I do not approve.
More precious was the light in your eyes than all the roses in the world. 
Down, down, down into the darkness of the grave
Gently they go, the beautiful, the tender, the kind;
Quietly they go, the intelligent, the witty, the brave.
I know.  But I do not approve.  And I am not resigned.


^^EOP^^

Metal giraffes march up the bluff
toward the lighthouse. In the moonlight,
whales, or their ghosts, litter the sand. 
There is a museum by the park that houses
apartheid; contained in stiff wax dummies. 
The tour bus stops on the road’s edge.
On the right a black town, the left Indian.
Pointing he says: This is the racial divide. 
Stopping at the bar, the drink menu offers—
Red’s Divas only five rand each. 
Each night the pounding sea reminds me
that, here, women are older than God. 
These people carry their dead with them,
plastering them onto every met face. 
Yet love hums like tuning forks
and the fading spreading sound
is the growth of something more. 
Their absence is loud and I long
for the confetti flutter of butterflies. 
Abattoirs litter the landscape with the sinister
air of murder, signs proclaiming: Zumba Butchery,
as though this is where the Zumba’s blood-
lust got the better of them. 
The air conditioner in my room hums
a dirge to a sea too busy spreading rumors. 
Death skips between street children
playing hopscotch in the traffic. 
The woman singing in Zulu, in a Jamaican bar,
is calling down fire, calling down fire.
There is no contradiction.


^^EOP^^

The American eagle is not aware he is
the American eagle. He is never tempted
to look modest. 
When orators advertise the American eagle’s
virtues, the American eagle is not listening.
This is his virtue. 
He is somewhere else, he is mountains away
but even if he were near he would never
make an audience. 
The American eagle never says he will serve
if drafted, will dutifully serve etc. He is
not at our service. 
If we have honored him we have honored one
who unequivocally honors himself by
overlooking us. 
He does not know the meaning of magnificent.
Perhaps we do not altogether either
who cannot touch him.


^^EOP^^

We sold it. To a man
who would be a patriarch.
I told John we were closed in,
subdivisions and trailers all around,
complaints of the smell (though
there was none), Ira came out
and told me to keep them fenced
(though none broke out), the neighbors
frightened because someone’s cousin’s
friend heard of a hog
that ate a child who fell in the pen (though
their children rode my sows
at feeding time), because I was tired,
because Jan carried our child and could
no longer help, because she wanted a home. 
And the patriarch lost his first crop
to weeds, threw a rod in the tractor,
dug a basement and moved the trailer on
for extra bedrooms, cut the water lines
for a ditch, subdivided the farm
and sold the pigs for sausage. I told John
they were his, they were no longer mine,
I couldn’t be responsible. 
The wire connecting our voices was silent
for a moment. “You stupid sonofabitch,” was all
he finally said. “You poor stupid bastard.”


^^EOP^^

What’s the matter with you today
sed John you and Jan fighting?
On no I said it’s not that
it’s a letter I got that’s bothering me.
Must be from the govament
or the insurance, I can understand that.
No, John, it’s not them this time
it’s from a friend.
Did he die or summin?
You aint sed a decent word all morning
I might as well be working by myself
and let you set on the nailkeg
unrolling barbwore 
Oh dammit, John,
it’s just a letter that pissed me off,
I said. It’s from a writer who saw something I wrote
about coyotes killing sheep
and he wrote saying that never happens.
He sez what? sez John.
He said there’s no documented evidence
that a coyote ever killed a sheep
unless it was rabid, I said.
And he said my story was a lie
and should never have been written.
He’s a writer? sez John.
What does he write about?
Oh, he writes novels, I said.
Books about cowboys and Indians
and the California mountains. 
He sez that sed John
did he? You know
most chickens I known of
is layers and most folks
I known is liars
and most of them don’t know the different
but that don’t get in the way
of their opinions.
It was a preacher
got his first call
to come to our town back home
his first sermon that everbody
showed up to hear
was how all people is good
it aint no such of a thing
as a bad person 
he wasn’t in town half a year
before Travis Newberry
knocked up his daughter in the eighth grade
and he was twenty-four by then.
He’d started preaching late
after giving up on farming
and owning a grocery store
must of been too late
he run out of words after bout a year
we had to elect him to office
to give him something to do.
First thing he voted no taxes
and no pay raises to schoolteachers
so they all known he’d be a good one
mebbe governor some day
had to move him out
of the parsonage and into a house
where he had to pay rent
like real people
so they found him a place
out on the end of town
where they could be alone
with that pregnant girl
they took out of school.
It was skunks out there
a mama and four babies
and his wife and that girl
sez oh they’re purdy
let them alone we like them
so he did
by the time she had her baby
they’d killed all their chickens
the Easter ducks and the cats
it was mice and skunks
running all over that place
they couldn’t live there no more
so he run for state office 
they sent that girl
off to Christian school
we never heard of her again
and tried to raise the baby boy
but couldn’t do that neither.
He got elected
to the campaign of no taxes
and close down the schools
cause he blamed it all
on Travis Newberry hanging around
the jr-high parking lot
and moved to the state capital
to live and before
they could rent that house again
they had to set out traps
for two months and rat poison
sed they got twenty-four skunks
but nobody counted the mice
it was awful
took a year for the smells
to go off and it wasn’t no hippies
back then to rent it to
they had to wait it out 
so he run for Warshington office
six years later
and put the boy in the orphanage
up for adoption
he might of been a scandal
but he didn’t get elected
they made him a judge instead
after that and he’s rich
still there and being so famous
he don’t pay no rent
the state gave him a house
and a car and a maid 
but that still don’t mean he known one damn thing
about people or skunks or mice
or preaching or farming or
running a grocery store.
I seen it with my own eyes
a coyote running through
a herd of sheep and killed nine lambs
just to do it
and we set up five nights
in our pickups waiting for him
until he come back
and he killed four more
before we shot him
and that’s nothing to what
Allen Dalley out to Summit lost
that one year when they say
coyotes got half his lamb crop
that’s just a bunch of bullshit
because he done one thing
don’t mean he knows nothing
about anothern
and if he doesn’t know
what he’s talking about
you tell him to just keep his mouth closed
or run for office
that’s what it’s there for
so why don’t you forget about it
and you can forget him too for now
let’s get to work
cause all this is real
not something in a book
and has to be got done for sure
not just by thinking about it
and if you don’t get that frown put in a drawer
this is gone be a long day of work


^^EOP^^

There are stones even here
worn into a malevolence by time
gritting the teeth and tearing
the eyes with the memory. 
Out in the desert, the wind
is a sculptor working the ephemera
of sand. Desperately editing steles
to write the names of thousands of slaves
who died to make Pharaoh great.
It is a fool’s game. 
And we are like the blind musician
at the hotel who tells us with a smile:
I’ll see you later. 
The guard at the pyramid eyes me.
Are you Egyptian? he demands,
then searches my bag for a bomb.
At the hotel they speak Arabic to me,
don’t treat me like the white guests,
and I guess, even here, with all
the hindsight of history we haven’t
learned to love ourselves. 
I cannot crawl into the tombs, and cannot
explain why. How do you say: In my country
they buried me alive for six months?
And so you lie and tell yourself this is love.
I am protecting the world from my rage. 
Rabab tells me: We know how to build graves
here. I nod. I know. It is the same all over Africa. 
Do you have a knife? Do you have one?
the guards at the museum ask Breyten and me,
searching us. We call this on ourselves. We
are clearly political criminals. 
I trace the glyphs chipped into stone.
As a writer I am drawn to this. If I could
I too would carve myself into eternity.
Breyten watching me says: Don’t tell me
you’ve found a spelling mistake in it! 
A line of miniature statues is placed
into the tomb to serve the pharaoh.
One for each day of the year. Four hundred.
The overseers are a plus. I think
even death will not ease
the lot of the poor here. 
Statues: it seems the more I search the world
for differences the more I find it all the same.
Perhaps the Buddha was a jaded traveler too
when he said we are all one. 
Mona argues about who should pay
to see the mummies. It isn’t often I can
treat a girl to a dead body, Breyten insists. 
A woman nearby tells her husand she can see
dead bodies at work. Why pay?
Do you think she works in a hospital? I ask.
That or the U.S. State Department, Breyten agrees. 
From the top of Bab Zwelia, flat rooftops
spread out like a conference of coffee tables.
Broken walls, furniture, pots, litter the roofs
like family secrets sunning themselves.
Two white goats on a roof chew
their way through the debris. 
On the Nile, Rabab sings in Arabic, tells me
she wants to be Celine Dion.
She is my sister calling me home to Egypt.
Perhaps one day I will be ready.
For now it is enough to know I can
be at home here.


^^EOP^^

All of the Indians must have tragic features: tragic noses, eyes, and arms.
Their hands and fingers must be tragic when they reach for tragic food. 
The hero must be a half-breed, half white and half Indian, preferably
from a horse culture. He should often weep alone. That is mandatory. 
If the hero is an Indian woman, she is beautiful. She must be slender
and in love with a white man. But if she loves an Indian man 
then he must be a half-breed, preferably from a horse culture.
If the Indian woman loves a white man, then he has to be so white 
that we can see the blue veins running through his skin like rivers.
When the Indian woman steps out of her dress, the white man gasps 
at the endless beauty of her brown skin. She should be compared to nature:
brown hills, mountains, fertile valleys, dewy grass, wind, and clear water. 
If she is compared to murky water, however, then she must have a secret.
Indians always have secrets, which are carefully and slowly revealed. 
Yet Indian secrets can be disclosed suddenly, like a storm.
Indian men, of course, are storms. They should destroy the lives 
of any white women who choose to love them. All white women love
Indian men. That is always the case. White women feign disgust 
at the savage in blue jeans and T-shirt, but secretly lust after him.
White women dream about half-breed Indian men from horse cultures. 
Indian men are horses, smelling wild and gamey. When the Indian man
unbuttons his pants, the white woman should think of topsoil. 
There must be one murder, one suicide, one attempted rape.
Alcohol should be consumed. Cars must be driven at high speeds. 
Indians must see visions. White people can have the same visions
if they are in love with Indians. If a white person loves an Indian 
then the white person is Indian by proximity. White people must carry
an Indian deep inside themselves. Those interior Indians are half-breed 
and obviously from horse cultures. If the interior Indian is male
then he must be a warrior, especially if he is inside a white man. 
If the interior Indian is female, then she must be a healer, especially if she is inside
a white woman. Sometimes there are complications. 
An Indian man can be hidden inside a white woman. An Indian woman
can be hidden inside a white man. In these rare instances, 
everybody is a half-breed struggling to learn more about his or her horse culture.
There must be redemption, of course, and sins must be forgiven. 
For this, we need children. A white child and an Indian child, gender
not important, should express deep affection in a childlike way. 
In the Great American Indian novel, when it is finally written,
all of the white people will be Indians and all of the Indians will be ghosts.


^^EOP^^

The body is a nation I have not known.
The pure joy of air: the moment between leaping
from a cliff into the wall of blue below. Like that.
Or to feel the rub of tired lungs against skin-
covered bone, like a hand against the rough of bark.
Like that. “The body is a savage,” I said.
For years I said that: the body is a savage.
As if this safety of the mind were virtue
not cowardice. For years I have snubbed
the dark rub of it, said, “I am better, Lord,
I am better,” but sometimes, in an unguarded
moment of sun, I remember the cowdung-scent
of my childhood skin thick with dirt and sweat
and the screaming grass.
But this distance I keep is not divine,
for what was Christ if not God’s desire
to smell his own armpit? And when I
see him, I know he will smile,
fingers glued to his nose, and say, “Next time
I will send you down as a dog
to taste this pure hunger.”


^^EOP^^

1. 
God love you now, if no one else will ever,
Corpse in the paddy, or dead on a high hill
In the fine and ruinous summer of a war
You never wanted. All your false flags were
Of bravery and ignorance, like grade school maps:
Colors of countries you would never see—
Until that weekend in eternity
When, laughing, well armed, perfectly ready to kill
The world and your brother, the safe commanders sent
You into your future. Oh, dead on a hill,
Dead in a paddy, leeched and tumbled to
A tomb of footnotes. We mourn a changeling: you:
Handselled to poverty and drummed to war
By distinguished masters whom you never knew. 
2. 
The bee that spins his metal from the sun,
The shy mole drifting like a miner ghost
Through midnight earth—all happy creatures run
As strict as trains on rails the circuits of
Blind instinct. Happy in your summer follies,
You mined a culture that was mined for war:
The state to mold you, church to bless, and always
The elders to confirm you in your ignorance.
No scholar put your thinking cap on nor
Warned that in dead seas fishes died in schools
Before inventing legs to walk the land.
The rulers stuck a tennis racket in your hand,
An Ark against the flood. In time of change
Courage is not enough: the blind mole dies,
And you on your hill, who did not know the rules. 
3. 
Wet in the windy counties of the dawn
The lone crow skirls his draggled passage home:
And God (whose sparrows fall aslant his gaze,
Like grace or confetti) blinks and he is gone,
And you are gone. Your scarecrow valor grows
And rusts like early lilac while the rose
Blooms in Dakota and the stock exchange
Flowers. Roses, rents, all things conspire
To crown your death with wreaths of living fire.
And the public mourners come: the politic tear
Is cast in the Forum. But, in another year,
We will mourn you, whose fossil courage fills
The limestone histories: brave: ignorant: amazed:
Dead in the rice paddies, dead on the nameless hills.


^^EOP^^

The telephone never rings. Still
you pick it up, smile into the static,
the breath of those you’ve loved; long dead. 
The leaf you pick from the fall
rises and dips away with every ridge.
Fingers stiff from time, you trace. 
Staring off into a distance limned
by cataracts and other collected debris,
you have forgotten none of the long-ago joy
of an ice-cream truck and its summer song. 
Between the paving stones;
between tea, a cup, and the sound
of you pouring;
between the time you woke that morning
and the time when the letter came,
a tired sorrow: like an old flagellant
able only to tease with a weak sting. 
Riding the elevator all day,
floor after floor after floor,
each stop some small victory whittled
from the hard stone of death, you smile.
They used to write epics about moments like this.


^^EOP^^




5-2001



(as on TV) 
Welcome to this
special edition 
double cortege for
Galbraith, Kenneth—
Friedman, Milton— 
ssstately cortege... 
efffusively-shiny
like your kids teeth— 
...such éclaircissement
on this beautiful morning  lustrum
(kids, that’s Latin, we mean to say
“wow”) 
...directly behind the caskets—is that
—it’s the Macy’s Rat (in mid-air)...neat, real neat... 
in front
the lead-coated horses don’t seem to mind the officers’
droppings... 
is that a gigantic molar,
with worms popping out?
—such a variety of colors! 
...look, some Teamsters
are in a tussle with some scab teletubby over on
23rd St. and Madison 
...ok, now, now they’re under arrest... 
if you look carefully you’ll see there’s two pre-funeral exercises for
Fukuyama, Francis—
Soros, George—
on 24th 
—not, not as stately... 
a delegation of mainstream poets! 
and behind them, this year’s NPR security-clearance
float!...ooh... 
ya, they’re rather new at this but...wait— 
there’s a lone guerrilla girl
running through the crowd now 
she’s 
she’s managed to get the Cultural Studies delegation
to strip and 
dress up as 
squeegee-bearing babushkas it looks like 
...it’s 20 degrees so, that’s rather—ok, she’s, she’s
under arrest now... 
...those are neat, those little plastic thingies, aren’t they?... 
The Bill Gates (My Charter) High School Marching Band! 
The Steve Case (My Charter) High School Marching Band! 
behind them
the post ’89, post-historical
acrobat academics 
on mini-lawnmowers... 
that’s smart... 
The Yucky’s! 
The Yucky’s, yeah, they’re an interesting group...
they do things like suppress that
Sidney Poitier
is the best American actor ever 
...oh look, the Fahd ibn Abdel Aziz al-Saúd
float 
...the F14’s behind him are real 
...now, that’s smart! 
...I think he just waved at me 
...who’s that man with the Monocle grabbing his— 
that’s Mister Modernist! 
he’s been a regular at these events for over 90 years now 
...Saga of The Blank Page float
a real favorite... 
ooh, he just dropped his—wait 
a babushka—her, her boot’s— 
crkkkk... 
oh, that’s, that’s not good...but 
—did you know that
these are the first
100% soy
caskets
ever made? 
some people have actually run up to nibble at them... 
kids, if you’re watching this... 
make sure you never think of any other social arrangement
other than one that 
Militarily Has To Dominate Three Quarter of The World


^^EOP^^

Ohdammit sez John I’m in trouble
so I sed why John?
John sez I got the bill for my insurance
and I haven’t got no money to pay it
cause I won’t get paid for swoking and bailing
Keith Guymon’s hay till next week
I done told him that would be just fine
when he ast a week ago but
LaVerne she went and opened the damn envelope
on a chain letter and I aint got no time
to write out twenty copies
I got to get that hay finished
so what am I posta do now? 
I sez what John? John sez
it’s the damn govament
sends them things out I know it
and it works with the post office and
the insurance to keep you in line
I sez what John? 
John sez my brother oncet
he got this chain letter back home
he didn’t have no time
to write out his copies neither
it sez he has four days to wrote it
before the luck comes good or bad
it aint never good I heard of
be he forgot
back then it was $5,000 this feller got
in four days and then later
when the govament ruint the money
he put on a zero it was $50,000
and then it was $100,000
now it sez he got $420,000
it’s the same guy it was in
that letter back then
just the numbers changed
it’s the way the govament has
to let us know how much
he’s gone let the money be worth
but the next day because he hadn’t
wrote out his twenty letters
he lost all that money
but my brother he was busy too
he didn’t do his letters 
the third day after
he had to go kill these pigs
for this man but this other feller
was gone bring his milkcow down
get her bred to my brother’s bull
he told him go ahead and do it
he sez he’d have his boy
walk her down the road
it wasn’t far
so while my brother was gone
his boy brought her down
turnt her in the corral
he climbt up on the fence to watch 
it might of been fine
except the hogs been rooting
up under the barn wall
my brother he borrowed
this lectric fence
he strung it along the side of the barn
so the bull mounts up on the milkcow
she turns and backs him up
against the barn he’s stuckt
he gets his back feet
tangled in that lectric fence
one in front and one back
he tries to move and he just tightens
up the lectric wire
that boy he sez you could hear it
zzip zzip zipp that bull
he starts to bellering
milkcow she don’t know
what’s going on so she backs him up
tighter against the barn
it isn’t no way he can get off
he commences to jumping up and down
on her and trying to get his feet
loost of that lectric wire
but he caint it goes zzip
he bellers and she backs up more
it goes zzip again
it was like he was doing a dance
like them crazy people do
trying to get his legs loost
hollering like a sonofabitch 
so it was hogs there too
they heard it and here they come
it wasn’t natural and a hog
it won’t let nothing that’s not natural
stay that way around them
it has to get right or go away or die
that boy sez they all run up
grunted and squolt like hell
when that didn’t work
this one old mean bitching sow
she run right in between them
she bit that bull right on his seeds
she wanted him to stop acting that way
making all that noise
jumping up and down like that
right now 
that bull he just went over backwards
right up against the barn
like he’d been shot in the head
knocked the whole goddam end
of the barn down
fell right on his back
the end rafter come down
on his chest it torn a piece of skin off
his pecker to his seeds
wide as your hand
they swolt up like basketballs
from the hogbite
broke ribs they figured
but it never did kill him
that milkcow she wan’t finished
she kept backing up
and fell down right on top of him
it was only the end of the barn
come down the rest stood up
that boy he’s ascairt
he got daddy’s milkcow up
off my brother’s bull he left
he sed he seen enough for oncet 
my brother that night
he’s coming home from killing them hogs
he never knew none of this happened yet
he’s driving see? and he’d lost
his picking finger on his left hand
in the leaf springs of a wagon
when we’s kids so
he’s driving left-handed
and doing the gears and picking
with his right hand
it was a moon out so he’d turned off
his pickup lights listening
to the radio because his battery
wasn’t much good
he couldn’t do both
while he was driving
he couldn’t see good as
he thot he could
he hit this big chuckhole
slung him right into the steering wheel
he figured it would of broke his nose
if he hand’t been picking
but his hand took the cushion
it only gave him a nosebleed
but almost broke his hand
where it hit
his knuckles was bruised so bad
he couldn’t even open and shut
his fingers for a week
he had to drive the rest of the way home
left-handed and lean acrost
and shift with that hand too
he thot the other one was broke
but it wasn’t
he got home and the first thing
he seen was the end of his barn out
that bull standing there
inside the barn with his head down low
my brother thot he’d butted it down
he run in the house to get his gun
he was mad he would of kilt that bull
but they told him how it happened
so he didn’t
he went out to look
but it wasn’t no way they could
get that bull to go back in that yard
where them pigs was
he wouldn’t go out the barn
they him him acrost the butt
with a board he’d just stand there
he didn’t care no more 
they went in the house
my brother he got out the dishpan
and soaked some cold water
so he lain his hand in it
to get the swollen to go down
he wouldn’t tell them how it happened
at first but while he was setting there
with his hand ducked
he remembered that chain letter
he jumped up and run to get it
sloshed water all over the kitchen floor
he was hollering how long’s it been?
how long’s it been?
they sez it happened this morning
it was just his morning
he sez whar? they sez when the sow
bit the bull on his seeds
knocked the barn down
he hollers no not that
how long’s it been since I got
this here chain letter in the mail?
they sez oh three days
he sez goddam I only got one day left 
my brother he set up all night
writing out his twenty copies
he had to tape the pencil to his hand
cause it was swole up
his fingers wouldn’t bent
they sed he even wrote some
with his left hand
it was so bad you couldn’t read the words
he got them all done by sunup
the fourth day like it sed
and took it to the mailbox 
he waited all morning on the porch
till they remembered it was Memoral Day
the mail he wouldn’t come
my brother he about had a worm
he run out to the mailbox
and got them letters he run over
to his pickup and clumb in
it wouldn’t crunk
he’d run the battery down
listening to the radio
goddam my brother he was mad
he busted the side winder
with his head when the pickup
wouldn’t turn over
jumped out and slammed the door
so hard it didn’t catch
it bounce right back and hit him
right on his swole-up hand
it hurt so bad he sez
he nearly fainted of the pain
he knew he had to get them letters
in the mail
so he walked all the way to town
it was more’n ten miles back then
it worked
nothing else happened
they got the end back in the barn
without it coming down
but they had to shoot the bull finally
and eat him
because he wouldn’t do nothing
just set there and waste away
he’d seen enough they guessed
it wasn’t no way he’d go
back out there with them pigs
in the corral 
since then ever time
we seen a envelope in my family
it looks like it might be a chain letter
we don’t open it till we got time
to set down right then
and make out them twenty copies
like it sez to do
but this time LaVerne must of forgot
it snuck up on her
when I got home it was laying
on the table and it wasn’t nothing
I could do
it was my name on the envelope 
I know it come from the insurance company
it was two years ago the man’s wife
from the insurance called
she sez to LaVerne then that she wanted her
to come to her house
she wanted to tell her about selling Amway
LaVerne she sez she wasn’t inarrested
a week later here comes
the insurance bill
by god it’s gone up almost double
I sez how come you didn’t go?
you could of just set and nod
now see what happened?
but it was too late 
so I’m gone to have to stay up tonight
writing chain letters
I done wrote one to send to the insurance
so he’ll know I did it
and let the govament know
I wrote him a note on the bottom
and sez I’ll pay the insurance bill
as soon as I can
but things is tough all over
I just hope he’ll understand
I’d as soon right now
rather not have no luck at all
but I am willing to cooperate
if that’s what my duty is
as a patriotic American citizen


^^EOP^^

dear dusty moth
wearing miller’s cloth,
Sophia Nichols’ soft
voice calls wings
at dusk
           across railroads
and sagebrush
to lull me to sleep,
‘Come to these window corners,
come, rest on my boy’s dreams
and flight,
come tonight’ 
                                                2 September 2002


^^EOP^^

The most inscrutable beautiful names in this world
always do sound like diseases.
It’s because they are engorged.
G., I am a fool.
What we feel in the solar plexus wrecks us.
Halfway squatting on a crate where feeling happened. Caresses. 
You know corporeal gifts besmirch thieves like me.
But she plucks a feather and my steam escapes.
                                                We’re awake
each night at pennymoon and we micro and necro.
I can’t stop. But love and what-all:
the uncomfortable position of telling the truth,
like the lotus, can’t be held long.
                                               If she knew would she
just take all her favors from my marmalade
vessel and chuck them back
into the endless reversible garment which is my life—
                                               an astonishing vanishing.
G., I know this letter is like a slice of elevator accident.
As smart folk would say,
“Everything is only Nothing’s Truck.” 
I would revise it and say that everything is only
nothing, truncated. 
Love, 
Your Igor


^^EOP^^

Like being reassigned to a case being made—to win? 
            for a world
            mocked-up—terms
            to contest? 
Or, self glutting the market of experience— 
            am am, a
            did this that—
            as “voice” script? 
Or, reining in the thrusting impulse that’d burst—out! 
            and into. . .
            timed pattern
            a male’s—“mine?” 
Or, a hyper-local cultural thing—to do— 
            conscious stance
            between friends
            strung along? 
Or, some gnawing negation—impelling all this? 
            din’ wanna
            (really did)
            am “writing?” 
Or, being dispatched to a cramped corner of the vast. . . 
            work-a-day
            transactions
            transmission? 
Or, alibis for (if not from) the near Black Out— 
            detecting
            vital signs
            or dissent? 
Or, The National—reifying itself—can read? 
            preemptive
            authorships
            as “progress”? 
Or, a once-elitist practice—popularized— 
            aimless youth
            called forth—I
            came (aimed at?) 
Or, recombinant ruses of power—“allure”— 
            who writes who
            here—and how
            sex—transects? 
Or, Capital’s quandaries of identity— 
            certified—
            the stakes—now
            lowered? raised? 
Or, malingering with History’s inducements— 
            disciplined
            we won’t be
            though are—need? 
Or, a schedule of vanguardist—occupations— 
            vacuum left
            by the left
            to fill out? 
Or, the Nors that can’t be stated (just yet) can—mean? 
            forming trends
            at the base
            asserting? 
Or, wouldn’t non-pop perspectives be also writ? 
            discursive
            bumps and grinds
            to report? 
Or, logging on to a collectivizing—chance? 
            bodies here
            plunked down—will
            plunk up. . . toward? 
Or, newly glozed invectives—to desublimate? 
            old belles lettres
            upgraded
            downplays gain? 
Or, the pervasive liberinage of Genres— 
            which clothes which
            strips which—for
            thrills—mostly? 
Or, a progressivist (scientistic)—complex? 
            regrounding
            the grounds (props
            dignity? 
Or, an overdue reunion with precedence— 
            compulsion
            to just flake
            kept in check? 
Or, why did you come—to hear something you don’t know? 
            already—
            sorting terms—
            assigned to? 
Or, a realization of what’s yet unrealized— 
            postscript or
            preamble
            to praxis?


^^EOP^^

Other weddings are so shrewd on the sofa, short
and baffled, bassett-legged. All things 
knuckled, I have no winter left, in my sore rememory,
to melt down for drinking water. Shrunk down. 
Your wedding slides the way wiry dark hairs do, down
a swimming pool drain. So I am drained. 
Sincerely. I wish you every chapped bird on this
pilgrimage to hold your hem up from the dust. 
Dust is plural: infinite dust. I will sink in the sun,
I will crawl towards the heavy drawing 
and design the curtains in the room
of never marrying you. Because it is a sinking, 
because today’s perfect weather is a later life’s
smut. This soiled future unplans love. 
I keep unplanning the same Sunday. Leg
and flower, breeze and terrier, I have no garden 
and couldn’t be happier. Please, don’t lose me
here. I am sorry my clutch is all 
tendon and no discipline: the heart is a severed
kind of muscle and alone. 
I can hear yours in your room. I hear mine
in another room. In another’s.


^^EOP^^

from a distance
almost festive 
rippling in the morning breeze 
soft conversations
great piles of scallions 
a pungent sun illuminates the faces of young girls 
she keeps grabbing them, straightening out their roots and tails 
in a little gesture of self-consciousness, she pulls her sweater
away from her face
knocks the dirt off, ties a rubber band around them 
Ejido San Quintin 
all are packed in ice
and shipped to Great Britian 
__________  
from a distance
almost restive 
rising on the 20th floor 
clipped conversations
great piles of papers 
a humming fax machine illuminates the faces of young girls 
they keep grabbing at her, straightening out her hands and fingers 
in a little gesture of self-consciousness, she pulls her sweater
away from her face
lifts it off the paper tray, sticks a sticky on it 
Ejido San Quintin 
all are packed in ice
and shipped to Great Britian 
__________  
from a distance
almost resistive 
basking in the building’s fluorescent light 
algebraic conversations
great piles of direct objects 
a deadened emotion illuminates the faces of young girls 
he keeps changing them, sorting out the nouns and verbs 
in a little gesture of trained-consciousness, he quickly minimizes
the screen from his face
knocks the dirt off, ties a rubber band around them 
Ejido San Quintin 
all are packed in ice
and shipped to Great Britian 
__________  
from a distance
almost imperceptive 
breezing through the morning frequencies 
anxious reservations
great piles of diners 
a poetry audience illuminates the faces of young girls 
she keeps grabbing them, straightening out their roots and social
whereabouts 
in a non-literal gesture of class-consciousness, he pulls her
sweater away from her face
knocks the dirt off, ties a rubber band around them 
Ejido San Quintin 
all are packed in ice
and shipped to Great Britian 
__________  
from a distance
almost assertive 
shuffling through the evening news 
moot conversations
great piles of rotting vegetables 
a pungent spin-off literature illuminates the faces of young girls 
it keeps grabbing him, chopping up his roots and raison d’êtres 
in a tactically abstract solidarizing gesture of class-consciousness,
she peels his self conscious piece away from her face 
knocks the dirt off, ties a rubber band around it 
Ejido San Quintin 
all are packed in ice
and shipped to Great Britian 
_________   Ejido: A landholding community owned collectively by its members. In 1992,
the Mexican congress (largely at the behest of Wall Street) passed legislation
aimed at watering-down Article 27 of the Mexican Constitution (guaranteeing
the fundamental economic and cultural rights of the ejidos), opening the way
for the privatization and commercialization of the lands, thus rendering the
peasants’ political gains (stemming from the Mexican Revolution of 1910-
1917) effectively moot.


^^EOP^^




Christopher Smart, 1722-1771
Blackula Poland China, 1971-1975
(memorandus)



For I will consider my black sow Blackula.
For she is the servant of the god of the feed bucket and serveth him.
For she worships the god in him and the secret of his pail in her way.
For this is done by screams of incantation at the appointed hour and lusty bites of daily communion.
For she stands with forelegs upon the top rail of the wooden fence in supplication.
For she grunts her thanks while she eats.
For she stands for the red boar with closed eyes at the appointed hour.
For having done she lies in the mud to consider herself.
For this she performs in ten degrees.
For first she rolls in her wallow to cover her body.
For secondly she lies still to feel the wet.
For thirdly she stretches her length and casts her belly to the sun.
For fourthly she exhales God’s air in huge sighs.
For fifthly she rises and examines her feed trough that replenishment might miraculously appear.
For sixthly she scratches her side against the fence.
For seventhly she scratches her jowl with delicate pastern swipe.
For eighthly she smells the breeze to ascertain the red boar’s presence.
For ninthly she returns to her mud and plows large holes in the earth.
For tenthly she lies again in the wallow to cool her frame.
For having considered her world she will sleep and dream dreams of herself and her god and the red boar.
For like Eve for softness she and sweet attractive Grace was formed.
For the red boar lusteth mightily and foameth at the mouth for her.
For he might escape and enter her pen.
For if he does this in a nonappointed hour she will scream loudly and discourage his kisses.
For her belly is full and needeth no more.
For in one month she will bring forth life in abundance.
For in her last litter she farrowed eight piglets of the red boar.
For three were black and five were red.
For she raised them all and laid on none.
For one in eight is normally crushed by the sow.
For she is exceedingly good in all that she does.
For she is surely of the tribe of Elephant and forgetteth not.
For she weighs near six hundred pounds.
For she has ears of tremendous size.
For she is heavy.
For a large sow is a term of the Titan Elephant.
For she has the appetite of a bird and would eat the day long which in debt her master suppresses.
For he would not have her too fat or his checkbook hollow.
For he keeps her well-fed and she breaks no fence.
For she grunts in pleasure from the mud when he scratches her ears.
For she is a tool of God to temper his mind.
For when she eats her corn she turns and shits in her trough.
For her master is provoked but hereby learns patience.
For she is an instrument for him to learn bankruptcy upon.
For he lost but four dollars each on the last litter of pigs.
For this is admirable in the world of the bank.
For every man is incomplete without one serious debt or loss.
For she provides this with her good faith.
For every farm is a skeleton without a mortgage.
For the Lord admonished black sows when he said lay up no stores of treasure on earth.
For she prohibits this daily.
For she is a true child of God and creature of the universe.
For she is called Blackula which is a derivative of the Devil, but false.
For she does worship her God and Savior.
For she was given her name for breaking a fence and eating Jan’s garden beets.
For when Jan came with a stick and wrath she lifted her head and smiled.
For her teeth and mouth were stained with red beet pulp.
For Jan dropped the stick and laughed.
For she looked like a six-hundred-pound vampire.
For she was called Blackula.
For we feed her red beets daily to watch her smile.
For she is humble when well-fed.
For she makes her point well when she is hungry.
For there is nothing swifter than a sow breaking fence when she desires.
For there is nothing more beautiful than a sow in full run when being chased through a garden.
For there is no sound more pure than her scream when she is hit with a stick.
For she is meek in all aspects when satisfied.
For when John Sims saw her lying in mud he proclaimed her majesty.
For he whistled and called her a pretty sonofabitch.
For he offered to trade his beat-up truck for her straight across.
For she has divine spirit and is manifest as a complete pig.
For she is tame and can be taught.
For she can run and walk and sleep and drink and eat.
For she can scream at the red boar.
For she allows her ears and belly to be scratched.
For she allows small children to ride her back.
For she sleeps in mounds of straw at night.
For she produces litters of healthy black and red pigs.
For she can root the earth.
For she can carry sticks in her mouth.
For she will grunt when she is addressed.
For she can jump not far but hard.
For dried earth cracks in the places where she walks.
For she is hated by the breeders of cattle and sheep.
For the former loses more money than I do on his stock.
For the latter fears her mind.
For she has no wool and will not blindly follow his steps.
For he carries no bucket of feed.
For she litters twice per year.
For he litters but once.
For her belly is firm and can take much abuse.
For from this proceeds her worth.
For I perceive God’s mystery by stroking her teats.
For I felt tiny lumps of flesh within and knew they were alive.
For the life is the physical substance which God sends from Heaven to sustain the appetites of men.
For God has blessed her womb and the red boar’s seed.
For they multiply in ecstasy at the appointed time.
For God has blessed her in many ways.
For God has given her the red beets to eat.
For God has given the water for her to drink.
For God has allowed the water to run to mud in a place for her to lay.
For she cannot fly to the mountain streams, though she walks well upon the earth.
For she walks the earth heavy upon tiny feet.
For she treads all the rows of the summer garden.
For she can jump the fence.
For she can push it down.
For she can eat.


^^EOP^^

Pyongyang, if you’ll please, STOP
                                        appearing
                                        in the poem
like this—
unannounced 
* 
In writing to your
Pomomomo 
(that special critical topos
between an ideolophe fahtha’
and a para-juridical muhtha’ ) 
This-side-of-the-Hudson
Psycho-Acoustics 
Jangling— 
Claim you
what? 
“We call it dead in the wa wa
don’ mean jacky bits” 
“Pyongyang” 
* 
But it does...
as an In Walk Bud
flips the whooole session
on its head 
lexicals
in range
clash
and dash out 
patch 14ths
off the scale
to perfect fifths
effects 
REACT
rather more differently
than before 
with   
“Pyongyang”
in there 
* 
And “Quetzalcoatl” 
Lands on
“Tarragon”
jangling it? 
If that’s where the Nitro’s stored, in
“Tarragon” 
bird’s already been
blown off 
feathers
falling 
field’s been
re-charged 
* 
And “Thatcher?” as guest
jaw-harp
soloist? 
The E.U.’s
formative   
contradictions 
unresolved? 
some kill in that cut— 
you got the mic, pomomomo 
make a ho’ youself 
and Maggy  and us


^^EOP^^

There are two kinds of people, soldiers and women,
as Virginia Woolf said. Both for decoration only. 
Now that is too kind. It’s technical: virgins and wolves.
We have choices now. Two little girls walk into a bar, 
one orders a shirley temple. Shirley Temple’s pimp
comes over and says you won’t be sorry. She’s a fine 
piece of work but she don’t come cheap. Myself, I’m
in less fear of predators than of walking around 
in my mother’s body. That’s sneaky, that’s more
than naked. Let’s even it up: you go on fuming in your 
gray room. I am voracious alone. Blank and loose,
metallic lingerie. And rare black-tipped cigarettes 
in a handmade basket case. Which of us weaves
the world together with a quicker blur of armed 
seduction: your war-on-thugs, my body stockings.
Ascetic or carnivore. Men will crack your glaze 
even if you leave them before morning. Pigs
ride the sirens in packs. Ah, flesh, technoflesh, 
there are two kinds of people. Hot with mixed
light, drunk on insult. You and me.


^^EOP^^

Oh, yes, the rain is sorry. Unfemale, of course, the rain is
with her painted face still plain and with such pixel you’d never see 
it in the pure freckling, the lacquer of her. The world
is lighter with her recklessness, a handkerchief so wet it is clear. 
To you. My withered place, this frumpy home (nearer
to the body than to evening) miserable beloved. I lie tender 
and devout with insomnia, perfect on the center pillow past
midnight, sick with the thought of another year 
of waking, solved and happy, it has never been this way! Believe
strangers who say the end is close for what could be closer? 
You are my stranger and see how we have closed. On both ends.
Night wets me all night, blind, carried. 
And watermarks. The plough of the rough on the slick,
love, a tendency toward fever. To break. To soil. 
Would I dance with you? Both forever and rather die.
It would be like dying, yes. Yes I would. 
I have loved the slaking of your forgetters, your indifferent
hands on my loosening. Through a thousand panes of glass 
not all transparent, and the temperature.
I felt that. What you say is not less than that.


^^EOP^^

the absence was there before the meeting    the radical of
presence    and absence does not return with death’s chance-
encounter, as in the old duality, life or death, wherein
the transcendence of the one translates the other into an everness
we do not meet in heaven, that outward of hell and death’s
beauty    it is a bright and terrible disk
                                                  where Jack is, where
Charles is, where James is, where Berg is  is here in the continuous carmen    O, some things—di—breathe into—aspirate—and lead away— deducite!    for the soul is a thing among many
                           Berkeley shimmers and shakes
in my mind    most lost    the absence preceded the place
and the friendships    Lady Rosario among us    of Spanish and Greek rushes
from the hedges around the gas station,
                swirled with Lawrence’s medlars and
sorb-apples                   
                                                                                     What
is it reminds us of white gods
                                           flesh-fragrant
as if with sweat    the delicious rottenness 

^^EOP^^

let me get the vocabulary of this song
right—the curious happiness of poetry—
the word materialism dropped by the way
side—its mereness of the other face of
spiritualism—just two notes to sing—
repetitious dualism—do—do—once in a while
one squawks louder than the other, baby
crows being weaned before the next batch—
thus, singing, move from how it does matter—
Oh!—a murder of crows 
                                                              1998


^^EOP^^

You love a woman and you wonder where she goes all night in some tricked-
out taxicab, with her high heels and her corset and her big, fat mouth. 
You love how she only wears her glasses with you, how thick
and cow-eyed she swears it’s only ever you she wants to see. 
You love her, you want her very ugly. If she is lovely big, you want her
scrawny. If she is perfect lithe, you want her ballooned, a cosmonaut. 
How not to love her, her bouillabaisse, her orangina. When you took her
to the doctor the doctor said, “Wow, look at that!” and you were proud, 
you asshole, you love and that’s how you are in love. Any expert, observing
human bodies, can see how she’s exceptional, how she ruins us all. 
But you really love this woman, how come no one can see this? Everyone must
become suddenly very clumsy at recognizing beauty if you are to keep her. 
You don’t want to lose anything, at all, ever. You want her sex depilated, you
want everyone else not blind, but perhaps paralyzed, from the eyes down. 
You wonder where she goes all night. If she leaves you, you will know
everything about love. If she’s leaving you now, you already know it.


^^EOP^^

Inside I brought
willows, the tips
bursting,
             blue
iris (I forget
the legend of long life
they represent)
and the branch of pepper tree
whose pink seeds
lack the passion of most fruit. 
On my hands a perfume of pepper. 
Outside the rain walks. 
There were two.
Their posture
taken out of the wall-
paper (a ghost story)
Jack talked.    His
determined privacy against
my public face.     The poem
by dictation.      A
disturbance in the cone
of weather.
                         Neither of these
is not making.     The comic
is a matter of style
as yellow hands mark the worker. 
The clown of dignity sits in a tree.
The clown of games hangs there too.
Which is which or where they go—
the point is to make others see
that two men in a tree is clearly
the same thing as poetry.


^^EOP^^

There is no salutation.     The
harvesters with gunny sacks
bend picking up jade stones. 
(Sure that Amor would appear
in sleep.     Director.    Guide.) 
Secret borrowings fit into their hands. 
Cold on the tongue.
White flecks on the water. 
These jade pebbles are true green
when wet. 
On the seventh night, the branches parted.
                                     The other replied,
How photographic.      Amor doesn’t appear
on demand.   He’s more like a snake skin.
If he fits, he lets you in
or sheds your body against the rocks. 
                                     I slept in a fort.
My bed pushed up against the log
enclosure.    At 3:00 his ankles pressed
against each side of my head.
When I woke crying for help
he rose near the kitchen door
dressed as a hunter. 
                                    The other replied,
Amor born like a cup trembles
at the lip.   Superstitions fit
into your hands. 
Thou has returned to thy house. 
                                    The other replied,
Torn loose from the eaves,
the blood trembles at the lips. 
Nine fetters on thy feet
Nine crossings of the street 
Nine suppers where they meet
Nine words of loss repeat
this and that 
Nine hunters cross the field
Nine lovers yield
their right of way 
Two came fighting out of the dark.


^^EOP^^

so it is death is the
condition of infinite form—
the rebellion of particulars,
ourselves and each thing,
even ideas, against that infinitude,
is the story of finitude—the
dream of the children harvested
in a harvester-machine
there are the real voice
and the voice imagined
and both have a reality,
but the latter is out of it
the ladder of things  never accept gifts from the gods
—Hesiod’s bitter-sweet sense of it—
rings true and doesn’t
settle the sea-shore down
to where the heart breaks or is bronzed
‘I am happy,’ the man said,
‘because the toad of the morning
is the worst thing I’ll find today’
and CBC’s TV critic says, ‘television
is the Shakespeare of the 20th century’
red lilies fall on the carpet
and Art Tatum, drawing his art
out of hymns, wanted more dissonance
perfect 
there are knives in the air
all around the poorly loved
their lives follow life back
into stone and they dream
a sweeter consonance at the centre
the art of a screaming and
demented oyster

^^EOP^^

Until then, every forest had wolves in it, we thought it would be fun to wear snowshoes all the time, and we could talk to water.  So who is this woman with the gray breath calling out names and pointing to the little desks we will occupy for the rest of our lives?


^^EOP^^

The streets are my body
or rather the wish
of the skin to put on
the grass in a gold rain 
not vice-versa,
the lips twisting to allow
the tongue to play in
the broken mirror on the floor
Catches an arm
a distance
                 the light
at the ceiling
                    This kills
the lift begged
of a magical hand 
I have walked a long way
traced in these pieces
an arm
a crotch     The queen
of faerie guarded
by blue-winged griffins 
Untouched by


^^EOP^^




for Dennis Wheeler



there are shining masters
when I tell you what they
look like    some of it is
nearly false   their blue hair 
but they are not ourselves   they
are equivalents   of action    they
compose forms,    which we hear  sound within a context
as if that action we are
images of    used us
the body becomes an instrument 
sometimes the harp pierces the body
and a man only hangs on the strings 
I hear the airborne-fire, the dead rebels’
second speech, which follows their live words,
and the rice, and the motorcycles 
but public life has fallen asleep
like a secret name    the wrong-reader
will say he has pity for others
where the thought is born in hatred
of pity

^^EOP^^

the root and mirror
of a plant
               its shape
and power familiar
iris 
the light is disturbed by
the boxwood leaves
shining
                rosemary
green, unblossoming
(the earth is too damp) 
the eye catches
almost a tune 
the moth in the piano
wherein
               unhammered
the air rings with 
an earlier un
ease of the senses
disturbed ( by Mrs. Arpan,
wife of a sailor


^^EOP^^

it is essentially reluctance  the language
a darkness, a friendship, tying to the real
but it is unreal 
the clarity desired, a wish for true sight,
all tangling 
‘you’ tried me, the everyday which
caught me, turning the house 
in the wind, a lovecraft  the political
was not my business  I could not look 
without seeing the decay, the shit poured
on most things, by indifference, the personal 
power which is simply that,     demanding a friend
take dullness out of the world  (he doesn’t know
his lousy emptiness)                      I slept
in a fire    on my book bag, one dried wing 
of a white moth     the story is of a man
who lost his way in the holy wood 
because the way had never been taken without
at least two friends,  one on each side, 
and I believe my dream said one of the others
always led     now left to acknowledge, 
he can’t breathe, the darkness bled
the white wing,     one     of the body 
of the moth that moved him, of the other
wing,     the language is bereft


^^EOP^^

the poets have always preceded,
as Mallarmé preceded Cézanne,
neck and neck    that was no
privilege, sweet and forgotten 
seated in chairs, the afternoon
marches along with the shadows
which are not bougainvillaea but
northern    I have always loved 
shadows as long as they were northern
and moved gently west    like the
crack-up of books, their spines
tingling with notes and stuffing 
most people remember the gardens
with cement flowers and the
house going straight up like
solidified swimming-pools or lilies 
when you get to the top which
they once called widow’s walk,
you wait in nothing but your garden
hat, beautifully otherwise naked 
for the wind-swept sea and the dying
sweetness or womb, declaring the completion
of philosophy

^^EOP^^

It is their way to find the surface
when they die.
                      Fish feed on fish
and drop those beautiful bones
                                              to swim.
I see them stretch the water to their need
as I domesticate the separate air to be my
breath.
            These fish die easily. 
I find my surface in the way they feed.
Their gathering hunger is a flash like death.
No agony
               as if
                      my mind had eaten death.


^^EOP^^

the wind hits and returns     it is easy to personify
a new place and language,     but the new body stings 
these men with green eyelids, drawing their worth,
it was rumoured, from Egypt, knew 
the work is part of it     a power arrived at the
same thirst 
                   he borrowed a head for a day 
but which head     the phrases tremble in the other
mouth    it is true and false     the veil of her face, 
an old porcelain, not for the hand to comfort     she
moved beyond the sop one gave for affection    ‘My 
success has been to keep duty and love alive’    she said
her hand waved with the power of disease      Sophia 
Nichols of the orchards, the deserts, the flooded
ponds and games wherein the moon sought our feet 
died with a mouth full of tumour      it is true and
false   the moon flowers  ( that is Blake talking ) 
tonight it is the half blossom and the stars too
above this mud are from the other mouth     this city 
untouched     the streets, Hotel Lyric have a foreignness,
a place outside a window     a sound of bees pulling 
the lilac     above cement this wonder ( the other mouth )
that crickets were men once who so loved the muses they 
forgot to eat     now fed on thistles, the language must
sting    the flesh turn to a dew ( the other mouth ) the 
loss,    some glistening blood on the leaves of the mirror
plant    Sophia Nichols of the story, the goldenrod,
of the snake that entered the cage and ate the captured
sparrows, the telegraph keys, pale yellow paper,     of 
the Odyssey and the homing stories of the soul,     the sea
imaginary, light and foaming green on the rocks  dark 
further out as the eye of the cat
                                                         if she would be
free from words, she would free me   even in the night 
there are birds summoned by words


^^EOP^^

our suppers stunned on the table
hold radios
                      hold
flasks of sound,
                        sharp intensities
bottled up for a time 
I taste your imagination, authors,
and place it among cotton trees
whose white stuff perches, 
cousins of the air 
if the manner could be political
the high walls protect against disgust 
the lady of blue glass
                               joined by
Pierrot, a griffin,    papers, books,
the chilled correspondence,     and
another woman whose futurist shape
suggests lines of the wind 
on my desk 
to awaken
the traffic would have to run into the radio


^^EOP^^

one should never play martyr
there are martyrs beyond you 
one should never argue apocalypse
without your whole lifetime before
you, which is impossible 
        Pushkin said, ‘my sadness
        is luminous’—this is
        his reason 
Ralph flew to Bristol to see her
she said, ‘You’re not in touch with
Eternity’
he said, ‘Gee, that’s true,’
then later sent a telegram,
‘meet me in Jerusalem,’
since he was going


^^EOP^^

If the angle of an eye is all,   
the slant of hope, the slant of dreaming, according to each life,
what is the light of this city,
light of Lady Liberty, possessor of the most famous armpit in the world,
light of the lovers on Chinese soap operas, throwing BBQ’d ducks at each other   
                                                             with that live-it-up-while-you’re-young, Woo Me kind of love,
light of the old men sitting on crates outside geegaw shops
                                                             selling dried seahorses & plastic Temples of Heaven,
light of the Ying ‘n’ Yang Junk Palace,
light of the Golden Phoenix Hair Salon, light of Wig-o-ramas,
light of the suntanners in Central Park turning over like rotisserie chickens sizzling on a spit,
light of the Pluck U & Gone with the Wings fried-chicken shops,
the parking-meter-leaners, the Glamazons,
the oglers wearing fern-wilting quantities of cologne, strutting, trash-talking, glorious:
the immigrants, the refugees, the peddlars, stockbrokers and janitors, stenographers and cooks,
all of us making and unmaking ourselves,   
hurrying forwards, toward who we’ll become, one way only, one life only:   
free in time but not from it,
here in the city the living make together, and make and unmake over and over
Quick, quick, ask heaven of it, of every mortal relation,
feeling that is fleeing,
for what would the heart be without a heaven to set it on?
I can’t help thinking no word will ever be as full of life as this world,   
I can’t help thinking of thanks.


^^EOP^^

When I was a child I knew red miners
dressed raggedly and wearing carbide lamps.
I saw them come down red hills to their camps
dyed with red dust from old Ishkooda mines.
Night after night I met them on the roads,
or on the streets in town I caught their glance;
the swing of dinner buckets in their hands,
and grumbling undermining all their words. 
I also lived in low cotton country
where moonlight hovered over ripe haystacks,
or stumps of trees, and croppers’ rotting shacks
with famine, terror, flood, and plague near by;
where sentiment and hatred still held sway
and only bitter land was washed away.


^^EOP^^

All you violated ones with gentle hearts;
You violent dreamers whose cries shout heartbreak;
Whose voices echo clamors of our cool capers,
And whose black faces have hollowed pits for eyes.
All you gambling sons and hooked children and bowery bums
Hating white devils and black bourgeoisie,
Thumbing your noses at your burning red suns,
Gather round this coffin and mourn your dying swan. 
Snow-white moslem head-dress around a dead black face!
Beautiful were your sand-papering words against our skins!
Our blood and water pour from your flowing wounds.
You have cut open our breasts and dug scalpels in our brains.
When and Where will another come to take your holy place?
Old man mumbling in his dotage, crying child, unborn?


^^EOP^^

I think I should have loved you presently,
And given in earnest words I flung in jest;
And lifted honest eyes for you to see,
And caught your hand against my cheek and breast;
And all my pretty follies flung aside
That won you to me, and beneath your gaze,
Naked of reticence and shorn of pride,
Spread like a chart my little wicked ways.
I, that had been to you, had you remained,
But one more waking from a recurrent dream,
Cherish no less the certain stakes I gained,
And walk your memory’s halls, austere, supreme,
A ghost in marble of a girl you knew
Who would have loved you in a day or two.


^^EOP^^

Life, like a marble block, is given to all,
A blank, inchoate mass of years and days,
Whence one with ardent chisel swift essays
Some shape of strength or symmetry to call;
One shatters it in bits to mend a wall;
One in a craftier hand the chisel lays,
And one, to wake the mirth in Lesbia’s gaze,
Carves it apace in toys fantastical. 
But least is he who, with enchanted eyes
Filled with high visions of fair shapes to be,
Muses which god he shall immortalize
In the proud Parian’s perpetuity,
Till twilight warns him from the punctual skies
That the night cometh wherein none shall see.


^^EOP^^

My monkey-wrench man is my sweet patootie;
the lover of my life, my youth and age.
My heart belongs to him and to him only;
the children of my flesh are his and bear his rage
Now grown to years advancing through the dozens
the honeyed kiss, the lips of wine and fire
fade blissfully into the distant years of yonder
but all my days of Happiness and wonder
are cradled in his arms and eyes entire.
They carry us under the waters of the world
out past the starposts of a distant planet
And creeping through the seaweed of the ocean
they tangle us with ropes and yarn of memories
where we have been together, you and I.


^^EOP^^

My mother sleeps with the Bible open on her pillow; she reads herself to sleep and wakens startled. She listens for her heart: each breath is shallow.  For years her hands were quick with thread and needle. She used to sew all night when we were little; now she sleeps with the Bible on her pillow  and believes that Jesus understands her sorrow: her children grown, their father frail and brittle; she stitches in her heart, her breathing shallow.  Once she even slept fast, rushed tomorrow, mornings full of sunlight, sons and daughters. Now she sleeps alone with the Bible on her pillow  and wakes alone and feels the house is hollow, though my father in his blue room stirs and mutters; she listens to him breathe: each breath is shallow.  I flutter down the darkened hallway, shadow between their dreams, my mother and my father, asleep in rooms I pass, my breathing shallow. I leave the Bible open on her pillow.


^^EOP^^

Out of the deep and the dark,
A sparkling mystery, a shape,
Something perfect,
Comes like the stir of the day:
One whose breath is an odor,
Whose eyes show the road to stars,
The breeze in his face,
The glory of heaven on his back.
He steps like a vision hung in air,
Diffusing the passion of eternity;
His abode is the sunlight of morn,
The music of eve his speech:
In his sight,
One shall turn from the dust of the grave,
And move upward to the woodland.


^^EOP^^

I'll not weep that thou art going to leave me, There's nothing lovely here; And doubly will the dark world grieve me, While thy heart suffers there.  I'll not weep, because the summer's glory Must always end in gloom; And, follow out the happiest story— It closes with a tomb!  And I am weary of the anguish Increasing winters bear; Weary to watch the spirit languish Through years of dead despair.  So, if a tear, when thou art dying, Should haply fall from me, It is but that my soul is sighing, To go and rest with thee. 


^^EOP^^

Earbud—a tiny marble sheathed in foam   to wear like an interior earring so you   can enjoy private noises wherever you go,   protected from any sudden silence.   Only check your batteries, then copy   a thousand secret songs and stories   on the tiny pod you carry in your pocket.   You are safe now from other noises made   by other people, other machines, by chance,   noises you have not chosen as your own.   To get your attention, I touch your arm   to show you the tornado or the polar bear.   Sometimes I catch you humming or talking to the air   as if to a shrunken lover waiting in your ear.


^^EOP^^

Leaves drift from the cemetery oaks onto late grass,   Sun-singed, smelling like straw, the insides of old barns.   The stone angel's prayer is uninterrupted by the sleeping   Vagrant at her feet, the lone squirrel, furtive amid the litter.    Someone once said my great-grandmother, on the day she died,   rose from her bed where she had lain, paralyzed and mute   For two years following a stroke, and dressed herself—the good   Sunday dress of black crepe, cotton stockings, sensible, lace-up shoes.    I imagine her coiling her long white braid in the silent house,   Lying back down on top of the quilt and folding her hands,   Satisfied.   I imagine her born-again daughters, brought up    In that tent-revival religion, called in from kitchens and fields   To stand dismayed by her bed like the sisters of Lazarus,   Waiting for her to breathe, to rise again and tell them what to do.    Here, no cross escapes the erosion of age, no voice breaks   The silence; the only certainty in the crow's flight   Or the sun's measured descent is the coming of winter.   Even the angel's outstretched arms offer only a formulated   Grace, her blind blessings as indiscriminate as acorns,   Falling on each of us, the departed and the leaving.


^^EOP^^

It is a soft thing, it has been sifted   from the sieve of space and seems   asleep there under the moths of light.    Cluster of dust and fire, from up here   you are a stranger and I am dropping   through the funnel of air to meet you.


^^EOP^^

In the glory of the gloaming-green soccer field her team, the Gladiators, is losing  ten to zip. She never loses interest in the roughhouse one-on-one that comes  every half a minute. She sticks her leg in danger and comes out the other side running.  Later a clump of opponents on the street is chant- ing, WE WON, WE WON, WE . . . She stands up  on the convertible seat holding to the wind-   shield. WE LOST, WE LOST BIGTIME, TEN TO  NOTHING, WE LOST, WE LOST. Fist pumping air. The other team quiet, abashed, chastened.  Good losers don't laugh last; they laugh continuously, all the way home so glad.


^^EOP^^

They lie under stars in a field. They lie under rain in a field. Under sun.  Some people are like this as well— like a painting hidden beneath another painting.  An unexpected weight the sign of their ripeness.


^^EOP^^

We stop at the dry cleaners and the grocery store   and the gas station and the green market and   Hurry up honey, I say, hurry,   as she runs along two or three steps behind me   her blue jacket unzipped and her socks rolled down.    Where do I want her to hurry to? To her grave?   To mine? Where one day she might stand all grown?   Today, when all the errands are finally done, I say to her,   Honey I'm sorry I keep saying Hurry—   you walk ahead of me. You be the mother.    And, Hurry up, she says, over her shoulder, looking    back at me, laughing. Hurry up now darling, she says,   hurry, hurry, taking the house keys from my hands.


^^EOP^^

I was always leaving, I was about to get up and go, I was on my way, not sure where. Somewhere else. Not here. Nothing here was good enough.  It would be better there, where I was going. Not sure how or why. The dome I cowered under would be raised, and I would be released into my true life. I would meet there  the ones I was destined to meet.   They would make an opening for me among the flutes and boulders, and I would be taken up. That this might be a form of death  did not occur to me. I only know that something held me back, a doubt, a debt, a face I could not leave behind. When the door fell open, I did not go through.


^^EOP^^

The carpet in the kindergarten room was alphabet blocks; all of us fidgeting on bright, primary letters. On the shelf sat that week's inflatable sound. The th was shaped like a tooth. We sang about brushing up and down, practiced exhaling while touching our tongues to our teeth. Next week, a puffy U like an upside-down umbrella; the rest of the alphabet deflated. Some days, we saw parents through the windows to the hallway sky. Look, a fat lady, a boy beside me giggled. Until then I'd only known my mother as beautiful.


^^EOP^^

Finding an old book on a basement shelf—   gray, spine bent—and reading it again,   I met my former, unfamiliar, self,   some of her notes and scrawls so alien    that, though I tried, I couldn't get (behind   this gloss or that) back to the time she wrote   to guess what experiences she had in mind,   the living context of some scribbled note;    or see the girl beneath the purple ink   who chose this phrase or that to underline,   the mood, the boy, that lay behind her thinking—    but they were thoughts I recognized as mine;    and though there were words I couldn't even read,   blobs and cross-outs; and though not a jot   remained of her old existence—I agreed   with the young annotator's every thought:    A clever girl. So what would she see fit   to comment on—and what would she have to say   about the years that she and I have written   since—before we put the book away?


^^EOP^^

The night never wants to end, to give itself over   to light. So it traps itself in things: obsidian, crows.   Even on summer solstice, the day of light’s great   triumph, where fields of sunflowers guzzle in the sun—   we break open the watermelon and spit out   black seeds, bits of night glistening on the grass.


^^EOP^^

Alice's first strike gets a pat on the back,   her second a cheer from Betty Woszinski   who's just back from knee surgery.   Her third—   "A turkey!" Molly calls out—raises everyone's eyes.   They clap.   Teresa looks up from the bar.   At the fourth the girls stop seeing their own pins wobble.   They watch the little X's fill the row on Alice's screen—   That's five.   That's six.   There's a holy space   around her like a saint come down to bowl   with the Tuesday Ladies in Thorp, Wisconsin.   Teresa runs to get Al, and Fran calls Billy   at the Exxon.   The bar crowds with silent men.   No one's cheering.   No one's bowling now   except Alice's team, rolling their balls   to advance the screen around to Alice, who's stopped   even her nervous laugh, her face blank and smooth   with concentration.   It can't go on   and then it does go on, the white bar   reading "Silver Dollar Chicken" lowering and clearing   nothing, then lowering and clearing nothing again.


^^EOP^^

You're telling that story again about your childhood,   when you were five years old and rode your blue bicycle    from Copenhagen to Espergaerde, and it was night   and snowing by the time you arrived,    and your grandparents were so relieved to see you,   because all day no one knew where you were,    you had vanished. We sit at our patio table under a faded green   umbrella, drinking wine in California's blue autumn,    red stars of roses along the fence, trellising over the roof   of our ramshackle garage. Too soon the wine glasses will be empty,    our stories told, the house covered with pine needles the wind   has shaken from the trees. Other people will live here.    We will vanish like children who traveled far in the dark,   stars of snow in their hair, riding to enchanted Espergaerde.


^^EOP^^

I'm going to put Karen Prasse right here in front of you on this page so that you won't mistake her for something else, an example of precocity, for instance, a girl who knew that the sky (blue crayon) was above the earth (green crayon) and did not, as you had drawn it, come right down to the green on which your three bears stood. You can tell from her outfit that she is a Brownie. You can tell from her socks that she knows how to line things up, from her mouth that she may grow up mean or simply competent. Do not mistake her for an art critic: when she told you   the first day of first grade that your drawing was "wrong," you stood your ground and told her to look out the window. Miss Voss told your mom you were going to be a good example of something, although you cannot tell from the way your socks sag, nor from your posture, far from Brownie-crisp. This is not about you for a change, but about mis-perception, of which Karen was an early example. Who knows? She may have meant to be helpful, though that is not always a virtue, and gets in the way of some art.


^^EOP^^

I hold my two-year-old son   under his arms and start to twirl.   His feet sway away from me   and the day becomes a blur.   Everything I own is flying into space:   yard toys, sandbox, tools,   garage and house,   and, finally, the years of my life.    When we stop, my son is a grown man,   and I am very old. We stagger    back into each other's arms   one last time, two lost friends   heavy with drink,   remembering the good old days.


^^EOP^^

Australia. Phillip Island. The Tasman Sea. Dusk. The craggy coastline at low tide in fog. Two thousand tourists milling in the stands as one by one, and then in groups, the fairy penguins mass up on the sand like so much sea wrack and debris. And then, as on command, the improbable parade begins: all day they've been out fishing for their chicks, and now, somehow, they find them squawking in their burrows in the dunes, one by one, two by two, such comical solemnity, as wobbling by they catch our eager eyes until we're squawking, too, in English, French, and Japanese, Yiddish and Swahili, like some happy wedding party brought to tears   by whatever in the ceremony repairs the rifts between us. The rain stops. The fog lifts. Stars. And we go home, less hungry, satisfied, to friends and family, regurgitating all we've heard and seen.


^^EOP^^

Blurring the window, the snowflakes' numb white lanterns.   She's brewed her coffee, in the bathroom sprays cologne   And sets her lipstick upright on the sink.   The door ajar, I glimpse the yellow slip,    The rose-colored birthmark on her shoulder.   Then she's dressed—the pillbox hat and ersatz fur,   And I'm dressed too, mummified in stocking cap   And scarves, and I walk her to the bus stop    Where she'll leave me for my own walk to school,   Where she'll board the bus that zigzags to St. Paul   As I watch her at the window, the paperback    Romance already open on her lap,   The bus laboring off into snow, her good-bye kiss   Still startling my cheek with lipstick trace.


^^EOP^^

Everything was the apple and the glass of tea.
The mountain, the mold, the apron on the grandmother—
the neck of a brown baby holding its tiny head
to get rid of the black bees.
This is the end of a bad century,
the opening of a door that was never built into the chest. 
A volume of loud wires coming out of the ground.
My grandfather rising from fifty-four years of death to see me.
The instrument carved out of bone.
A lock of hair from a famous seventeenth-century poet.
The disintegrating bible wishing it was another book.
A hanging arm sweeping the water out of the way.
My memory of flying through the tunnel that came out of nowhere. 
A dog with wings and a cat with magic.
The sentiment and the sweat.
The blue chest of the working man and
the bare ankle of a young girl who drank beer.
The shadow of a young boy named Carlos and
the bare shoulders of a young girl who whispered. 
The hunger of an older boy named José.
The hard work of a brother named Ramón with
a closeness and a disagreement among them.
A torn pair of work pants and
a stiff and muddy pair of gloves.
A pocket with two dollars crumbled inside.
A bare foot rubbing the bare back of a young girl.
The fourth can of beer.
The farmhouse that belonged to the family
and the chickens that were killed for food.
The cactus garden that killed two men when they fell in
and the pieces of green cactus that made them dream.
The green juice that started the earthquake,
the crushed flesh of cactus on their tongues
and its swelling that made them dream.
A garden hose washing away the blood.
The sparrow hovering over the trash can and
the back alley stinking of dog shit and drunken men.
Falling feathers interpreted for what they bring. 
A church next door full of sermons and howling black faces.
The corner of the house where a young boy went to hide.
A single strand of hair found in a high school yearbook,
the forgotten idea that hiding it in there would lead to a different life.
The piano wounded by stones falling out of the cottonwood.
The willow tree spreading over the entire front yard
and the tiny white balls of gum that fell out of it one day. 
The smell of shadows, trains, humor, tumbleweeds,
ice, empty parking lots, one or two torn knees,
a baseball glove, the first guy to cross the finish line,
the fear, the dread and the skill of escaping
so no one would start a list of smells. 
Fear melted the memory of a lost boy.
The old house, the rosary around the neck,
the crushed dog in the road—
a sudden calling from behind to warn him
to come in and be still.
Who recalls how this ended when the men
built their ships and invaded to change the outcome? 
The right to cry out and wait a whole century.
The embers, the lone piano, the oil lamps
damaged by a dream.
The ambition in the spine.
Who will insist on tapping the window to show
how easy it is to delay the next hundred years?


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

I sit with my railroad face and ask God to forgive me
for being a straight line toward the dead
who were buried with their poor clothes
in the Arizona desert of iron borders. 
This way of waving to the embers of the past,
not apologzing for carrying torn rosaries inside
my pockets where beads of worry became fossilized
insects whose dry husks I kept since a child. 
Faces adopted me from boys who hated their parents.
I was told not to repeat this,
reminded by the priest who unmasked himself.
I was told there was a great horror down
the hallway of the smelly Catholic school.
Once, my friend Joey jumped off the second floor window
and flattened his brains over the asphalt yard. 
I see a hibiscus blossom.
It is a bright yellow flower that lasts one day.
Its shape brings tears, saves me from the hummingbird
that dots the air with patterns resembling an alphabet
too familiar to smell like a railroad worker. 
I love heaven when I admit the spikes
and the railroad ties came from
the labor of fate and not the labor of love.
The tracks are my cross. 
The tiny car is full of sweating men.
They look into the eye of the sun,
hold their hammers over their blackened heads.
If staring grows in the common search,
a perfume dots the heart with greed.
Silence between the lightning of pounding stakes. 
Once, I rode the train home
to see if the smoke from the speeding engine
was going to enter my lungs.
I never wore the old, yellow hat of the crew,
but returned the shovel and the bag of railroad spikes,
thought I saw my grandfather, the foreman, running
across the desert in overalls, changing his skin
from brown to the black of the scorched engine. 
I live with my railroad face, its smoothness hammered
by sweating crews that knew the line of hot iron
was going to end in the west someday.
I live with my railroad face and don’t know why
the tracks disappear on the horizon.
I cross my railroad face and comb my hair.


^^EOP^^

My roots are deep in southern life; deeper than John Brown or Nat Turner or Robert Lee. I was sired and weaned in a tropic world. The palm tree and banana leaf, mango and coconut, breadfruit and rubber trees know me. 
Warm skies and gulf blue streams are in my blood. I belong with the smell of fresh pine, with the trail of coon, and the spring growth of wild onion. 
I am no hothouse bulb to be reared in steam-heated flats with the music of El and subway in my ears, walled in by steel and wood and brick far from the sky. 
I want the cotton fields, tabacco and the cane. I want to walk along with sacks of seed to drop in fallow ground. Restless music is in my heart and I am eager to be gone. 
O Southland, sorrow home, melody beating in my bone and blood! How long will the Klan of hate, the hounds and the chain gangs keep me from my own?


^^EOP^^

Being unwise enough to have married her
I never knew when she was not acting.
‘I love you’ she would say; I heard the audiences
Sigh. ‘I hate you’; I could never be sure
They were still there. She was lovely. I
Was only the looking-glass she made up in.
I husbanded the rippling meadow
Of her body. Their eyes grazed nightly upon it. 
Alone now on the brittle platform
Of herself she is playing her last rôle.
It is perfect. Never in all her career
Was she so good. And yet the curtain
Has fallen. My charmer, come out from behind
It to take the applause. Look, I am clapping too.


^^EOP^^

Evans? Yes, many a time
I came down his bare flight
Of stairs into the gaunt kitchen
With its wood fire, where crickets sang
Accompaniment to the black kettle’s
Whine, and so into the cold
Dark to smother in the thick tide
Of night that drifted about the walls
Of his stark farm on the hill ridge. 
It was not the dark filling my eyes
And mouth apalled me; not even the drip
Of rain like blood from the one tree
Weather-tortured. It was the dark
Silting the veins of that sick man
I left stranded upon the vast
And lonely shore of his bleak bed.


^^EOP^^

The idiot goes round and around
With his brother in a bumping car
At the fair. The famous idiot
Smile hangs over the car’s edge,
Illuminating nothing. This is mankind
Being taken for a ride by a rich
Relation. The responses are fixed:
Bump, smile; bump, smile. And the current 
Is generated by the smooth flow
Of the shillings. This is an orchestra
Of steel with the constant percussion
Of laughter. But where he should be laughing
Too, his features are split open, and look!
Out of the cracks come warm, human tears.


^^EOP^^

Men who have hardly uncurled
from their posture in the
womb. Naked. Heads bowed, not
in prayer, but in contemplation
of the earth they came from,
that suckled them on the brown
milk that builds bone not brain. 
Who called them forth to walk
in the green light, their thoughts
on darkness? Their women,
who are not Madonnas, have babes
at the breast with the wise,
time-ridden faces of the Christ
child in a painting by a Florentine 
master. The warriors prepare poison
with love’s care for the Sebastians
of their arrows. They have no
God, but follow the contradictions
of a ritual that says
life must die that life
may go on. They wear flowers in their hair.


^^EOP^^

I sit and sew—a useless task it seems,
My hands grown tired, my head weighed down with dreams—
The panoply of war, the martial tred of men,
Grim-faced, stern-eyed, gazing beyond the ken
Of lesser souls, whose eyes have not seen Death,
Nor learned to hold their lives but as a breath—
But—I must sit and sew. 
I sit and sew—my heart aches with desire—
That pageant terrible, that fiercely pouring fire
On wasted fields, and writhing grotesque things
Once men. My soul in pity flings
Appealing cries, yearning only to go
There in that holocaust of hell, those fields of woe—
But—I must sit and sew. 
The little useless seam, the idle patch;
Why dream I here beneath my homely thatch,
When there they lie in sodden mud and rain,
Pitifully calling me, the quick ones and the slain?
You need me, Christ! It is no roseate dream
That beckons me—this pretty futile seam,
It stifles me—God, must I sit and sew?


^^EOP^^

O white little lights at Carney’s Point,      You shine so clear o’er the Delaware;When the moon rides high in the silver sky,      Then you gleam, white gems on the Delaware.Diamond circlet on a full white throat,      You laugh your rays on a questioning boat;Is it peace you dream in your flashing gleam,      O’er the quiet flow of the Delaware?And the lights grew dim at the water’s brim,      For the smoke of the mills shredded slow between;And the smoke was red, as is new bloodshed,      And the lights went lurid ’neath the livid screen.O red little lights at Carney’s Point,      You glower so grim o’er the Delaware;When the moon hides low sombrous clouds below,      Then you glow like coals o’er the Delaware.Blood red rubies on a throat of fire,      You flash through the dusk of a funeral pyre;And there hearth fires red whom you fear and dread      O’er the turgid flow of the Delaware?And the lights gleamed gold o’er the river cold,      For the murk of the furnace shed a copper veil;And the veil was grim at the great cloud’s brim,      And the lights went molten, now hot, now pale.O gold little lights at Carney’s Point,     You gleam so proud o’er the Delaware;When the moon grows wan in the eastering dawn,      Then you sparkle gold points o’er the Delaware.Aureate filagree on a Croesus’ brow,      You hasten the dawn on a gray ship’s prow.Light you streams of gold in the grim ship’s hold      O’er the sullen flow of the Delaware?And the lights went gray in the ash of day,      For a quiet Aurora brought a halcyon balm;And the sun laughed high in the infinite sky,      And the lights were forgot in the sweet, sane calm.


^^EOP^^

he’s only a smart-ass when he’s home
with Mandrake
he’s silent and obedient as a snail
his bald pate bowing into the cape’s
trail and dreaming
of tales he’ll bore me with
his one night home 
once a month
that’s what I get like clockwork
and always on the full moon
half my allowance he reserves
for sheets, tearing them with his teeth
to vent the forced silence
of those other twenty-odd days 
did I say odd
it’s that one day that’s odd
his coming home full of half-tricks
he’s picked up from the master
the hypnotic hunger
he so willingly tries on me
he claims he stole me, bought me 
claims he’s Zulu, Bantu, Beja
depending on the hour, day, or year
says I was the black spot
in the white of his eye
the speck he turned into leopard
that unwittingly turned into woman
neither of us no longer knows what’s real 
and my mother beats her fat tongue
against her gums
as each month I try to reveal the puzzle
stroking the lines from his hairless
obsidian crown
I hear her rumbling around in the next room
I soothe his sweet head and she moans
heaven protect us from all the things
to which we can become accustomed


^^EOP^^




                           on turning forty



They draw me closer like the hands
of one grandmother I kissed upon
visiting her in the barrio.
The magnets make me look at my waist,
wondering why the ache is in the street,
houses giving off stinking air,
a magnetic field collecting old newspapers,
broken-down cars, alleys where
the drummer cowers before he beats
on his bag of beer cans. 
I visit the irrigation canal that
churns green and flows beyond the streets,
wait for the alligator to swim by,
the one released from the plaza long ago.
I feel the pull toward the mongrel dog,
the clicking of the magnets in the church,
an attraction for open doorways. 
                                   * 
I remove the magnet from my neck,
a medal of a denied saint.
I will never witness the migration of bats again,
stand at the entrance of the caverns
as bats shoot out of the opening,
the evening bristling with their intelligence. 
The sky bruises against the horizon
of yucca plants erect as magnets
surrrounding the cavern,
miles of yucca encircling the poles
to protect them from the wind
that pulls me into the hole. 
                                   * 
He tells me to believe what I have seen,
insists magnetic force comes from the blade,
the woman wanting us to keep something for her.
He says magnets are missing metals
from an underground wound,
a husband’s wrist broken by a slammed car hood,
loyal dance of an old couple watching the street. 
He says tortillas and menudo attract flies.
He learned red chili kills all life,
insists magnets let him sleep fulfilled,
delicious food he fixes
long after his wife has died. 
He cries that the magnets get stronger
when he peels the pods to find no difference
in the seeds of hunger and the seeds of love. 
                                   * 
I climb the rocks because the minerals are there,
ascend to where I buried the seashell,
rusted can, and pencil twenty-eight years ago.
I reach the rocks because I am allowed one mountain,
climbing to readjust the magnets.
Then, I stand and look down. 
I clear my chest of a fist encountered up here,
set my foot on the humming slab.
I move to survive when I touch my heart.
I climb higher before deciding to bend and dig.


^^EOP^^

My Life had stood - a Loaded Gun -
In Corners - till a Day
The Owner passed - identified -
And carried Me away - 
And now We roam in Sovreign Woods -
And now We hunt the Doe -
And every time I speak for Him
The Mountains straight reply - 
And do I smile, such cordial light
Opon the Valley glow -
It is as a Vesuvian face
Had let it’s pleasure through - 
And when at Night - Our good Day done -
I guard My Master’s Head -
’Tis better than the Eider Duck’s
Deep Pillow - to have shared - 
To foe of His - I’m deadly foe -
None stir the second time -
On whom I lay a Yellow Eye -
Or an emphatic Thumb - 
Though I than He - may longer live
He longer must - than I -
For I have but the power to kill,
Without - the power to die -


^^EOP^^

There was Dai Puw. He was no good.
They put him in the fields to dock swedes,
And took the knife from him, when he came home
At late evening with a grin
Like the slash of a knife on his face. 
There was Llew Puw, and he was no good.
Every evening after the ploughing
With the big tractor he would sit in his chair,
And stare into the tangled fire garden,
Opening his slow lips like a snail. 
There was Huw Puw, too. What shall I say?
I have heard him whistling in the hedges
On and on, as though winter
Would never again leave those fields,
And all the trees were deformed. 
And lastly there was the girl;
Beauty under some spell of the beast.
Her pale face was the lantern
By which they read in life’s dark book
The shrill sentence: God is love.


^^EOP^^

Primeval 
Beasts rearing from green slime—
an illiterate country, unable to read
its own name. Stones moved into position
on the hills’ sides; snakes laid their eggs
in their cold shadow. The earth suffered
the sky’s shrapnel, bled yellow
into the enraged sea. At night heavily
over the heaving forests the moon
sagged. The ancestors of the tigers
brightened their claws. Such sounds
as there were came from the strong
torn by the stronger. The dawn tilted
an unpolished mirror for the runt mind
to look at itself in without recognition.   Neolithic 
I shall not be here,
and the way things are going
now won’t want to be.
Wheels go no faster
than what pulls them. That land
visible over the sea
in clear weather, they say
we will get there some time
soon and take possession
of it. What then? More acres
to cultivate and no markets
for the crops.
                       The young
are not what they were,
smirking at the auspices
of the entrails. Some think
there will be a revival.
I don’t believe it. This
plucked music has come
to stay. The natural breathing
of the pipes was to
a different god. Imagine
depending on the intestines
of a polecat for accompaniment
to one’s worship! I have
attended at the sacrifice
of the language that is the liturgy
the priests like, and felt
the draught that was God
leaving. I think some day
there will be nothing left
but to go back to the place
I came from and wrap
myself in the memory
of how I was young
once and under the covenant
of that God not given to folly.   Christian 
They were bearded
like the sea they came
from; rang stone bells
for their stone hearers. 
Their cells fitted them
like a coffin.
Out of them their prayers
seeped, delicate 
flowers where weeds
grew. Their dry bread
broke like a bone.
Wine in the cup 
was a blood-stained mirror
for sinners to look
into with one eye
closed, and see themselves forgiven.   Mediaeval 
I was my lord’s bard,
telling again sweetly
what had been done bloodily. 
We lived in a valley;
he had no lady.
Fame was our horizon. 
In the spring of the year
the wind brought the news
of a woman’s beauty. 
Her eyes were still stones
in her smooth-running hair.
Her voice was the birds’ envy. 
We made a brave foray;
the engagement was furious.
We came back alone. 
Sing me, my lord said,
the things nearer home:
my falcons, my horse. 
I did so, he listened.
My harp was of fire;
the notes bounced like sparks 
off his spirit’s anvil.
To-morrow, he promised,
we will ride forth again.   Modern 
And the brittle gardens
of Dinorwig, deep
in the fallen petals of
their slate flowers: such the autumn 
of a people! Whose spring
is it sleeps in a glass
bulb, ready to astonish us
with its brilliance? Bring 
on the dancing girls
of the future, the swaying
pylons with their metal
hair bickering towards England.


^^EOP^^

I want you to know how it was,
whether the Cross grinds into dust
under men’s wheels or shines brightly
as a monument to a new era. 
There was a church and one man
served it, and few worshipped
there in the raw light on the hill
in winter, moving among the stones
fallen about them like the ruins
of a culture they were too weak
to replace, too poor themselves
to do anything but wait
for the ending of a life
they had not asked for.
                                     The priest would come
and pull on the hoarse bell nobody
heard, and enter that place
of darkness, sour with the mould
of the years. And the spider would run
from the chalice, and the wine lie
there for a time, cold and unwanted
by all but he, while the candles
guttered as the wind picked
at the roof. And he would see
over that bare meal his face
staring at him from the cracked glass
of the window, with the lips moving
like those of an inhabitant of
a world beyond this.
                                 And so back
to the damp vestry to the book
where he would scratch his name and the date
he could hardly remember, Sunday
by Sunday, while the place sank
to its knees and the earth turned
from season to season like the wheel
of a great foundry to produce
you, friend, who will know what happened.


^^EOP^^

‘Poems from prison! About
what?’
            ‘Life and God.’ ‘God
in prison? Friend, you trifle
with me. His face, perhaps,
at the bars, fading
like life.’
                  ‘He came in
with the warder, striving
with him. Where else
did the severity of the man
spring from, but awareness
of a charity he must
overcome?’
                   ‘The blows, then,
were God chastening
the beloved! Who
was the more blessed, the
dispenser or receiver
of them?’
                  ‘It is the same
outside. Bars, walls
but make the perspective
clear. Deus absconditus!
We ransack the heavens,
the distance between
stars; the last place we look
is in prison, his hideout
in flesh and bone.’
                              ‘You believe,
then?’
            ‘The poems
are witness. If his world
contracted, it was to give birth
to the larger vision. Not meadows
empty of him, animal
eyes, impersonal
as glass, communicate
God. On the bare walls
of a cell the oppressor watches
the diminishing of his
human shadow, as
he withdraws from the light.’


^^EOP^^

Seven of them pinned in blood by
long, shiny tails, three of them still 
alive and writhing against the wood,
their heaviness whipping the wall 
as they try to break free,
rattles beating in unison, 
hisses slowly dying in silence,
the other four hanging stiff 
like ropes to another life,
patterns of torn skin dripping 
with power and loss, the wonder
of who might have done this 
turning in shock as all seven
suddenly come alive when 
I get closer, pink mouths
trembling with white fangs, 
lunging at me then falling back,
entangled in one another to form 
twisted letters that spell a bloody
word I can’t understand.


^^EOP^^

1 
It is calm.
It is as though
we lived in a garden
that had not yet arrived
at the knowledge of
good and evil.
But there is a man in it.  
2 
There will be
rain falling vertically
from an indifferent
sky. There will stare out
from behind its
bars the face of the man
who is not enjoying it.  
3 
Nothing higher
than a blackberry
bush. As the sun comes up
fresh, what is the darkness
stretching from horizon
to horizon? It is the shadow
here of the forked man.  
4 
We have eaten
the blackberries and spat out
the seeds, but they lie
glittering like the eyes of a man.  
5 
After we have stopped
singing, the garden is disturbed
by echoes; it is
the man whistling, expecting
everything to come to him.  
6 
We wipe our beaks
on the branches
wasting the dawn’s
jewellery to get rid
of the taste of a man.  
7 
Neverthless,
which is not the case
with a man, our
bills give us no trouble.  
8 
Who said the
number was unlucky?
It was a man, who,
trying to pass us,
had his licence endorsed
thirteen times.  
9 
In the cool
of the day the garden
seems given over
to blackbirds. Yet
we know also that somewhere
there is a man in hiding.  
10 
To us there are
eggs and there are
blackbirds. But there is the man,
too, trying without feathers
to incubate a solution.  
11 
We spread our
wings, reticulating
our air-space. A man stands
under us and worries
at his ability to do the same.  
12 
When night comes
like a visitor
from outer space
we stop our ears
lest we should hear tell
of the man in the moon.  
13 
Summer is
at an end. The migrants
depart. When they return
in spring to the garden,
will there be a man among them?


^^EOP^^

I emerge from the mind’s
cave into the worse darkness
outside, where things pass and
the Lord is in none of them. 
I have heard the still, small voice
and it was that of the bacteria
demolishing my cosmos. I
have lingered too long on 
this threshold, but where can I go?
To look back is to lose the soul
I was leading upwards towards
the light. To look forward? Ah, 
what balance is needed at
the edges of such an abyss.
I am alone on the surface
of a turning planet. What 
to do but, like Michelangelo’s
Adam, put my hand
out into unknown space,
hoping for the reciprocating touch?


^^EOP^^

Oft have I thrilled at deeds of high emprise,And yearned to venture into realms unknown,Thrice blessed she, I deemed, whom God had shownHow to achieve great deeds in woman’s guise. Yet what discov’ry by expectant eyesOf foreign shores, could vision half the throneFull gained by her, whose power fully grownExceeds the conquerors of th’ uncharted skies?So would I be this woman whom the worldAvows its benefactor; nobler far,Than Sybil, Joan, Sappho, or Egypt’s queen.In the alembic forged her shafts and hurledAt pain, diseases, waging a humane war;Greater than this achievement, none, I ween.


^^EOP^^

God washes clean the souls and hearts of you,
His favored ones, whose backs bend o’er the soil,
Which grudging gives to them requite for toil
In sober graces and in vision true.
God places in your hands the pow’r to do
A service sweet. Your gift supreme to foil
The bare-fanged wolves of hunger in the moil
Of Life’s activities. Yet all too few
Your glorious band, clean sprung from Nature’s heart;
The hope of hungry thousands, in whose breast
Dwells fear that you should fail. God placed no dart
Of war within your hands, but pow’r to start
Tears, praise, love, joy, enwoven in a crest
To crown you glorious, brave ones of the soil.


^^EOP^^

My garden is the wild
   Sea of the grass. Her garden
Shelters between walls.
   The tide could break in;
   I should be sorry for this. 
There is peace there of a kind,
   Though not the deep peace
Of wild places. Her care
   For green life has enabled
   The weak things to grow. 
Despite my first love,
   I take sometimes her hand,
Following straight paths
   Between flowers, the nostril
   Clogged with their thick scent. 
The old softness of lawns
   Persuading the slow foot
Leads to defection; the silence
   Holds with its gloved hand
   The wild hawk of the mind. 
But not for long, windows,
   Opening in the trees
Call the mind back
   To its true eyrie; I stoop
   Here only in play.


^^EOP^^

I am, as you know, Walter Llywarch,
Born in Wales of approved parents,
Well goitred, round in the bum,
Sure prey of the slow virus
Bred in quarries of grey rain. 
Born in autumn at the right time
For hearing stories from the cracked lips
Of old folk dreaming of summer,
I piled them on to the bare hearth
Of my own fancy to make a blaze
To warm myself, but achieved only
The smoke’s acid that brings the smart
Of false tears into the eyes. 
Months of fog, months of drizzle;
Thought wrapped in the grey cocoon
Of race, of place, awaiting the sun’s
Coming, but when the sun came,
Touching the hills with a hot hand,
Wings were spread only to fly
Round and round in a cramped cage
Or beat in vain at the sky’s window. 
School in the week, on Sunday chapel:
Tales of a land fairer than this
Were not so tall, for others had proved it
Without the grave’s passport, they sent
The fruit home for ourselves to taste. 
Walter Llywarch—the words were a name
On a lost letter that never came
For one who waited in the long queue
Of life that wound through a Welsh valley.
I took instead, as others had done
Before, a wife from the back pews
In chapel, rather to share the rain
Of winter evenings, than to intrude
On her pale body; and yet we lay
For warmth together and laughed to hear
Each new child’s cry of despair.


^^EOP^^

What if I didn’t shoot the old lady
running away from our patrol,
or the old man in the back of the head,
or the boy in the marketplace? 
Or what if the boy—but he didn’t
have a grenade, and the woman in Hue
didn’t lie in the rain in a mortar pit
with seven Marines just for food, 
Gaffney didn’t get hit in the knee,
Ames didn’t die in the river, Ski
didn’t die in a medevac chopper
between Con Thien and Da Nang. 
In Vietnamese, Con Thien means place of angels. What if it really was
instead of the place of rotting sandbags,
incoming heavy artillery, rats and mud. 
What if the angels were Ames and Ski,
or the lady, the man, and the boy,
and they lifted Gaffney out of the mud
and healed his shattered knee? 
What if none of it happened the way I said?
Would it all be a lie?
Would the wreckage be suddenly beautiful?
Would the dead rise up and walk?


^^EOP^^

Still half drunk, after a night at cards,
with the grey dawn taking us unaware
among our guilty kings and queens, we drove
far North in the morning, winners, losers,
to a stream in the high hills, to climb up to a place
one of us knew, with some vague view
of cutting losses or consolidating gains
by the old standard appeal to the wilderness,
the desert, the empty places of our exile,
bringing only the biblical bread and cheese
and cigarettes got from a grocer’s on the way,
expecting to drink only the clear cold water
among the stones, and remember, or forget.
Though no one said anything about atonement,
there was still some purgatorial idea
in all those aching heads and ageing hearts
as we climbed the giant stair of the stream,
reaching the place around noon. 
It was as promised, a wonder, with granite walls
enclosing ledges, long and flat, of limestone,
or, rolling, of lava; within the ledges
the water, fast and still, pouring its yellow light,
and green, over the tilted slabs of the floor,
blackened at shady corners, falling in a foam
of crystal to a calm where the waterlight
dappled the ledges as they leaned
against the sun; big blue dragonflies hovered
and darted and dipped a wing, hovered again
against the low wind moving over the stream,
and shook the flakes of light from their clear wings.
This surely was it, was what we had come for,
was nature, though it looked like art with its
grey fortress walls and laminated benches
as in the waiting room of some petrified station.
But we believed; and what it was we believed
made of the place a paradise
for ruined poker players, win or lose,
who stripped naked and bathed and dried out on the rocks
like gasping trout (the water they drank
making them drunk again), lit cigarettes and lay back
waiting for nature to say the last word
—as though the stones were Memnon stones,
which, caught in a certain light, would sing. 
The silence (and even the noise of the waters
was silence) grew pregnant; that is the phrase,
grew pregnant; but nothing else did.
The mountains brought forth not a mouse, and the rocks,
unlike the ones you would expect to find
on the slopes of Purgatory or near Helicon,
mollified by muses and with a little give to ’em,
were modern American rocks, and hard as rocks.
Our easy bones groaned, our flesh baked
on one side and shuddered on the other; and each man
thought bitterly about primitive simplicity
and decadence, and how he had been ruined
by civilization and forced by circumstances
to drink and smoke and sit up all night
inspecting those perfectly arbitrary cards
until he was broken-winded as a trout on a rock
and had no use for the doctrines of Jean Jacques
Rousseau, and could no longer afford
a savagery whether noble or not; some
would never batter that battered copy of Walden
again. 
         But all the same,
the water, the sunlight, and the wind
did something; even the dragonflies
did something to the minds full of telephone
numbers and flushes, to the flesh
sweating bourbon on one side and freezing on the other.
And the rocks, the old and tumbling boulders
which formed the giant stair of the stream,
induced (again) some purgatorial ideas
concerning humility, concerning patience
and enduring what had to be endured,
winning and losing and breaking even;
ideas of weathering in whatever weather,
being eroded, or broken, or ground down into pebbles
by the stream’s necessitous and grave currents.
But to these ideas did any purgatory
respond? Only this one: that in a world
where even the Memnon stones were carved in soap
one might at any rate wash with the soap. 
After a time we talked about the War,
about what we had done in the War, and how near
some of us had been to being drowned, and burned,
and shot, and how many people we knew
who had been drowned, or burned, or shot;
and would it have been better to have died
in the War, the peaceful old War, where we were young?
But the mineral peace, or paralysis, of those
great stones, the moving stillness of the waters,
entered our speech; the ribs and blood
of the earth, from which all fables grow,
established poetry and truth in us,
so that at last one said, “I shall play cards
until the day I die,” and another said,
“in bourbon whisky are all the vitamins
and minerals needed to sustain man’s life,”
and still another, “I shall live on smoke
until my spirit has been cured of flesh.” 
Climbing downstream again, on the way home
to the lives we had left empty for a day,
we noticed, as not before, how of three bridges
not one had held the stream, which in its floods
had twisted the girders, splintered the boards, hurled
boulder on boulder, and had broken into rubble,
smashed practically back to nature,
the massive masonry of span after span
with its indifferent rage; this was a sight
that sobered us considerably, and kept us quiet
both during the long drive home and after,
till it was time to deal the cards.


^^EOP^^

I the people
to the things that are were &
      come to be.
We were once what we know
      when we
make love    When we go away
      from each other because
we have been created
      at 10th & A, in winter &
of trees & of the history of houses
      we hope we are
notes of the musical scale of
      heaven—I the
people so repetitious, & my
      vision of
to hold the neighbors loose-
      ly here in
light of gel, my gel, my vision
      come out of
my eyes to hold you sur-
      round you in
gold & you don’t know it
      ever. Everyone
we the people having our
      vision of
gold & silver & silken liquid
      light flowed
from our eyes & caressing
      all around all the
walls. I am a late Pre-
      in this dawn of
We the people
to the things that are & were
      & come to be
Once what we knew was only
      and numbers became
It is numbers & gold & at 10th
      & A you don’t
have to know it ever. Opening
      words that show
Opening words that show that we
      were once
the first to recognize
      the immortality of numbered
bodies. And we are the masters
      of hearing & saying
at the double edge of body &
      breath
We the lovers & the eyes
All over, inside her
      when the wedding
is over, & the Park “lies cold &
      lifeless”
I the people, whatever is said
      by the first
one along, Angel-Agate. I wear
      your colors
I hear what we say & what
      we say . . . (and I
the people am still parted in
      two & would cry)


^^EOP^^

Roughly figured, this man of moderate habits,
This average consumer of the middle class,
Consumed in the course of his average life span
Just under half a million cigarettes,
Four thousand fifths of gin and about
A quarter as much vermouth; he drank
Maybe a hundred thousand cups of coffee,
And counting his parents’ share it cost
Something like half a million dollars
To put him through life. How many beasts
Died to provide him with meat, belt and shoes
Cannot be certainly said.
                                     But anyhow,
It is in this way that a man travels through time,
Leaving behind him a lengthening trail
Of empty bottles and bones, of broken shoes,
Frayed collars and worn out or outgrown
Diapers and dinnerjackets, silk ties and slickers. 
Given the energy and security thus achieved,
He did . . . ? What? The usual things, of course,
The eating, dreaming, drinking and begetting,
And he worked for the money which was to pay
For the eating, et cetera, which were necessary
If he were to go on working for the money, et cetera,
But chiefly he talked. As the bottles and bones
Accumulated behind him, the words proceeded
Steadily from the front of his face as he
Advanced into the silence and made it verbal.
Who can tally the tale of his words? A lifetime
Would barely suffice for their repetition;
If you merely printed all his commas the result
Would be a very large volume, and the number of times
He said “thank you” or “very little sugar, please,”
Would stagger the imagination. There were also
Witticisms, platitudes, and statements beginning
“It seems to me” or “As I always say.”
Consider the courage in all that, and behold the man
Walking into deep silence, with the ectoplastic
Cartoon’s balloon of speech proceeding
Steadily out of the front of his face, the words
Borne along on the breath which is his spirit
Telling the numberless tale of his untold Word
Which makes the world his apple, and forces him to eat.


^^EOP^^

In a world where all the heroes
are pilots with voices like God
he brought her a strand of some woman’s 
hair to wear on her wing.
She looked sideways at the ground
silent behind the cloudy film covering 
her eyes knowing she would be his
forever. They cruised the city nights
each one spiralling away from the other 
but always coming home to gather stories.
Dark streets bright tavern lights drunks
filled with beer in the gutters. 
The flicker of stars shaped like a hunter’s
arrow bent stars that twinkled like babies’
eyes. No babies for them. She was an outcast. 
He a loner. A perfect pair.
Winters had made him wise
and he avoided the single nests of summer. 
He told her about things she could see.
How the dismal cover of clouds roils and explodes
and the ground aches like an old woman’s knee. 
How wood rots against the tide
good for hunting grub.
How to fade and fall back into the wind. 
He translated her pulse
into near-language. Their poetry so personal
even Peterson’s Field Guide could not tap it. 
Only a stray hunter saw it.
Shook his head once thinking it a trick
of wind and wing then turned his eyes north 
to search for the simple flight
of Brant or Canadian. Those patterns
he could easily understand. 
That last night they drank from the river.
Sucked its delicate cusps of mold
sang anti social songs as if they were humans. 
When he flicked his handsome head
to catch the drift of wind
she even managed a single tear. 
She waited through days and nights
of grief. Circled the city less
then settled on the wires. 
The metallic conductor captured her eyes.
She remembered how he proudly sang her name
as he pranced from pole-top to KV line. 
One last fluff of feathers. One sigh
for all the unnested summers.
One single scratch 
one electrical surge of power of love.
Then she fell smiling.
A trick he had taught her.


^^EOP^^




in memory of the painters Paul Klee
and Paul Terence Feeley



I 
The painter’s eye follows relation out.
His work is not to paint the visible,
He says, it is to render visible. 
Being a man, and not a god, he stands
Already in a world of sense, from which
He borrows, to begin with, mental things
Chiefly, the abstract elements of language:
The point, the line, the plane, the colors and
The geometric shapes. Of these he spins
Relation out, he weaves its fabric up
So that it speaks darkly, as music does
Singing the secret history of the mind.
And when in this the visible world appears,
As it does do, mountain, flower, cloud, and tree,
All haunted here and there with the human face,
It happens as by accident, although
The accident is of design. It is because
Language first rises from the speechless world
That the painterly intelligence
Can say correctly that he makes his world,
Not imitates the one before his eyes.
Hence the delightsome gardens, the dark shores,
The terrifying forests where nightfall
Enfolds a lost and tired traveler. 
And hence the careless crowd deludes itself
By likening his hieroglyphic signs
And secret alphabets to the drawing of a child.
That likeness is significant the other side
Of what they see, for his simplicities
Are not the first ones, but the furthest ones,
Final refinements of his thought made visible.
He is the painter of the human mind
Finding and faithfully reflecting the mindfulness
That is in things, and not the things themselves. 
For such a man, art is an act of faith:
Prayer the study of it, as Blake says,
And praise the practice; nor does he divide
Making from teaching, or from theory.
The three are one, and in his hours of art
There shines a happiness through darkest themes,
As though spirit and sense were not at odds.  
II 
The painter as an allegory of the mind
At genesis. He takes a burlap bag,
Tears it open and tacks it on a stretcher.
He paints it black because, as he has said,
Everything looks different on black. 
Suppose the burlap bag to be the universe,
And black because its volume is the void
Before the stars were. At the painter’s hand
Volume becomes one-sidedly a surface,
And all his depths are on the face of it. 
Against this flat abyss, this groundless ground
Of zero thickness stretched against the cold
Dark silence of the Absolutely Not,
Material worlds arise, the colored earths
And oil of plants that imitate the light. 
They imitate the light that is in thought,
For the mind relates to thinking as the eye
Relates to light. Only because the world
Already is a language can the painter speak
According to his grammar of the ground. 
It is archaic speech, that has not yet
Divided out its cadences in words;
It is a language for the oldest spells
About how some thoughts rose into the mind
While others, stranger still, sleep in the world. 
So grows the garden green, the sun vermilion.
He sees the rose flame up and fade and fall
And be the same rose still, the radiant in red.
He paints his language, and his language is
The theory of what the painter thinks.  
III 
The painter’s eye attends to death and birth
Together, seeing a single energy
Momently manifest in every form,
As in the tree the growing of the tree
Exploding from the seed not more nor less
Than from the void condensing down and in,
Summoning sun and rain. He views the tree,
The great tree standing in the garden, say,
As thrusting downward its vast spread and weight,
Growing its green height from the dark watered earth,
And as suspended weightless in the sky,
Haled forth and held up by the hair of its head.
He follows through the flowing of the forms
From the divisions of the trunk out to
The veinings of the leaf, and the leaf’s fall.
His pencil meditates the many in the one
After the method in the confluence of rivers,
The running of ravines on mountainsides,
And in the deltas of the nerves; he sees
How things must be continuous with themselves
As with whole worlds that they themselves are not,
In order that they may be so transformed.
He stands where the eternity of thought
Opens upon perspective time and space;
He watches mind become incarnate; then
               He paints the tree.  
IV 
These thoughts have chiefly been about the painter Klee,
About how he in our hard time might stand to us
Especially whose lives concern themselves with learning
As patron of the practical intelligence of art,
And thence as model, modest and humorous in sufferings,
For all research that follows spirit where it goes. 
That there should be much goodness in the world,
Much kindness and intelligence, candor and charm,
And that it all goes down in the dust after a while,
This is a subject for the steadiest meditations
Of the heart and mind, as for the tears
That clarify the eye toward charity. 
So may it be to all of us, that at some times
In this bad time when faith in study seems to fail,
And when impatience in the street and still despair at home
Divide the mind to rule it, there shall be some comfort come
From the remembrance of so deep and clear a life as his
Whom I have thought of, for the wholeness of his mind,
As the painter dreaming in the scholar’s house,
His dream an emblem to us of the life of thought,
The same dream that then flared before intelligence
When light first went forth looking for the eye.


^^EOP^^




“painting has no air . . .”
          —Gertrude Stein



That there should never be air
in a picture surprises me.
It would seem to be only a picture
of a certain kind, a portrait in paper
or glue, somewhere a stickiness
as opposed to a stick-to-it-ness
of another genre. It might be
quite new to do without
that air, or to find oxygen
on the landscape line
like a boat which is an object
or a shoe which never floats
and is stationary. 
                              Still there
are certain illnesses that require
air, lots of it. And there are nervous
people who cannot manufacture
enough air and must seek
for it when they don’t have plants,
in pictures. There is the mysterious
traveling that one does outside
the cube and this takes place
in air. 
                              It is why one develops
an attitude toward roses picked
in the morning air, even roses
without sun shining on them.
The roses of Juan Gris from which
we learn the selflessness of roses
existing perpetually without air,
the lid being down, so to speak,
a 1912 fragrance sifting
to the left corner where we read
“La Merveille” and escape.


^^EOP^^

                                   I 
The sidewalks were long where I grew up.
They were as veined as the backs
Of my Grandma’s hands.
We knew every inch of pavement;
We jumped the cracks
Chanting rhymes that broke evil spirits,
Played tag at sunset
Among the fireflies and sweet maple trees
Or sang wishful sonnets about boyfriends
To the tune of whipping jump ropes.
The sidewalks wrapped around corners
Like dirty ribbons lacing the old houses
Together in tight knots;
Maple trees bordered
The all-white cemetery.
Sometimes we’d watch Priscilla’s uncle
Sway down the dirt alley towards home.
We called her Pussy, called him
Crazy Max.
He was feebleminded and took to fits,
Barely making it from alley to pavement,
Loping down the street like a drunk.
We paced his jagged walk
Against tumbling tunes,
Taunting each pigeon-toed footstep
With rhyme.
The boys      bolder, louder
The girls       tagging along
Braids flopping like twisted hemp,
Ending in brightly colored ribbons.
We turned our black faces into silence
When he finally made it home;
Watched him grope up the broken concrete stairs,
Clutch the wooden railing,
Lunge for the broken screen door
And his medicine.
His tongue flopped wildly,
Parrot noises drowning his sister’s cries
As she rushed from the black pit
Of their house. 
One day, he leaned away from the safe umbrella
Of his sister’s voice;
Leaned into the sky,
Hanging on the porch rail like a rag doll,
Then fell into the cracks of the sidewalk.
We rarely chanted after that,
Always passed Pussy’s house in silence.
Sometimes I’d sit in the sweet stillness
Of Grandma’s moldy basement
And draw his outline on the wet fuzzy walls.
The grey concrete backdropped my stick figure
As it fell into nothingness.  
                                   II 
Bumpsy played the Dirty Dozens
As we jackknifed the length of the block,
Forcing grown-ups off the street.
We linked arms like soldiers,
Our black legs scissoring in precision.
    One’s a company, two’s a crowd
    Three on the sidewalk is not allowed—
    Last night, the night before
    Twenty-four robbers at my door—
    Po-lice, po-lice, do your duty
    Make this boy stop feeling my booty—
    Mary, Mary, tell me true
    Who is the one you love?
Tin soldiers, wooden guns, and sharp tongues.
We got comic books for the price of one
In blitz attacks at Old Man Farrow’s dirty store.
Garages were secret places for dirty jokes,
Our folks couldn’t afford cars.
When we got older, we played house for real
Until we found Terry’s baby sister’s body
Behind a stack of tires;
The melodies we’d sung still seemed to bounce
Off the dirty walls and stacks of comic books.  
                                  III 
Our houses ended at the sidewalk,
Whitewashed steps gleaming like teeth
Against the blocks of grey pavement.
We walked three blocks just to find
A vacant lot to feed Mildred’s thirst
For green grass.
Fat Vaughn could eat a whole sheet
Of newspaper in less than three minutes.
Once, I licked the damp cellar wall,
But the taste didn’t match the sweet smell.
Ten years later, I searched through Grandma’s
Things before they were sold for auction.
I found her picture, three comics and the wind-up
Victrola we had used to put on our version
Of Cotton Club musicals.
We traded days so we could all be stars;
The rest sang chorus until the Victrola
Ran out of steam, the record moaning
Like a sick calf.
I found the stack of old pillows
We collapsed on, giggling and tumbling
Against each other like puppies,
While the needle stuck in one groove
Cutting circles in the records.


^^EOP^^




“The art of our necessities is strange,
That can make vile things precious.”



A mile out in the marshes, under a sky
Which seems to be always going away
In a hurry, on that Venetian land threaded
With hidden canals, you will find the city
Which seconds ours (so cemeteries, too,
Reflect a town from hillsides out of town),
Where Being most Becomingly ends up
Becoming some more. From cardboard tenements,
Windowed with cellophane, or simply tenting
In paper bags, the angry mackerel eyes
Glare at you out of stove-in, sunken heads
Far from the sea; the lobster, also, lifts
An empty claw in his most minatory
Of gestures; oyster, crab, and mussel shells
Lie here in heaps, savage as money hurled
Away at the gate of hell. If you want results,
These are results.
                          Objects of value or virtue,
However, are also to be picked up here,
Though rarely, lying with bones and rotten meat,
Eggshells and mouldy bread, banana peels
No one will skid on, apple cores that caused
Neither the fall of man nor a theory
Of gravitation. People do throw out
The family pearls by accident, sometimes,
Not often; I’ve known dealers in antiques
To prowl this place by night, with flashlights, on
The off-chance of somebody’s having left
Derelict chairs which will turn out to be
by Hepplewhite, a perfect set of six
Going to show, I guess, that in any sty
Someone’s heaven may open and shower down
Riches responsive to the right dream; though
It is a small chance, certainly, that sends
The ghostly dealer, heavy with fly-netting
Over his head, across these hills in darkness,
Stumbling in cut-glass goblets, lacquered cups,
And other products of his dreamy midden
Penciled with light and guarded by the flies. 
For there are flies, of course. A dynamo
Composed, by thousands, of our ancient black
Retainers, hums here day and night, steady
As someone telling beads, the hum becoming
A high whine at any disturbance; then,
Settled again, they shine under the sun
Like oil-drops, or are invisible as night,
By night.
             All this continually smoulders,
Crackles, and smokes with mostly invisible fires
Which, working deep, rarely flash out and flare,
And never finish. Nothing finishes;
The flies, feeling the heat, keep on the move. 
Among the flies, the purefying fires,
The hunters by night, acquainted with the art
Of our necessities, and the new deposits
That each day wastes with treasure, you may say
There should be ratios. You may sum up
The results, if you want results. But I will add
That wild birds, drawn to the carrion and flies,
Assemble in some numbers here, their wings
Shining with light, their flight enviably free,
Their music marvelous, though sad, and strange.


^^EOP^^

Sidewalks of webs and weeds
Run parallel to empy lots where foul deeds
By handkerchief heads and winos were played,
To that old house where we stayed.
Irma Jean, Cora Jean and I, three debs,
Against the cracks of weeds and webs. 
Sitting through matinees, dodging chores,
Chewing gum; claiming boys were bores.
But secretly grooming hair and breasts; 
Jennie’s brood, a female nest.
Irma, long-legged, delicious full lips,
Taught Cora and me to wiggle our hips.
George Darlington Love, a beau, my first;
They yelled his name like a tribal curse 
As his virginal fingers pressed our bell.
Against that background of sights and smells,
We ignored switchblades, zip guns, and knees
Shattered by cops in that place without trees.
Now memories of dances are sprinkled like seeds
Among cousins and sidewalks of webs and weeds.


^^EOP^^

By the time he’d hit eighty, he was something out of Ovid,his long beak thin and hooked, 

^^EOP^^

I have nothing to recant, I am just the decanter. You, the just destroyer, have in faith become the role, recalling for those gathered the noble fallenwith a prayer to his-grace-above-fire, (“Turn me, I’m burnt on that side”)St. Lawrence. Well done, I applaud. And you: Well executed. This is it. Not much else to awaitwhen our fates touch: I’ve nowhere to be but eternity, you’ve nothing to catch but the thatch. Dry on dry,we keep our wits about us 

^^EOP^^

Two young men—you just might call them boys—waiting for the Woodward streetcar to get 

^^EOP^^




After Stevens



It was when he said expansively There is no such thing as the truth

^^EOP^^

Just past the bin of pastel baby socks and underwear,there are some 

^^EOP^^

Tragedy began with a dance in the guise of goats, said Aristotle.

^^EOP^^




For E.B.



The sprig of unknown bloom you sent last fallspent the long winter drying on my wall,mounted on black. But it had turned to fluffsome months ago. Tonight I took it downbecause I thought that I had had enoughof staring at it. Brittle, dry and brown,it seemed to speak too plainly of a wasteof friendship, forced to flower, culled in haste.So, after months of fearing to walk pastin case the stir should scatter it to bits,I took it out to scatter it at lastwith my own breath, and so to call us quits.

^^EOP^^

—retracing

^^EOP^^

Bewildered Saint of the curse, bulbous 

^^EOP^^

It approaches from the sea, too smallFor thunder and lightningBut ominous as a closed fistAnd what it will bringNearing us, growing larger,Is completely unknown.

^^EOP^^

Stick that bumbershootin elephant’s-footbrolly stand behindthe big door. Mindyour manners at High Tea.Hi, you. High ve-locity hailstones creampassersby beyond the panes. I dreamof Jeannie, starring Bar-bara Eden, of Eden, star-ring Eve and Adam, of AdamCartwright, a.k.a. the let-'

^^EOP^^

The first seated takes the chance he’ll bestood up. She’s getting on with the hope she mayget off. One and one make onein this riddle. Or, more closely, comedy routine:first, impressions; second, observations. Impolite to have thirds. Bachelors and bachelorettes beware: more than tonight they can mess up your order.Who would go for the lobster expects the claws.No pets allowed, keep your shirt on, places this strict—like loony bins—require a jacket, sir. Mark sudden pauses, gaps in the flap, commas where a sutra might be

^^EOP^^

Macy’s                               Hickory Farms
 Circuit City                         GNC Payless ShoeSource                   The Body Shop Sears                                Eddie Bauer Kay Jewelers                         Payless ShoeSource GNC                                  Circuit City  LensCrafters                         Kay Jewelers Coach                                Gymboree H&M RadioShack Gymboree                             The Body Shop                                      Hickory Farms                                      Coach The Body Shop                        Macy's Eddie Bauer                          GNC Crabtree & Evelyn                    Circuit City Gymboree                             Sears Foot Locker Land's End GNC                                  H&M LensCrafters                         Kay Jewelers Coach                                Land's End Famous Footwear                      LensCrafters H&M                                  Eddie Bauer                                      Cinnabon                                      LensCrafters Foot Locker                          RadioShack GNC                                  GNC Macy's                               Sears Crabtree & Evelyn                    Crabtree & Evelyn H&M Cinnabon Kay Jewelers Lands's End


^^EOP^^

Ink on a 5.5 by 9 inch substrate of 60-pound offset matte white paper. Composed of: varnish (soy bean oil [C57H98O6], used as a plasticizer: 52%. Phenolic modified rosin resin [Tall oil rosin: 66.2%. Nonylphenol [C15H24O]: 16.6%. Formaldehyde [CH2O]: 4.8%. Maleic anhydride [C4H2O3]: 2.6%. Glycerol [C3H8O3]: 9.6%. Traces of alkali catalyst: .2%]: 47%): 53.7%. 100S Type Alkyd used as a binder (Reaction product of linseed oil: 50.7%. Isophthalic acid [C8H6O4]: 9.5%. Trimethylolpropane [CH3CH2C(CH2OH)3]: 4.7%. Reaction product of tall oil rosin: 12.5%. Maleic anhydride [C4H2O3]: 2.5%. Pentaerythritol [C5H12O4]: 5%. Aliphatic C14 Hydrocarbon: 15%): 19.4%. Carbon Black (C: 92.8%. Petroleum: 5.1%. With sulfur, chlorine, and oxygen contaminates: 2.1%), used as a pigmenting agent: 18.6%. Tung oil (Eleostearic acid [C18H30O2]: 81.9%. Linoleic acid [C18H32O2]: 8.2%. Palmitic acid [C16H32O2]: 5.9%. Oleic acid [CH3(CH2)7CH=CH(CH2)7COOH]: 4.0%.), used as a reducer: 3.3%. Micronized polyethylene wax (C2H4)N: 2.8%. 3/50 Manganese compound, used as a through drier: 1.3%. 1/25 Cobalt linoleate compound used as a top drier: .7%. Residues of blanket wash (roughly equal parts aliphatic hydrocarbon and aromatic hydrocarbon): .2%. Adhered to: cellulose [C6H10O5] from softwood sulphite pulp (Pozone Process) of White Spruce (65%) and Jack Pine (35%): 77%; hardwood pulp (enzyme process pre-bleach Kraft pulp) of White Poplar (aspen): 15%; and batch treated PCW (8%): 69.3%. Water [H2O]: 11.0%. Clay [Kaolinite form aluminum silicate hydroxide (Al2Si2O5[OH]4): 86%. Calcium carbonate (CaCO3): 12%. Diethylenetriamine: 2%], used as a pigmenting filler: 8.4%. Hydrogen peroxide [H2O2], used as a brightening agent: 3.6%. Rosin soap, used as a sizer: 2.7%. Aluminum sulfate [Al2(SO4)]: 1.8%. Residues of cationic softener (H2O: 83.8%. Base [Stearic acid (C18H36O2): 53.8%. Palmitic acid (C16H32O2): 29%. Aminoethylethanolamine (H2-NC2-H4-NHC2-H4-OH): 17.2%]: 10.8%. Sucroseoxyacetate: 4.9%. Tallow Amine, used as a surfactant: 0.3%. Sodium chloride [NaCl], used as a viscosity controlling agent: .2%) and non-ionic emulsifying defoamer (sodium salt of dioctylsulphosuccinate [C20H37NaO7S]), combined: 1.7%. Miscellaneous foreign contaminates: 1.5%.


^^EOP^^

He’s supposed to call his doctor, but for now he’s the May King with his own maypole. He’s hallelujah. He’s glory hole. The world has more women than he can shake a stick at. The world is his brickbat, no conscience to prick at, all of us Germans he can 

^^EOP^^




^^EOP^^

before iced coffee came to town, a sump from which I’ve fishedmany a memory of regret and loneliness and whose misery I now understand came less from my pocked nature than from the chokehold of blue laws, and from my broken-willed Eeyore of a used car which liked to stop stubbornly in Sealy, halfway to Hill Country, and always one day after the insurance ran out, and from the paucity of public space so that we drove (locally) from shopping strip to balding park, once to a leech-infested pond; and owing also to the blinding afternoons that made invisible,

^^EOP^^

I Google myself I want you to love me When I feel down I want you to Google me I search myself I want you to find me I Google myself I want you to remind me 

^^EOP^^

When Hans Hofmann became a hedgehogsomewhere in a Germany that hasvanished with its forests and hedgerowsShakespeare would have been a young actorstarting out in a country that wasonly a word to Hans who had learnedfrom those who had painted animalsonly from hearing tales about themwithout ever setting eyes on themor from corpses with the lingeringlight mute and deathly still foreverheld fast in the fur or the feathershanging or lying on a tableand he had learned from others who hadarranged the corpses of animalsas though they were still alive in fullflight or on their way but this hedgehogwas there in the same life as his ownlooking around at him with his brushof camel hair and his stretched parchmentof sheepskin as he turned to each sharpparticular quill and every blackwhisker on the long live snout and thoseflat clawed feet made only for trundlingand for feeling along the dark undersidesof stones and as Hans took them in heturned into the Hans that we would see

^^EOP^^

At forty-eight, to be given water,which is most of the world, given lifein water, which is most of me, given ease,which is most of what I lack, here, where walls don’t part to my hands, is to be born as of three weeks ago. Taking nothing from you, mother, or you, sky, or you, mountain, that you wouldn’t take if offered by the sea, any sea, or river, any river, or the pool, beside which a woman sits who would save me if I needed saving, in a red suit, as if flame is the color of emergency, as I do, need saving, from solid things, most of all, their dissolve.

^^EOP^^




We must not look for poetry in poems.                  —Donald Revell



You must not skirt the issue wearing skirts.You must not duck the bullet using ducks. You must not face the music with your face.Headbutting, don’t use your head. Or your butt.You must not use a house to build a home,and never look for poetry in poems.In fact, inject giraffes into your poems.Let loose the circus monkeys in their skirts.Explain the nest of wood is not a homeat all, but a blind for shooting wild ducks.Grab the shotgun by its metrical butt;aim at your Muse’s quacking, Pringled face.It’s good we’re talking like this, face to face.There should be more headbutting over poems.Citing an 80s brand has its cost buthonors the teenage me, always in skirts,showing my sister how to Be the Duckwith a potato-chip beak. Take me home,Mr. Revell. Or make yourself at homein my postbellum, Reconstruction face—my gray eyes, my rebel ears, all my ducksin the row of a defeated mouth. Poemswere once civil. But war has torn my skirtsoff at the first ruffle, baring my butt

^^EOP^^

How much soil do you plow to soothe a conscience?If you’re a staked plains, dry-land, long view man:a sky’s worth. Some even sow the dry playamid-summer with sorghum, the cotton plowed underafter early hail. Thus, not every farmer keepsan old broken homestead sacred as a graveyard. Today, no Sharpshin on a pivot for an omen,no stoic farmer on a turn-row changing water.Among a little wind grit, in a grid on a grid, somewhere like the crossroads of outer space and Earth, Texas, a handful of ragged elms withstand a long swayof heat and wind. These old guards of a home haunt the field but wither even as ghosts must. Honor themwith a walk among homesick bricks, and prophesy good.

^^EOP^^

were the last wordsof Goethe on hisdeathbed as the darknessclosed around him.But Mayor Lichtwas also the chiefexecutive of Providence,Rhode Island in the earlyEighties. I’m dreamingof the best politicalcommercial of all time—Weimar in the 

^^EOP^^

There was a melon fresh from the gardenSo ripe the knife slurped As it cut it into six slices. The children were going back to school.Their mother, passing out paper plates,Would not live to see the leaves fall. I remember a hornet, too, that flew inThrough the open window Mad to taste the sweet fruitWhile we ducked and screamed,Covered our heads and faces,And sat laughing after it was gone.

^^EOP^^

Miss Scarlett, effen we kain git de doctahw’en Miss Melly’s time come, doan you bodderAh kin manage. Ah knows all ’bout birthin.Ain’ mah ma a midwife? Ain’ she raise meter be a midwife, too? Jes’ you leave itter me. She warn’t dar. Well’m, Dey Cookie say Miss Meade done got wud early dis mawnin’dat young Mist’ Phil done been shot an’ Miss Meadeshe tuck de cah’ige an’ Ole Talbot an’Besty an’ dey done gone ter fotch him home.Cookie say he bad hurt an’ Miss Meade ain’gwin ter be studyin’ ’bout comin’ uphyah. Dey ain’ dar, Miss Scarlett. Ah drapped inter pass time of de day wid Mammy onmah way home.Dey’s doen gone. House all locked up.Spec dey’s at de horsepittle.Miss Elsing ober at de horsepittle.Dey Cookie ’lows a whole lot of woundedsojers come in on de early train. Cookie fixin’soup ter tek over dar. She say—Yas’mGawdlmighty, Miss Scarlett! De Yankees ain’ at Tara, s dey? Gawdlmighty, Miss Scarlett! Whut’ll dey do ter Maw?Dey’s fightin’ at Jonesboro, Miss Scarlett!Dey say our gempumus is gittin’ beat.Oh, Gawd, Miss Scarlett! Whut’ll happen terMaw an’ Poke? Oh, Gawd, Miss Scarlett! Whut’ll happenter us effen de Yankees gits hyah? Oh, Gawd—Ah ain’ nebber seed him, Miss Scarlett.No’m, he ain’ at de horsepittle.Miss Merriwetheran’ Miss Elsing ain’ dar needer.A man he tole me de doctah down     by de car shed     wid the woundedsojers jes’ come in frum Jonesboro, butMiss Scarlett, Ah wuz sceered ter go down dar terde shed—dey’s folkses dyin’ down dar. Ah’ssceered of daid folkses—Miss Scarlett, fo’ Gawd, Ahcouldn’ sceercely git one of dem ter readyo’ note. Dey wukin’ in de horsepittlelak dey all done gone crazy. One doctahhe say ter me, “Damn yo’ hide! Doan you comeroun’ hyah bodderi’ me ’bout babies w’enwe got a mess of men dyin’ hyah. Git some woman ter he’p you.” An’ den Ah went aroun’ an’ about an’ ask fer newslak you done tole me an’ dey all say “fightin’at Jonesboro” an’ Ah—Is her time nigh, Miss Scarlett?Is de doctah come?Gawd, Miss Scarlett! Miss Melly bad off!Fo’ Gawd, Miss Scarlett—Fo’ Gawd, Miss Scarlett!We’s got ter have a doctah. Ah—Ah—Miss Scarlett, Ah doan know nutin’ ‘bout bringin’ babies.

^^EOP^^

In the suburbs on a bike path that inany other age would be a road roughedhalfway through some dark wood’s listening hearttwo damp young men in suits sucked dry of lightwalk stiffly and uncertain round a bendin each left hand the black box of a bookThey see me then spread out to fill the wayas sun blares down and dry May wind slapscheap loose plastic cloth against their shinsThe thinner taller blond one greets me inan earnest tone these days not often heardand when I do not take his offered handsurprised he pulls it back by jerked degreessays 

^^EOP^^

Grandma laughing on her deathbed.Eternity, the quiet one, listening in.Like moths around an oil lamp we were.Like ragdolls tucked away in the attic.In walked a cat with a mouthful of feathers.(How about that?)A dark little country store full of gravedigger’s        children buying candy. (That’s how we looked that night.) The young men pumping gas spoke of his friends:     the clouds.It was such a sad story, it made everyone laugh.A bird called out of a tree, but received no answer.The beauty of that last momentLike a red sail on the bay at sunset,Or like a wheel breaking off a carAnd roaming the world on its own.

^^EOP^^

                    
                    
                    Words can bang around in your head Forever, if you let them and you give them room. I used to love poetry, and mostly I still do, Though sometimes “I, too, dislike it.” There must be Something real beyond the fiddle and perfunctoryConsolations and the quarrels—as of courseThere is, though what it is is difficult to say.The salt is on the briar rose, the fog is in the fir trees.I didn’t know what it was, and I don’t know now,But it was what I started out to do, and now, a lifetime later,    All I’ve really done. The Opening of the Field, Roots and Branches, Rivers and Mountains: I sat in my roomAlone, their fragments shored against the ruin or revelationThat was sure to come, breathing in their secret atmosphere,Repeating them until they almost seemed my own.We like to think our lives are what they study to become,And yet so much of life is waiting, waiting on a whim.So much of what we are is sheer coincidence,Like a sentence whose significance is retrospective,Made up out of elementary particles that are in some senseSimply sounds, like syllables that finally settle into place.You probably think that this is a poem about poetry (And obviously it is), yet its real subject is time, For that’s what poetry is—a way to live through time And sometimes, just for a while, to bring it back.
*     *     *
A paneled dining room in Holder Hall. Stage right, enter twit:“Mr. Ashbery, I’m your biggest campus fan.” We hit it offAnd talked about “The Skaters” and my preference for “Clepsydra” Vs. “Fragment.” Later on that night John asked me to a party in New York, And Saturday, after dinner and a panel on the artist’s role as something (And a party), driving Lewis’s Austin-Healey through the rain I sealed our friendship with an accident. The party was on Broadway,An apartment (white of course, with paintings) just downstairsFrom Frank O’Hara’s, who finally wandered down. I talked to himA little about Love Poems (Tentative Title), which pleased him,And quoted a line from “Poem” about the rain, which seemed to please him too.The party ended, John and I went off to Max’s, ordered steaks And talked about our mothers. All that talking!—poems and paintings,Parents, all those parties, and the age of manifestos still to come!I started coming to New York for lunch. We’d meet at Art News,Walk to Fifty-sixth Street to Larre’s, a restaurant filled with French expatriates,Have martinis and the prix fixe for $2.50 (!), drink rose de ProvenceAnd talk (of course) about Genet and James and words like “Coca-Cola.”It was an afternoon in May when John brought up a playThat he and Kenneth Koch and Frank O’Hara—Holy Trinity!(Batman was in vogue)—had started years ago and never finished.There was a dictator named Edgar and some penicillin,But that’s all I remember. They hadn’t actually been togetherIn years, but planned to finish it that night at John’s new apartmentOn Ninety-fifth Street, and he said to come by for a drinkBefore they ate and got to work. It was a New York dreamCome true: a brownstone floor-through, white and full of paintings(Naturally), “with a good library and record collection.”John had procured a huge steak, and as I helped him set the tableThe doorbell rang and Frank O’Hara, fresh from the museumAnd svelte in a hound’s tooth sports coat entered, followed shortlyBy “excitement-prone Kenneth Koch” in somber gray,And I was one with my immortals. In the small mythologiesWe make up out of memories and the flow of timeA few moments remain frozen, though the feel of them is lost,The feel of talk. It ranged from puns to gossip, always coming back To poems and poets. Frank was fiercely loyal to young poets(Joe Ceravolo’s name came up I think), and when I mentioned LewisIn a way that must have sounded catty, he leapt to his defense,Leaving me to backtrack in embarrassment and have another drink,Which is what everyone had. I think you see where it was going:Conversation drifting into dinner, then I stayed for dinnerAnd everyone forgot about the play, which was never finished(Though I think I’ve seen a fragment of it somewhere). I see a tableIn a cone of light, but there’s no sound except for Kenneth’s Deadpan “Love to see a boy eat” as I speared a piece of steak;And then the only voice I’m sure I hear is mine,As those moments that had once seemed singular and clearDissolve into a “general mess of imprecision of feeling”And images, augmented by line breaks. There were phone calls,Other people arrived, the narrative of the night dissolvedAnd finally everyone went home. School and spring wound down.The semester ended, then the weekend that I wrote about in “Sally’s Hair”Arrived and went, and then a late-night cruise around Manhattan for a rich friend’sParents’ anniversary bash, followed by an Upper East Side preppie barThat left me looking for a place to crash, and so I rang John’s bell at 2 AMAnd failed (thank God) to rouse him, caught a plane to San DiegoThe next day, worked at my summer job and worked on poemsAnd started reading Proust, and got a card one afternoonFrom Peter Schjeldahl telling me that Frank O’Hara had been killed.Ninety-fifth Street soldiered on for several years.I remember a cocktail party (the symposium of those days),Followed by dinner just around the corner at Elaine’s,Pre-Woody Allen. It was there I learned of R.F.K.’s assassinationWhen I woke up on the daybed in the living room, and whereJohn told me getting married would ruin me as a poet(I don’t know why—most of his friends were married), a judgmentHe revised when he met Susan and inscribed The Double Dream of Spring“If this is all we need fear from spinach, then I don’t mind so much”(Which was probably premature—watering his plants one dayShe soaked his landlord, Giorgio Cavallon, dozing in the garden below).It was where Peter Delacorte late one night recited an entire sideOf a Firesign Theatre album from memory, and set John on that path,To his friends’ subsequent dismay, and where he blessed me with his extra copyOf The Poems, and next day had second thoughts (though I kept it anyway). Sometimes a vague, amorphous stretch of years assumes a shape,And then becomes an age, and then a golden age alive with possibilities,When change was in the air and you could wander through its streetsAs though through Florence and the Renaissance. I know it sounds ridiculous,But that’s the way life flows: in stages that take form in retrospect,When all the momentary things that occupy the mind from day to dayHave vanished into time, and something takes their place that wasn’t there,A sense of freedom—one which gradually slipped away. The centerOf the conversation moved downtown, the Renaissance gave way to mannerismAs the junior faculty took charge, leaving the emeriti alone and out of itOf course, lying on the fringes, happily awake; but for the rest The laws proscribing what you couldn’t do were clear. I got so tiredOf writing all those New York poems (though by then I’d moved to Boston—To Siena, you might say) that led to nowhere but the next one,So I started writing poems about whatever moved me: what it’s likeTo be alive within a world that holds no place for you, yet seems so beautiful;The feeling of the future, and its disappointments; the trajectory of a life,That always brought me back to time and memory (I’d finished Proust by then),And brings me back to this. John finally moved downtown himself,Into a two-story apartment at Twenty-fifth and Tenth, with a spiral staircase Leading to a library, the locus of the incident of Susan, Alydar and John And the pitcher of water (I’ll draw a veil over it), and Jimmy Schuyler sighing“It’s so beautiful,” as Bernadette Peters sang “Raining in My Heart” from Dames at Sea.The poetry still continued—mine and everyone’s. I’d added Jimmy To my pantheon (as you’ve probably noticed), but the night in nineteen sixty-six Seemed more and more remote: I never saw Kenneth anymore,And there were new epicenters, with new casts of characters, like Madoo, Bob Dash’s garden in Sagaponack, and Bill and Willy’s loft in Soho.John moved again, to Twenty-second Street, and Susan and I moved to Milwaukee,Where our son was born. I stopped coming to New York, and writing poems, For several years, while I tried to dream enough philosophy for tenure.One afternoon in May I found myself at Ninth and Twenty-second,And as though on cue two people whom I hadn’t seen in years—David Kalstone, Darragh Park—just happened by, and then I took a taxi down to SohoTo the loft, and then a gallery to hear Joe Brainard read from I Remember,Back to John’s and out to dinner—as though I’d never been away, Though it was all too clear I had. Poems were in the air, but theory too, And members of the thought police department (who must have also gotten tenure) Turned up everywhere, with arguments that poetry was called upon to prove.It mattered, but in a different way, as though it floated free from poemsAnd wasn’t quite the point. I kept on coming back, as I still do.Half my life was still to come, and yet the rest was mostly personal:I got divorced, and Willy killed himself, and here I am now, ready to retire.There was an obituary in the Times last week for Michael Goldberg,A painter you’ll recall from Frank O’Hara’s poems (“Why I Am Not a Painter,”“Ode to Michael Goldberg (’s Birth and Other Births)”). I didn’t know him,But a few months after the soiree on Ninety-fifth Street I was at a partyIn his studio on the Bowery, which was still his studio when he died.The New York art world demimonde was there, including nearly everyoneWho’s turned up in this poem. I remember staring at a guy whoLooked like something from the Black Lagoon, dancing with a gorgeousWoman half his age. That’s my New York: an island dreamOf personalities and evenings, nights where poetry was second natureAnd their lives flowed through it and around it as it gave them life.O brave new world (now old) that had such people in’t!
*     *     *
“The tiresome old man is telling us his life story.” I guess I am, but that’s what poets do—not always Quite as obviously as this, and usually more by indirectionAnd omission, but beneath the poetry lies the singular reality And unreality of an individual life. I see it as a long,Illuminated tunnel, lined with windows giving on the scenes outside—On Ninety-fifth Street forty years ago. As life goes onYou start to get increasingly distracted by your own reflectionAnd the darkness gradually becoming visible at the end. I try not to look too far ahead, but just to stay here— Quick now, here, now, always—only something pulls meBack (as they say) to the day, when poems were more like secrets,With their own vernacular, and you could tell your friends By who and what they read. And now John’s practically become A national treasure, and whenever I look up I think I see him Floating in the sky like the Cheshire Cat. I don’t knowWhat to make of it, but it makes me happy—like seeing Kenneth Just before he died (“I’m going west John, I’m going west”) In his apartment on a side street near Columbia, or rememberingOnce again that warm spring night in nineteen sixty-six. I like to think of them together once again, at the cocktail partyAt the end of the mind, where I could blunder in and ruin it one last time.Meanwhile, on a hillside in the driftless region to the west,A few miles from the small town where The Straight Story ends,I’m building a house on a meadow, if I’m permitted to return,Behind a screen of trees above a lower meadow, with some apple treesIn which the fog collects on autumn afternoons, and a vistaOf an upland pasture without heaviness. I see myselfSitting on the deck and sipping a martini, as I used to at Larre’s, In a future that feels almost like a past I’m positive is there— But where? I think my life is still all conversation,Only now it’s with myself. I can see it continuing forever,Even in my absence, as I close the windows and turn off the lightsAnd it begins to rain. And then we’re there together In the house on the meadow, waiting for whatever’s left to comeIn what’s become the near future—two versions of myself And of the people that we knew, each one an otherTo the other, yet both indelibly there: the twit of twentyAnd the aging child of sixty-two, still separateAnd searching in the night, listening through the nightTo the noise of the rain and memories of rainAnd evenings when we’d wander out into the Renaissance,When I could see you and talk to you and it could still change;And still there in the morning when the rain has stopped,And the apples are all getting tinted in the cool light. 


^^EOP^^




From "Shorter Chaucer Tales" (2006)



The great labour of appearanceServed the making of the pyre. But how Nor howHow alsoHow theyShal nat be tooldShall not be told.Nor how the godsNor how the beestes and the birds Nor how the ground agastNor how the fire First with strawAnd then with drye And then with grene And then with goldAnd thenNow how a site is laid like this.Nor whatNor howNor howNor what she spak nor what was her desirNor what jewelsWhen the fireNor how some threw their And some their And their And cups full of wine and milk And bloodInto the fyrInto the fire.Nor how three times And three times withAnd three times how.

^^EOP^^

“Nothing but sunlight and gleaming, linoleum flecked with flame,a thick coat of wax that flasheddown a corridor and led to a room,a place where I curled up a few innocuous inches off the floor. Straps—word out of strophe,the restraints of line and stanza—straps hung in loops on closet hooks. On the nightstand a basket with peanut butter crackers, a vivid and unnatural orange, a crinkly wrap. A knee-high fridge stocked with icy juices, foil boxes, straws glued on. A female voice next door claimed she was still a human being, though I could not hear the reasons. When it was my turn, I answered right away, saying I knew where I was and why. No, I would not harm myself, surprised to be asked as I had never had the thought. Yes I knew where I was going next. Out the window and through shadow and streetlight, I saw how this building connected to the next. I was to follow a stripe painted on the wall. Someone would walk with me as well. I felt fine I said, and it was sort of true. Actually I felt nailed by one wrist to a desire to flee and by the other to a sincere longing for sleep. I was not in pain. Thank you. I felt like the very last note in a concert, the one that hovers as if it wants to linger, but is already over.”

^^EOP^^

O, she says (because she loves to say O),

^^EOP^^

Perishable, it said on the plastic container,and below, in different ink, the date to be used by, the last teaspoon consumed. I found myself looking:now at the back of each hand,now inside the knees,now turning over each foot to look at the sole.Then at the leaves of the young tomato plants, then at the arguing jays.Under the wooden table and lifted stones, looking. Coffee cups, olives, cheeses, hunger, sorrow, fears—these too would certainly vanish, without knowing when.How suddenly thenthe strange happiness took me,like a man with strong hands and strong mouth,inside that hour with its perishing perfumes and clashings.

^^EOP^^

Don’t take it personal, they said;
but I did, I took it all quite personal— 
the breeze and the river and the color of the fields;
the price of grapefruit and stamps, 
the wet hair of women in the rain—
And I cursed what hurt me 
and I praised what gave me joy,
the most simple-minded of possible responses. 
The government reminded me of my father,
with its deafness and its laws, 
and the weather reminded me of my mom,
with her tropical squalls.

^^EOP^^




After Erik Satie



For an hour I forgot my fat self, my neurotic innards, my addiction to alignment.For an hour I forgot my fear of rain.For an hour I was a salamandershimmying through the kelp in search of shore,and under his fingers the notes slid loosefrom my belly in a long jellyrope of eggsthat took root in the mud. And whatwould hatch, I did not know—a lie. A waltz. An apostle of glass.For an hour I stood on two legs and ran. For an hour I panted and galloped.For an hour I was a maple tree,and under the summer of his fingers the notes seeded and winged away 

^^EOP^^




During Napoleon iii’s coup d’état one of  his officers, Count de Saint-Arnaud, on being informed that a mob was approaching the Imperial Guard, coughed and exclaimed, with his hand across his throat, “Ma sacrée toux! (my damned cough).” But his lieutenant, understanding him to say “Massacrez tous! (massacre them all),” gave the order to fire, killing thousands—needlessly.                    —Guy Murchie



“He was mortared to death.” A pity, how we misspeak and mishear. —Or “martyred”? Not that/coin-flip/either makes a difference to the increasingly cooler downtick of a corpse’s cells. “We heard the crazy mating joy of the loon across the water.” Yes, but what do 

^^EOP^^

I have written a couple of poems about treespoems about trees and snakes and lakes and birdspoems about nature and life in New EnglandI write crappy poems and eat babiesif you like poems about trees you’re in for a treatwhen I get nervous I get hyper and bump into peopleI read to them what MapQuest gave meround during then in the mom seeker pantiesto help me narrow down the slut thing word jobs

^^EOP^^

Always a broom leaned against a wall,meals never on time, if they come at all.Days without dates through which she movesempty and stubborn, slightly confused.Ironing hung dejectedly over a chair,gestures that come from who-knows-where.Old letters unanswered, piled together,papers and pills stuffed deep in a drawer.Thankful to be part of your heart’s great wholeyet devoted to the limits of her own small skull.O orderly biped, take heed,leave her alone—let her read.

^^EOP^^

God knows the law of life is death,and you can feel it in your warbler neck,your river-quick high stick wristat the end of day. But the trophies:a goldfinch tearing up a pink thistle,a magpie dipping her wing tipsin a white cloud, an ouzel barreling hip-high upstream with a warning.You wish you had a river. To makea river, it takes some mountains.Some rain to watershed. You wishyou had a steady meadow and pink thistlesbobbing at the border for your horizons,pale robins bouncing their good posturesin the spruce shadows. Instead, the lawof life comes for you like three men and a car. In your dreams, you win them overwith your dreams: a goldfinch tearing up a pink thistle. A magpie so slow she knows how to keep death at bay, she takes her time with argument and hides her royal blue in black. Shy as a blue grouse, nevertheless Goddoesn’t forget his green mountains.You wish you had a river.

^^EOP^^

Yes, the young mothers are beautiful,with all the self-acceptance of exhaustion,still dazed from their great outpouring,pushing their strollers along the public river walk.

^^EOP^^

The Swiss just do whateverlike masturbating their doink-doinksdeep in rural Francein the shadow of Mont Blanc.Heavy, dependableand prepared for whateverthe Swiss vago-simulacrum recognizesas larderKing Hussein and President Fabio,always just about to touch each otheron their devolved sparkle-offsand Neil Patrick Harris appreciation pages.Everyone knows when these bizzarre Swiss comeththey cometh with fluffy Beatles-likesix packs of shit-covered reindeerknock-knocking like a bummer.Glitter is the Swiss Army knifeof the most bedazzlingly ridiculousemotions: the part just beforethe paranoid cheese-maker says,“Whatever you do in Palm Springs,don’t yodel”—a most unusual Swiss Missmixture of very early skunk and the roboticsadness of women’s moldheavy, greasy, dense and low, likelethargic sea-green gardenswith a buzz overpowering, likemodern outdoor inbreeding.

^^EOP^^

For knowledge, says the Old Sage, add; for wisdom,subtract. My head in a surgeon’s chair, checking Lao Tsu’s math as these teeth I barely knew I had (mumbled of as wisdom) introducedthemselves—rude party guests—right as they hadto go, their pinched 

^^EOP^^

Lobster in the bathtub. Christmas Eve.Scrub the tub first. Hand off cleanser.Rinse well. We don’t want Cometin our lobster. He’s clickingagainst the porcelain. Everyone leery              of going to the bathroom.Bubbles had risen when we lowered him in,now he’s limp. Stare into the waterthat wears a similar gooseflesh.The lobster is dispatched. 

^^EOP^^

turtles generate poemsNo wonder they move so slowly—Somebody in there isTrying to write.

^^EOP^^

You’ve planted and weeded and wheelbarrowed,            now tapping a pencil, trying to rememberthe next thing—what was it?—when a shape            drops from the sky, shudders and stopsat a tree—red blotch—whack, whack.            A creature big enough on this slow spring day to make you mutter, 

^^EOP^^

Every time I usemy language, I tellthe truth. A catin a white collar,like a priest with calicofur, walks across the deadgrass of the yard, and outthrough the white fence. The sun’sstrong, but the colors of the lawnwere washed out by the winter, not the light.February. Stained glass window of the housenext door takes the sun’s full brunt.It must look spectacularto the neighbor in my head,a white-haired woman with an airof dignity and grace, whothrough pools of the intensestcolors climbs the flight of stairs.I’ve never seen it,but I know it’s there.

^^EOP^^

Metropolitan Forecast

^^EOP^^

Oddly enough, there is a“Unicorn Pleasure Ring” in existence.Research reveals that Hitler liftedthe infamous swastika from a unicornemerging from a colorful rainbow.Nazi to unicorn: “You’re not comingout with me dressed in that ridiculousoutfit.” You can finally tell your daughterthat unicorns are real. One ripped the head offa waxwork of Adolf Hitler, police said.April 

^^EOP^^

All can be measured by the standard of the capybara.Everyone is lesser than or greater than the capybara.Everything is taller or shorter than the capybara.Everything is mistaken for a Brazilian dance craze more or less frequently than the capybara.Everyone eats greater or fewer watermelons than the capybara. Everyone eats more or less bark.Everyone barks more than or less than the capybara, who also whistles, clicks, grunts, and emits what is known as his 

^^EOP^^

I was, I was—by its posthumous chomp,by its bad dab of venom, its joy-buzzer buzz.If you’re ever shanked like the chumpthat I was, by the posthumous chompof an expired wire, you’ll bellow out promptat the pitiless shiv when she does what she does.Was 

^^EOP^^

Imagine having enough left to break a bottle over it. Listen how pretty, listen for glass in nothing nearby shattering, just morning birds that do not wake whoeveris not sleeping. Come hereLittle Birdie, 

^^EOP^^

Two rooms, the Aegean, 2008, there lived a rhapsode and his wife. When they ate, they ate straight from the vine. Her curves, sibilance,Serbo-Croatian chants. His chants, curves of clocks, burnished bells. When they ate, they boiled wings and gills.Nights, slate olives, he couldn’t see.

^^EOP^^

She came from the mountains, killing zombies at will. Some people cried “but that was cool!” and I could only whisper “we should NOT be killing zombies!” What have you gotten yourself to do? Did it ever occur to you that you may in fact hate yourself? I know I do . . . I’m not nearly high enough yet—and you’re not helping. My group got invited to join the Flarfist Collective, set up some hibachis and do what we do best, if you know what I mean. I wouldn’t have so much of a problem with this writing if it were a library and I checked out the entire world as if it were a single book. Strike “helpful” off your list. The 4th quarter gets pretty intense and the announcers are usually trying to figure out who is going to become overwhelmed by their own arrogant nightmares. It would upset the stomach of the balance of nature. I always go red over the stupidest things and I have no clue why. Whether it’s speaking in front of the class or someone asking me why I think I have the right to say anything. Why do I need an enemy to feel okay about what I’m doing? Observe yourself as you browse with sophistication through the topic of Authorship & Credibility. Why do I hate the surface of the world so much that I want to poison it? Why do I hate this so much? Well . . . you Hate Your Fucking Dad! Why is the screen so damn small? And why does the car turn so sharply? And why is the only sound I hear the sound of a raft of marmosets? BECAUSE I’m fucking ANXIOUS AS HELL about EVERYTHING. AAAAAAAAARGH. It’s even worse: “I’ll tell you later.” The medium is literally made of thousands of beautiful, living, breathing wolves. Why do I hate the moon so much? Unpublish your ideas in reverse. People hate any new way of writing. My girlfriend really hates it. There is not so much daytime left. Life is like spring snow tossing off mercurial Creeley-like escapes from life-threatening health problems. In summer we love winter in winter we love summer—all poetry is written in social mercurochrome. Since I hate the abridgement of life, a function of needing to please unpleaseable parents is more what this is about. Hate and love—if those are the options I just want to love and hate lobsters. The oddity is not so much that Blake held these eccentric views for most of his life, but that in modern civilization they not only extend the hand, so that it could not complain about complaining about something it hadn’t even bothered to read, and instead formed a halfway decent indie rock band. I’m actually starting to get much more interested in white people than I used to be. Why do I hate Flarf so much? Because it is against everything good this country once espoused. Why do I hate Flarf so much? Because of the awful conflict it places the law-abiding or police-fearing poets under.


^^EOP^^

Orange gleams athwart a crimson soulLambent flames; purple passion lurksIn your dusk eyes.Red mouth; flower soft,Your soul leaps up—and flashesStar-like, white, flame-hot.Curving arms, encircling a world of love,You! Stirring the depths of passionate desire!


^^EOP^^

In tattered old slippers that toast at the bars,And a ragged old jacket perfumed with cigars,Away from the world and its toils and its cares,I’ve a snug little kingdom up four pair of stairs.To mount to this realm is a toil, to be sure,But the fire there is bright and the air rather pure;And the view I behold on a sunshiny dayIs grand through the chimney-pots over the way.This snug little chamber is cramm’d in all nooksWith worthless old nicknacks and silly old books,And foolish old odds and foolish old ends,Crack’d bargains from brokers, cheap keepsakes from friends.Old armour, prints, pictures, pipes, china (all crack’d),Old rickety tables, and chairs broken-backed;A twopenny treasury, wondrous to see;What matter? ’tis pleasant to you, friend, and me.No better divan need the Sultan require, Than the creaking old sofa that basks by the fire;And ’tis wonderful, surely, what music you getFrom the rickety, ramshackle, wheezy spinet.That praying-rug came from a Turcoman’s camp;By Tiber once twinkled that brazen old lamp;A Mameluke fierce yonder dagger has drawn:’Tis a murderous knife to toast muffins upon.Long, long through the hours, and the night, and the chimes,Here we talk of old books, and old friends, and old times;As we sit in a fog made of rich LatakieThis chamber is pleasant to you, friend, and me.But of all the cheap treasures that garnish my nest,There’s one that I love and I cherish the best:For the finest of couches that’s padded with hairI never would change thee, my cane-bottom’d chair.'Tis a bandy-legg'd, high-shoulder'd, worm-eaten seat,With a creaking old back, and twisted old feet;But since the fair morning when Fanny sat there,I bless thee and love thee, old cane-bottom'd chair.If chairs have but feeling, in holding such charms,A thrill must have pass'd through your wither'd old arms!I look'd, and I long'd, and I wish'd in despair;I wish'd myself turn'd to a cane-bottom'd chair.It was but a moment she sate in this place,She'd a scarf on her neck, and a smile on her face!A smile on her face, and a rose in her hair,And she sate there, and bloom'd in my cane-bottom'd chair.And so I have valued my chair ever since,Like the shrine of a saint, or the throne of a prince;Saint Fanny, my patroness sweet I declare,The queen of my heart and my cane-bottom'd chair.When the candles burn low, and the company's gone,In the silence of night as I sit here alone—I sit here alone, but we yet are a pair—My Fanny I see in my cane-bottom'd chair.She comes from the past and revists my room;She looks as she then did, all beauty and bloom;So smiling and tender, so fresh and so fair,And yonder she sits in my cane-bottom'd chair.


^^EOP^^

Father, where do the wild swans go?         Far, far. Ceaselessly winging,         Their necks outstraining, they haste them singing         Far, far. Whither, none may know.Father, where do the cloud-ships go?         Far, far. The winds pursue them,         And over the shining heaven strew them         Far, far. Whither, none may know.Father, where do the days all go?         Far, far. Each runs and races—         No one can catch them, they leave no traces—         Far, far. Whither, none may know.But father, we—where do we then go?         Far, far. Our dim eyes veiling,         With bended head we go sighing, wailing         Far, far. Whither none may know.


^^EOP^^

“All folks hev some soft spot,”      Ma uster say,“Somethin’ or ’nother      Comes out some dayComes out ’fore they know it,      Jest like ez not.”’N’en us kids’d say, “Ma,      What’s your sof’ spot?”An’ we’d keep a plaguin’,      Till ma’d say,“I wish ’at you youngins      ’D run away!Ask your pa’ bout his’n      An’, like ez not,He’ll tell you willin’ly      What’s his sof’ spot.”’N’en we’d ’gree to ask him      That very day;When his train’d whistle      Why right away,We’d jest skedaddle      Clean ’cross the lot,To be first to ask pa      What’s his sof’ spot.Pa, he’d say, “My sof’ spot?      Never hes none!”Wouldn’t tell us neither,      But jest make fun;Then he’d tell his brakeman,      He’d says “Great lot,Think you’re goin’ to tell ’em      What’s your sof’ spot!”’N’en we’d all go home,      An’ after ’whilePa’d tell ma ’bout it,      An’ ma she’d smile;We’d ’gin agin a guessin’,      Till pa’d say, “Trot!Time you kids wuz dreamin’      In some sof’ spot.”An’ pa’d never tell us,      When he wuz in;Ev’ry trip he come home      We’d ’gin agin;Onct George sez when prayin’,      He prayed a lot,“Please God, wisht you’d tell us      What’s pa’s sof’ spot!”One day the opurat’r      Sent word by BertThere hed bin a washout,      An’ pa wuz hurt;Engineer wuz hurt, too,      An’ both might die;Pa wanted to see us      To say good-by.We wuz all so still      When we went in;They wuz holdin’ pa up,      A fannin’ him;An’ pa sez “I may die      Jest like ez not,Tell the children I sed      They’s my sof’ spot!”But our pa didn’t die,      He jist got well;We wuz all so happy,      Couldn’t ’gin to tell!’Cause we all loved our pa,      A great big lot,I guess God saw we wuz      Pa’s sof’ spot!


^^EOP^^




(With apologies to Mr. Rudyard Kipling)



If you can dress to make yourself attractive,       Yet not make puffs and curls your chief delight;If you can swim and row, be strong and active,       But of the gentler graces lose not sight;If you can dance without a craze for dancing,       Play without giving play too strong a hold,Enjoy the love of friends without romancing,       Care for the weak, the friendless and the old;If you can master French and Greek and Latin,       And not acquire, as well, a priggish mien,If you can feel the touch of silk and satin       Without despising calico and jean;If you can ply a saw and use a hammer,       Can do a man’s work when the need occurs,Can sing when asked, without excuse or stammer,       Can rise above unfriendly snubs and slurs;If you can make good bread as well as fudges,       Can sew with skill and have an eye for dust,If you can be a friend and hold no grudges,       A girl whom all will love because they must;If sometime you should meet and love another       And make a home with faith and peace enshrined,And you its soul—a loyal wife and mother—       You’ll work out pretty nearly to my mindThe plan that’s been developed through the ages,       And win the best that life can have in store,You’ll be, my girl, the model for the sages—       A woman whom the world will bow before.


^^EOP^^

The boy Alexander understands his father to be a famous lawyer.The leather law books of Alexander’s father fill a room like hay in a barn.Alexander has asked his father to let him build a house like bricklayers build, a house with walls and roofs made of big leather law books.    The rain beats on the windows   And the raindrops run down the window glass   And the raindrops slide off the green blinds down the siding.The boy Alexander dreams of Napoleon in John C. Abbott’s history, Napoleon the grand and lonely man wronged, Napoleon in his life wronged and in his memory wronged.The boy Alexander dreams of the cat Alice saw, the cat fading off into the dark and leaving the teeth of its Cheshire smile lighting the gloom.Buffaloes, blizzards, way down in Texas, in the panhandle of Texas snuggling close to New Mexico,These creep into Alexander’s dreaming by the window when his father talks with strange men about land down in Deaf Smith County.Alexander’s father tells the strange men: Five years ago we ran a Ford out on the prairie and chased antelopes.Only once or twice in a long while has Alexander heard his father say ‘my first wife’ so-and-so and such-and-such.A few times softly the father has told Alexander, ‘Your mother . . . was a beautiful woman . . . but we won’t talk about her.’Always Alexander listens with a keen listen when he hears his father mention ‘my first wife’ or ‘Alexander’s mother.’Alexander’s father smokes a cigar and the Episcopal rector smokes a cigar, and the words come often: mystery of life, mystery of life.These two come into Alexander’s head blurry and grey while the rain beats on the windows and the raindrops run down the window glass and the raindrops slide off the green blinds and down the siding.These and: There is a God, there must be a God, how can there be rain or sun unless there is a God?So from the wrongs of Napoleon and the Cheshire cat smile on to the buffaloes and blizzards of Texas and on to his mother and to God, so the blurry grey rain dreams of Alexander have gone on five minutes, maybe ten, keeping slow easy time to the raindrops on the window glass and the raindrops sliding off the green blinds and down the siding.


^^EOP^^

An old man going a lone highway,Came, at the evening cold and gray,To a chasm vast and deep and wide.Through which was flowing a sullen tideThe old man crossed in the twilight dim,The sullen stream had no fear for him;But he turned when safe on the other sideAnd built a bridge to span the tide.“Old man,” said a fellow pilgrim near,“You are wasting your strength with building here;Your journey will end with the ending day,You never again will pass this way;You’ve crossed the chasm, deep and wide,Why build this bridge at evening tide?”The builder lifted his old gray head;“Good friend, in the path I have come,” he said,“There followed after me to-dayA youth whose feet must pass this way.This chasm that has been as naught to meTo that fair-haired youth may a pitfall be;He, too, must cross in the twilight dim;Good friend, I am building this bridge for him!”


^^EOP^^

My pa he didn’t go to town      Last evening after tea,But got a book and settled down      As comfy as could be.I’ll tell you I was offul glad      To have my pa aboutTo answer all the things I had      Been tryin’ to find out.And so I asked him why the world      Is round instead of square,And why the piggies’ tails are curled,      And why don’t fish breathe air?And why the moon don’t hit a star,      And why the dark is black,And just how many birds there are,      And will the wind come back?And why does water stay in wells,      And why do June bugs hum,And what’s the roar I hear in shells,      And when will Christmas come?And why the grass is always green,      Instead of sometimes blue,And why a bean will grow a bean      And not an apple, too?And why a horse can’t learn to moo,      And why a cow can’t neigh?And do the fairies live on dew,      And what makes hair grow gray—And then my pa got up an’ gee!      The offul words he said,I hadn’t done a things, but he      Jest sent me off to bed.


^^EOP^^

How large was Alexander, father,       That parties designateThe historic gentleman as rather       Inordinately great?Why, son, to speak with conscientious       Regard for history,Waiving all claims, of course, to heights pretentious,—       About the size of me.


^^EOP^^

Father, father, where are you going       O do not walk so fast.Speak father, speak to your little boy       Or else I shall be lost,The night was dark no father was there       The child was wet with dew.The mire was deep, & the child did weep       And away the vapour flew.


^^EOP^^

When I was one-and-twenty       I heard a wise man say,“Give crowns and pounds and guineas       But not your heart away;Give pearls away and rubies       But keep your fancy free.”But I was one-and-twenty,       No use to talk to me.When I was one-and-twenty       I heard him say again,“The heart out of the bosom       Was never given in vain;’Tis paid with sighs a plenty       And sold for endless rue.”And I am two-and-twenty,       And oh, ’tis true, ’tis true.


^^EOP^^

Come with me then, my son;       Thine eyes are wide for truth:And I will give thee memories,       And thou shalt give me youth.The lake laps in silver,        The streamlet leaps her length:And I will give thee wisdom,       And thou shalt give me strength.The mist is on the moorland,       The rain roughs the reed:And I will give thee patience,       And thou shalt give me speed.When lightnings lash the skyline       Then thou shalt learn thy part:And when the heav’ns are direst,       For thee to give me heart.Forthrightness I will teach thee;       The vision and the scope;To hold the hand of honour:—       And thou shalt give me hope;And when the heav’ns are deepest       And stars most bright above;May God then teach thee duty;       And thou shalt teach me love.


^^EOP^^

Fortune has brought me down—her wonted way—       from station great and high to low estate;Fortune has rent away my plenteous store:       of all my wealth honor alone is left.Fortune has turned my joy to tears: how oft       did fortune make me laugh with what she gave!But for these girls, the kata’s downy brood,       unkindly thrust from door to door as hard—Far would I roam and wide to seek my bread       in earth that has no lack of breadth and length.Nay, but our children in our midst, what else       but our hearts are they, walking on the ground?If but the breeze blow harsh on one of them       my eye says no to slumber all night long.


^^EOP^^




(For My Father)



I listened to them talking, talking,That tableful of keen and clever folk,Sputtering . . . followed by a pale and balkingSort of flash whenever some one spoke;Like musty fireworks or a pointless joke,Followed by a pointless, musty laughter. ThenWithout a pause, the sputtering once again . . .The air was thick with epigrams and smoke;And underneath it allIt seemed that furtive things began to crawl,Hissing and striking in the dark,Aiming at no particular mark,And careless whom they hurt.The petty jealousies, the smiling hatesShot forth their venom as they passed the plates,And hissed and struck again, aroused, alert;Using their feeble smartness as a screenTo shield their poisonous stabbing, to divertFrom what was cowardly and black and mean.Then I thought of you,Your gentle soul, Your large and quiet kindness;Ready to caution and console,And, with an almost blindnessTo what was mean and low.Baseness you never knew;You could not think that falsehood was untrue,Nor that deceit would ever dare betray you.You even trusted treachery; and so,Guileless, what guile or evil could dismay you?You were for counsels rather than commands.Your sweetness was your strength, your strength a sweetnessThat drew all men, and made reluctant handsRest long upon your shoulder.Firm, but never proud,You walked your sixty years as through a crowdOf friends who loved to feel your warmth, and whoKnowing that warmth, knew you.Even the casual beholderCould see your fresh and generous completeness,Like dawn in a deep forest, growing and shining through.Such faith has soothed and armed you. It has smiledFrankly and unashamed at Death; and, like a child,Swayed half by joy and half by reticence,Walking beside its nurse, you walk with Life;Protected by your smile and an immenseSecurity and simple confidence.Hearing the talkers talk, I thought of you . . .And it was like a great wind blowingOver confused and poisonous places.It was like sterile spacesCrowded with birds and grasses, soaked clear throughWith sunlight, quiet and vast and clean.And it was forests growing,And it was black things turning green.And it was laughter on a thousand faces . . .It was, like victory rising from defeat,The world made well again and strong—and sweet.


^^EOP^^

My father was a tall man and yet the ripened ryeWould come above his shoulders, the spears shot up so high.My father was a tall man and yet the tasseled cornWould hide him when he cut the stalks upon a frosty morn.The green things grew so lushly in the valley of my birth,Where else could one witness the luxuriance of earth?The plow would turn so rhythmically the loose, unfettered loam,There was no need of effort to drive the coulter home.My father walked behind his team before the sun was high,Fine as a figure on a frieze cut sharp against the sky.And when he swung the cradle in the yellow of the grain,He could command all eyes around, or when he drove the wain.I wonder if his acres now that lie so far awayAre waiting for his footprint at the coming of the day.I wonder if the brown old barn that still is standing longAnd ghostly cattle in the stalls are waiting for his song.


^^EOP^^

If a fairy should come from BabylandWith a smile on his face and a wand in his hand,And say to me in his merry way,“I wish to hear what you have to say’Bout being born all over again—Exactly where and exactly whenAnd just what kind of a feller you’d likeTo have for your dad on this earthly hike,”I’d look at him and try to be As nonchalant and gay as he,And then I’d say, “If I must beBorn again, it seems to me,It doesn’t matter much just where or when(For what’s a baby now and then?)But there’s one thing I must requestSo will you do your level bestAnd kindly see that I shall dropInto the self-same arms of the self-same Pop?For, take it from me, he’s the very best dadThat any baby’s ever had!”


^^EOP^^

The tortoise walks on tiptoe in June,
the month of his ardors.
Buttery light, distant thunder
in the month of my ardors.

^^EOP^^




for Dianne McIntyre



as i fly over this time
rising over only this
so much painted suffering
unseen grimaces and stares
among spruce greens
these few forests left
all of us trying to be alone
quiet and blind.
       *
i see soldiers in bus stations
with colored names
polaroid shots
their girlfriends chew gum
smile wide
       *
in all this silver of sky
like stars these wheels
car gears lampshades
electrical refuse
zen oiled and greased
the believers now so many
now so tired of the sad songs
the endless yearnings for war
and more and more
       *
dumb cries i sigh
trying to get out of town
i am writing on the wall
it will be painted over
like all the songs
once outside
but as i fly over this time
       *
dianne is dancing
touching the far reaches
leaping and teaching
she strokes and struts the air
none of us stumbles
or fears their lives
steel beams and rail tracks
strike an E-flat, B-flat, A
E-flat, B-flat, A
dianne is dancing
no one can handle the hostages
terror is abandoned
because of light
breaking in leaves
because the center is gone
we are still breathing
and the swing is our bodies


^^EOP^^

this little phase
keeps on the same way
without variety
jazz and compromise
making blue snow grow at the windows
mohair fumes clog my throat like cats
flames pounce without burning
shadows gather in parkas at my back
turn so i can see your face
stand where i can see you man
should someone phone
i will tell whoever it is
i cannot escape this night
even saxophones do not dry
light the brown sweat
terror in white doorways
under multicolored covers
there is no way to sleep
with the phone
falling off the hook
the blaring beep of warnings
do not leave your house
do not stay home
this is the contradiction
of when i live
even fanfares and flourishes
do not announce a truce
with our personal assailants
without variety blue dust
blood traces in floor wax
black fog and nappy lint
colorless wax spreads broad
tears across all the windows
some permanent weather
happened to this building
some misplaced coal mine
had its disaster here
and i am alive inside


^^EOP^^




for Miami



They all like to hang out.
Thinking is all rather grim to them.
Snake and Minnie,
who love each other dearly,
drink in different bars,
ride home in separate cars.
They like to kiss good night
with unexplored lips.
They go out of town
to see each other open.
This they do for no one else.
Minnie does it all for God.
Snake does it all for fame.
Backstage is where they play their games;
that’s why i know their business. 
I was gonna talk about a race riot.
They say they’ve never played that town.
Fleece tells me he’s seen an old movie
about a black town attacking a white one.
Sidney Poitier was the young doctor,
accused, abused and enraged.
There were Ossie Davis and Woody Strode,
Ruby Dee and a hundred unknowns.
Also Sapphire’s mama as a maid.
“What was Sapphire’s mama’s name?” says Inez.
I was going to talk about a race riot
but we were stuck on Kingfish’s mother-in-law.
Minnie kisses Snake so he’ll forget about that
and I say, “They’re mad, they’re on the bottom
going down, stung by white justice in a white town,
and then there’s other colored people,
who don’t necessarily think they’re colored people,
leaving them the ground.” 
“That’s just like the dreads, the Coptics,
and the Man-ley-ites,” one drunk says too loud,
“I and I know,” say he.
Snake yells, “Are you crazy? No, it ain’t,
and no, we don’t.”
“That’s just like Angola,” Terri chimes,
“Sometimes it’s not who but what,
sometimes not what but who.” 
I’m trying to talk to these people
about this race riot,
someone is walking on the bar,
and every one of us belongs even now to Miami,
to people we have never seen. 
Pookie and Omar want to know what’s goin’ on.
They always do,
’cause they’re always in the bathroom
when it’s goin’ on.
They do everything together and not for God,
and not for fame, but for love.
At least that’s what their records say.
They are a singing group that’s had 13 Pookies. 
Omar asks me, “What do you want to say?”
Inez interupts, “She don’t know what to say,
she just wants to say something,
I understand that.”
The 13th Pookie chirps, “This race riot sounds like
all the other race riots.”
Fleece says, “And you sound like
12 other Pookies, Pookie.” 
I am still trying to talk about this race riot.
Minnie looks up and says, “We don’t have anywhere
to put any more dead.”
Snake puts on his coat to leave alone,
“We never did, we never did.”


^^EOP^^

Or a man who looks like him.
I only know I call him Daddy
(as all southern women
do until the day we die).
In my dreams he is still alive
and this is not a comfort.
I am my best when tragic.
Grief becomes me.
Daddy is more real in death,
eyes dark, undimmed
by the grave, smile less sincere.
Matter clings to his thick
eyebrows, his mouth spits mud
when he tries to talk. He is candid.
He tells me he liked my sisters better than me.
Most times I search for him in a crowd
of counterfeit Daddies.
I look for pieces of him.
An elbow. Black hair on the back
of a pale neck. If I find him,
I will say, Is that you?
I know you this time.

^^EOP^^




   for Alvester James



Long after it was
necessary, Uncle
Vess ate the leavings
off the hog, doused
them with vinegar sauce.
He ate chewy abominations.
Then came high pressure.
Then came the little pills.
Then came the doctor
who stole Vess’s second
sight, the predication
of pig’s blood every
fourth Sunday.
Then came the stillness
of barn earth, no more
trembling at his step.
Then came the end
of the rib, but before
his eyes clouded,
Uncle Vess wrote
down the gospel
of barbecue.  Chapter one:
Somebody got to die
with something at some
time or another.  Chapter two:
Don’t ever trust
white folk to cook
your meat until
it’s done to the bone.  Chapter three:
December is the best
time for hog killing.
The meat won’t
spoil as quick.
Screams and blood
freeze over before
they hit the air.  Chapter four, Verse one:
Great Grandma Mandy
used to say food
you was whipped
for tasted the best.  Chapter four, Verse two:
Old Master knew to lock
the ham bacon chops
away quick or the slaves
would rob him blind.
He knew a padlock
to the smokehouse
was best to prevent
stealing, but even the
sorriest of slaves would
risk a beating for a full
belly. So Christmas time
he give his nasty
leftovers to the well
behaved. The head ears
snout tail fatback
chitlins feet ribs balls.
He thought gratitude
made a good seasoning.  Chapter five:
Unclean means dirty
means filthy means
underwear worn too
long in summertime heat.
Perfectly good food
can’t be no sin.
Maybe the little
bit of meat on ribs
makes for lean eating.
Maybe the pink flesh
is tasteless until you add
onions garlic black
pepper tomatoes
soured apple cider
but survival ain’t never been
no crime against nature
or Maker. See, stay alive
in the meantime, laugh
a little harder. Go on
and gnaw that bone clean.


^^EOP^^




Who died and made you Elvis?
      —Bumper sticker



The big rock by my door
is a plaster prop, after
all. I’m back to hear
screams for what I can’t
do, couldn’t do forty
years ago. Awkward
pelvic thrusts fooled
the camera and virgins,
but I have no more fish-
fry tunes left to dress
up on brand new plates.
This time around,
I spend all day singing
cracked Mississippi
homilies. Why
did I want to live
forever in the first place?
Salvation felt better dead,
floating home free
while my bones, secret
and brown, mingle
with old dirt.


^^EOP^^

Roslyn has nothing going
nothing to fight for
no work to do
she couldn’t name one desire
that is not someone else’s
or a man 
she cannot claim
where she came from
will not claim who she is
or the way she cries
so no one can see 
she has no work to do
cannot finish books
feed herself
or go out alone
she is always late
not to sit alone somewhere
and wait
she wouldn’t know what to do 
Roslyn doesn’t want a thing
but she waits for something anyway
she has no work to do
she holds off interests
passions and opinions
everything but the facts
and these come to her
from dramas and the papers 
she agrees with fiction
and what people say
i wouldn’t trust her in court
or on my back
a woman without a dream
is a fault in the earth
all steam and liquid fire 
Roslyn goes to work
has a job
but no calling
waits for the word
to call herself
no one ever remembers her name
or where they saw her
she waits to be told
she’s the only one 
her tyranny is silent
small and sexual
her losses are great
she has not called herself
said, “I’m here, now, deal with me” 
Roslyn wouldn’t hurt a fly
but people fear her sleep
her unconscious
the primal whatever
that wants to play
it might have guns out
for the rest of us


^^EOP^^

the streets of hell are also paved
with fear of contagion
I have been swimming
in enough barbed-wire waters to know
you’re not even safe on the beach
it’s not just your “body fluids”
it’s the grime of your skin
those dirty things you think 
they are cleaning up the world again
I can see the inflammation
heartbreak & hunger scurry me down
on the road to Damascus
I want to be blinded like Saul
for the sake of vision
not just cause I can’t take it anymore 
are we talking burnt out here?
burnt out is a reason for infection
I hope I get the whole disease
I am glad to be a speck / a piece of dirt
the dark side of the earth
they’re trying to clean
I want to get in their pores
want them to sweat my filth
the way a wound hurts before the dope
but then come the murderers on the road
are we talking burnt out?
they go in the camps looking for you
cause you are hiding the sores
you could be contagious
after all in the postapocalypse movies
you don’t even exist 
your survival is not required
for history or hollywood
in the movie Road Warrior
everyone is antisocial on purpose
human ties are burnt out
& human intercourse is fatiguing & dangerous
gratefully no one is traumatized anymore
& unfortunately no one goes to school 
in the movie Blade Runner
almost everyone lives 90 stories below
almost no one else
everyone is antisocial by accident
due to overcrowding in L.A. but no one minds
& there are still parties to go to 
everyone white is “off-world” more or less
everyone 90 stories down is polymorphous colored
more or less
no one has attended school in decades
in both films everyone dresses with panache
which preserves their identities
to audiences who know
there is no grounds for indentity
postworld 
personally I prefer the people in Titanic
even though they got their minds blown
when the unbelievable happened
they still believed in life
they were not burnt out
& had grounds for clinging
to lifeboats and a certain
stylish way of dressing 
they could not imagine Jim Jensen
intoning without horror
that the body count goes on
that no one needs the news to know
what’s going on
Beirut is one of the low levels
Dante went on about
available in ordinary life 
see the corpses if you will
believe at the risk
you may see it everywhere
every body spreads infection
unless you burn it out
eyewitness news invites you
to wait for the coverage
because Jim Jensen is there
& history is in the making or
you can come skinny-dip
in my gene pool 
the massacres were arbitrary
when my people were hunted down
the deaths still go on
stretching over centuries
of shades of brown
baptist, moslem,
mothers, children, fathers
burnt out of homes but living 
I am not that desperate
to be numb & dumb
I’m walking 90 stories down
I know I survive
in some wretched moments
of what men do
but I am not that desperate
I don’t give a shit if this is history
in the making
it should stop 
I am still alive
I am still happy to be the dirt
that can’t be cleaned up
scorch my earth & I will grow
from history up
under the feet of the present
burnt out is for the movies
in which we don’t exist


^^EOP^^

This was gruesome—fighting over a ham sandwich                   with one of the tiny cats of Rome, he leaped on my arm and half hung on to the food and half hung on to my shirt and coat. I tore it apart and let him have his portion, I think I lifted him down, sandwich and all, on the sidewalk and sat with my own sandwich beside him, maybe I petted his bony head and felt him shiver. I have told this story over and over; some things root in the mind; his boldness, of course, was frightening and unexpected—his stubbornness—though hunger drove him mad. It was the breaking of boundaries, the sudden invasion, but not only that it was the sharing of food and the sharing of space; he didn't run into an alley or into a cellar, he sat beside me, eating, and I didn't run into a trattoria, say, shaking, with food on my lips and blood on my cheek, sobbing; but not only that, I had gone there to eat and wait for someone. I had maybe an hour before she would come and I was full of hope and excitement. I have resisted for years interpreting this, but now I think I was given a clue, or I was giving myself a clue, across the street from the glass sandwich shop. That was my last night with her, the next day I would leave on the train for Paris and she would meet her husband. Thirty-five years ago I ate my sandwich and moaned in her arms, we were dying together; we never met again although she was pregnant when I left her—I have a daughter or son somewhere, darling grandchildren in Norwich, Connecticut, or Canton, Ohio. Every five years I think about her again and plan on looking her up. The last time I was sitting in New Brunswick, New Jersey, and heard that her husband was teaching at Princeton, if she was still married, or still alive, and tried calling. I went that far. We lived in Florence and Rome. We rowed in the bay of Naples and floated, naked, on the boards. I started to think of her again today. I still am horrified by the cat's hunger. I still am puzzled by the connection. This is another insane devotion, there must be hundreds, although it isn't just that, there is no pain, and the thought is fleeting and sweet. I think it's my own dumb boyhood, walking around with Slavic cheeks and burning stupid eyes. I think I gave the cat half of my sandwich to buy my life, I think I broke it in half as a decent sacrifice. It was this I bought, the red coleus, the split rocking chair, the silk lampshade. Happiness. I watched him with pleasure. I bought memory. I could have lost it. How crazy it sounds. His face twisted with cunning. The wind blowing through his hair. His jaw working.


^^EOP^^

This was gruesome—fighting over a ham sandwich
with one of the tiny cats of Rome, he leaped
on my arm and half hung on to the food and half
hung on my shirt and coat. I tore it apart
and let him have his portion, I think I lifted him
down, sandwich and all, on the sidewalk and sat
with my own sandwich beside him, maybe I petted
his bony head and felt him shiver. I have
told this story over and over; some things
root in the mind; his boldness, of course, was frightening
and unexpected—his stubbornness—though hunger
drove him mad. It was the breaking of boundaries,
the sudden invasion, but not only that, it was
the sharing of food and the sharing of space; he didn’t
run into an alley or into a cellar,
he sat beside me, eating, and I didn’t run
into a trattoria, say, shaking,   
with food on my lips and blood on my cheek, sobbing;
but not only that, I had gone there to eat
and wait for someone. I had maybe an hour
before she would come and I was full of hope
and excitement. I have resisted for years
interpreting this, but now I think I was given
a clue, or I was giving myself a clue,
across the street from the glass sandwich shop.   
That was my last night with her, the next day
I would leave on the train for Paris and she would
meet her husband. Thirty-five years ago
I ate my sandwich and moaned in her arms, we were
dying together; we never met again
although she was pregnant when I left her—I have
a daughter or son somewhere, darling grandchildren   
in Norwich, Connecticut, or Canton, Ohio.
Every five years I think about her again
and plan on looking her up. The last time
I was sitting in New Brunswick, New Jersey,
and heard that her husband was teaching at Princeton,
if she was still married, or still alive, and tried   
calling. I went that far. We lived
in Florence and Rome. We rowed in the bay of Naples
and floated, naked, on the boards. I started
to think of her again today. I still
am horrified by that cat’s hunger. I still
am puzzled by the connection. This is another
insane devotion, there must be hundreds, although
it isn’t just that, there is no pain, and the thought
is fleeting and sweet. I think it’s my own dumb boyhood,
walking around with Slavic cheeks and burning
stupid eyes. I think I gave the cat
half of my sandwich to buy my life, I think
I broke it in half as a decent sacrifice.
It was this I bought, the red coleus,
the split rocking chair, the silk lampshade.
Happiness. I watched him with pleasure.   
I bought memory. I could have lost it.   
How crazy it sounds. His face twisted with cunning.
The wind blowing through his hair. His jaws working.


^^EOP^^

Sweet beast, I have gone prowling,
    a proud rejected man
who lived along the edges
    catch as catch can;
in darkness and in hedges
    I sang my sour tone
and all my love was howling
    conspicuously alone. 
I curled and slept all day
    or nursed my bloodless wounds
until the squares were silent
    where I could make my tunes
singular and violent.
    Then, sure as hearers came
I crept and flinched away.
    And, girl, you've done the same. 
A stray from my own type,
    led along by blindness,
my love was near to spoiled
    and curdled all my kindness.
I find no kin, no child;
    only the weasel's ilk.
Sweet beast, cat of my own stripe,
    come and take my milk.


^^EOP^^

Use meAbuse me          Turn wheels of ﬁre          on manhole hotheadsSing meSour me          Secrete dark matter’s sheen          on our smarting skinRise and shineIn puddle shallows          under every Meryl Cheryl Caleb Syd          somnambulists and sleepyheadsWake usSpeak to us          Bless what you’ve nurtured in your pits          the rats voles roaches and all outlivers          of your obscene ethic and politicsCrawl on us Fall on us          you elevations that break and vein          down to sulfuric ﬁber-optic wrecks            through drill-bit dirt to bedrockBeat our browsFlee our sorrows          Sleep tight with your ultraviolets          righteous mica and drainage seeps                               your gorgeous color-chart container ships                               and cab-top numbers squinting in the mist

^^EOP^^

Birds small enough to nest in our young cypressAre physicians to usThey burst from the tree exactlyWhere the mind ends and the eye seesAnother world the equal of this oneThough only a small boy naked in the sunGlad day glad day I was bornSparrow hatted old New YorkAnd the physician who brought me Drowned under sail next day in a calm seaThere are birds small enough to live foreverWhere the mind ends and whereMy love and I once planted a cypressWhich is God to us

^^EOP^^

You lean disconsolate on your stool,                                        Sullen and certain As minor royalty rusticated to thisUnhelpful climate of solvents, gaskets, pliers, and bolts. Because they are new and manifold and usefulYou feel their whispers against you. The staunchResistance of objects. How can I tell you                                           O my soul, To exhaust the realm of the possible when                                  Ever the lightIs uncongenial as February and your hand unlovely?Like a dog nearly annihilated by nervesAnd boredom chewing her paw to sore, red velvet,You’ve torn your nails so far ﬂesh swellsClosed around each bed like an eyeless socket.That you should be making such small change!Fingers inarticulate as moles nudge a debris Of dimes not thick enough to hide The candy-colored butterﬂy ﬂaringAcross the tender, veined delta of your handHeralding indelibly the eviction                            Of this vulgar ﬂeshOr the one word needled in black, knuckle-Gothic                                             

^^EOP^^

Hobos wail a garbage can againstthe cyclone links. The monkey puzzle treedroops its scaly tails above our headsas she sets up near the zoo’s bonobos,humping happy in their cages closeto chimps ripping off each other’s ears.And in the cloud reposing on the sky,cut by an 

^^EOP^^

I went to make kouign amann. It sounded Irisha

^^EOP^^

We communicated by cheeses,unwrapping them gingerly,parting the crust with a fork,tasting dew, must, salt,raising an eyebrow,or we let chianti talk for us,rolling it in the glass,staring—it was dark and shinyas the pupil, and stared back—or we undressed each other;we took long walks hand in handin the vineyards, the pastures,resenting each other bitterlyfor our happiness that excluded usas surely as the world did,mountain after mountain.

^^EOP^^

I hate you,How the children pleadAt ﬁrst sight—

^^EOP^^

Miguel might, if he speaks English, call the colorsof ukuleles stretching their necks from yardsof canvas duffel yoked across his shoulders,auroral azul, cherry pop, or mojito green,under this Pac Heights sky where the awful richsnap their heels past shop windows, past goatskin bagsand spiked heels that bring them closer to heaven,ﬁbristic sheets of celadon paper from Zhejiang,

^^EOP^^

They were driving into the mountains, suddenly married,sometimes touching each other’s cheek with a ﬁngernailgingerly: the radio played ecstatic static: certain roadsmarked with blue enamel numbers led to cloud banks,or basalt screes, or dim hotels with padlocked verandas.Sometimes they quarreled, sometimes they grew old,the wind was constant in their eyes, it was their own wind,they made it. Small towns ﬂew past, Rodez, Albi,limestone quarries, pear orchards, children racingafter hoops, wobbling when their shadows wavered,infants crying for ﬁne rain, old women on stoopsdarning gray veils—and who were we, watching?Doubles, ghosts, the ones who would tell of the ﬁeldwhere they pulled over, bluish tinge of the elms, steepnessof the other’s eyes, glowworm hidden in its own glint,how the rain was twilight and now is darkness.

^^EOP^^

Some motionless conﬂict in the skyAs of Milton’s angels painted thereIn all their radiance and red maliceIt is a special happiness and universalSimply to know the names of colorsAnd to see them saidShe mixed the colors for house paintersThat was Binghamton Rochester IndianapolisI’ll take less luck if it means less stink she saidA special happiness When clouds contest with clouds In ﬁxed ﬂamboyanceGood versus Evil or beautiful cold hairGod loosed angels on us and they are the air

^^EOP^^




For Audrey Richardson Curdy (1931–1986)



It was 1986, when currencies to be changed          Into multiple-launch-surface, anti-tank missiles Swarmed through numbered bank accounts          Like Ovid’s seething knotted seed of frog-slime,Which not seldome attracted by the sun falls           In little frogs with the rain; when it also rained  Radionuclides, strontium, caesium, 

^^EOP^^

Until wolf-light I will count my sheep,       Adumbrated, uncomedic, as they are.        One is perdu, two, qualm, three                            Is sprawl, four, too late,Night is already a thirsty county in Texas,                            Salt ﬂat and unremitting        Blacktop dry as my mouth,         And your elastic vowels, my genial,                            My electric ghost, my        Radio’s lonely station. Because the spectacleOf suffering corrupts us, all punishments        Are now executive, offstage.        Most presume you a fable:        Echoes of approaching bootheelsThat harry labyrinths of concrete corridors,                           Or hooded in burlap.                            We are convicted        As we are also pardoned: He cherished        His lawn, or afterwards he coveredThe victim’s face. You make no judgments        Yourself. Only in bursal tones,                           Tactful as the ﬁle boxThat shows, if opened, the neon, pleading heart         Of Jesus wrapped in barbed wire,You perform penalties others have scripted, so                           Untroubled by so many.        How long I have listened to you        For news of the opal distances,

^^EOP^^

The tulips make me want to paint,Something about the way they dropTheir petals on the tabletopAnd do not wilt so much as faint,Something about their burnt-out hearts,Something about their pallid stemsWearing decay like diadems,Parading ﬁnishes like starts,Something about the way they twistAs if to catch the last applause,And drink the moment through long straws,And how, tomorrow, they’ll be missed.The way they’re somehow getting clearer,The tulips make me want to 

^^EOP^^

Unreal precision of the houses at ﬁrst light

^^EOP^^

If an orchidophage’s tastebud magniﬁed resembles an orchidso my buds indubitably mimic pricking ice cream cones.Love, little by little it dawned on us the artisanalice cream, especially the prizewinning caramel, would be out of our reach, like the previous Friday of a Sunday leaving the beach, in the meltdown.When you gasp at the soundﬁle of cymbals

^^EOP^^

Between my finger and my thumb   
The squat pen rests; snug as a gun. 
Under my window, a clean rasping sound   
When the spade sinks into gravelly ground:   
My father, digging. I look down 
Till his straining rump among the flowerbeds   
Bends low, comes up twenty years away   
Stooping in rhythm through potato drills   
Where he was digging. 
The coarse boot nestled on the lug, the shaft   
Against the inside knee was levered firmly.
He rooted out tall tops, buried the bright edge deep
To scatter new potatoes that we picked,
Loving their cool hardness in our hands. 
By God, the old man could handle a spade.   
Just like his old man. 
My grandfather cut more turf in a day
Than any other man on Toner’s bog.
Once I carried him milk in a bottle
Corked sloppily with paper. He straightened up
To drink it, then fell to right away
Nicking and slicing neatly, heaving sods
Over his shoulder, going down and down
For the good turf. Digging. 
The cold smell of potato mould, the squelch and slap
Of soggy peat, the curt cuts of an edge
Through living roots awaken in my head.
But I’ve no spade to follow men like them. 
Between my finger and my thumb
The squat pen rests.
I’ll dig with it.


^^EOP^^

An idle lingerer on the wayside's road,  He gathers up his work and yawns away;  A little longer, ere the tiresome load  Shall be reduced to ashes or to clay.  No matter if the world has marched along,  And scorned his slowness as it quickly passed;  No matter, if amid the busy throng,  He greets some face, infantile at the last.  His mission? Well, there is but one,  And if it is a mission he knows it, nay,  To be a happy idler, to lounge and sun,  And dreaming, pass his long-drawn days away.  So dreams he on, his happy life to pass  Content, without ambitions painful sighs,  Until the sands run down into the glass;  He smiles—content—unmoved and dies.  And yet, with all the pity that you feel  For this poor mothling of that flame, the world;  Are you the better for your desperate deal,  When you, like him, into infinitude are hurled?


^^EOP^^

  If I had known  Two years ago how drear this life should be,  And crowd upon itself allstrangely sad,  Mayhap another song would burst from out my lips,  Overflowing with the happiness of future hopes;  Mayhap another throb than that of joy.  Have stirred my soul into its inmost depths,                    If I had known.  If I had known,  Two years ago the impotence of love,  The vainness of a kiss, how barren a caress,  Mayhap my soul to higher things have soarn,  Nor clung to earthly loves and tender dreams,  But ever up aloft into the blue empyrean,  And there to master all the world of mind,                    If I had known.


^^EOP^^

Thy various works, imperial queen, we see,    How bright their forms! how deck'd with pomp by thee!Thy wond'rous acts in beauteous order stand,And all attest how potent is thine hand.    From Helicon's refulgent heights attend,Ye sacred choir, and my attempts befriend:To tell her glories with a faithful tongue,Ye blooming graces, triumph in my song.    Now here, now there, the roving Fancy flies,Till some lov'd object strikes her wand'ring eyes,Whose silken fetters all the senses bind,And soft captivity involves the mind.    Imagination! who can sing thy force?Or who describe the swiftness of thy course?Soaring through air to find the bright abode,Th' empyreal palace of the thund'ring God,We on thy pinions can surpass the wind,And leave the rolling universe behind:From star to star the mental optics rove,Measure the skies, and range the realms above.There in one view we grasp the mighty whole,Or with new worlds amaze th' unbounded soul.    Though Winter frowns to Fancy's raptur'd eyesThe fields may flourish, and gay scenes arise;The frozen deeps may break their iron bands,And bid their waters murmur o'er the sands.Fair Flora may resume her fragrant reign,And with her flow'ry riches deck the plain;Sylvanus may diffuse his honours round,And all the forest may with leaves be crown'd:Show'rs may descend, and dews their gems disclose,And nectar sparkle on the blooming rose.    Such is thy pow'r, nor are thine orders vain,O thou the leader of the mental train:In full perfection all thy works are wrought,And thine the sceptre o'er the realms of thought.Before thy throne the subject-passions bow,Of subject-passions sov'reign ruler thou;At thy command joy rushes on the heart,And through the glowing veins the spirits dart.    Fancy might now her silken pinions tryTo rise from earth, and sweep th' expanse on high:From Tithon's bed now might Aurora rise,Her cheeks all glowing with celestial dies,While a pure stream of light o'erflows the skies.The monarch of the day I might behold,And all the mountains tipt with radiant gold,But I reluctant leave the pleasing views,Which Fancy dresses to delight the Muse;Winter austere forbids me to aspire,And northern tempests damp the rising fire;They chill the tides of Fancy's flowing sea,Cease then, my song, cease the unequal lay.


^^EOP^^

Families when a child is born
Hope it will turn out intelligent.
I, through intelligence
Having wrecked my whole life,
Only hope that the baby will prove
Ignorant and stupid.
Then he'll be happy all his days
And grow into a cabinet minister.


^^EOP^^

My father at the dictionary-stand   
Touches the page to fully understand   
The lamplit answer, tilting in his hand 
His slowly scanning magnifying lens,   
A blurry, glistening circle he suspends
Above the word “Carnation.” Then he bends 
So near his eyes are magnified and blurred,   
One finger on the miniature word,   
As if he touched a single key and heard 
A distant, plucked, infinitesimal string,   
“The obligation due to every thing   
That’s smaller than the universe.” I bring 
My sewing needle close enough that I
Can watch my father through the needle’s eye,   
As through a lens ground for a butterfly 
Who peers down flower-hallways toward a room   
Shadowed and fathomed as this study’s gloom   
Where, as a scholar bends above a tomb 
To read what’s buried there, he bends to pore   
Over the Latin blossom. I am four,   
I spill my pins and needles on the floor 
Trying to stitch “Beloved” X by X.
My dangerous, bright needle’s point connects   
Myself illiterate to this perfect text 
I cannot read. My father puzzles why   
It is my habit to identify
Carnations as “Christ’s flowers,” knowing I 
Can give no explanation but “Because.”   
Word-roots blossom in speechless messages   
The way the thread behind my sampler does 
Where following each X I awkward move
My needle through the word whose root is love.   
He reads, “A pink variety of Clove,  Carnatio, the Latin, meaning flesh.”   
As if the bud’s essential oils brush
Christ’s fragrance through the room, the iron-fresh 
Odor carnations have floats up to me,   
A drifted, secret, bitter ecstasy,
The stems squeak in my scissors, Child, it’s me, 
He turns the page to “Clove” and reads aloud:   
“The clove, a spice, dried from a flower-bud.”
Then twice, as if he hasn't understood,    
He reads, “From French, for clou, meaning a nail.”
He gazes, motionless. “Meaning a nail.”   
The incarnation blossoms, flesh and nail,    
I twist my threads like stems into a knot   
And smooth “Beloved,” but my needle caught
Within the threads, Thy blood so dearly bought, 
The needle strikes my finger to the bone.   
I lift my hand, it is myself I’ve sewn,   
The flesh laid bare, the threads of blood my own,    
I lift my hand in startled agony   
And call upon his name, “Daddy daddy”—
My father’s hand touches the injury    
As lightly as he touched the page before,   
Where incarnation bloomed from roots that bore   
The flowers I called Christ’s when I was four.   


^^EOP^^

My little Son, who look'd from thoughtful eyesAnd moved and spoke in quiet grown-up wise,Having my law the seventh time disobey'd,I struck him, and dismiss'dWith hard words and unkiss'd,His Mother, who was patient, being dead.Then, fearing lest his grief should hinder sleep,I visited his bed,But found him slumbering deep,With darken'd eyelids, and their lashes yetFrom his late sobbing wet.And I, with moan,Kissing away his tears, left others of my own;For, on a table drawn beside his head,He had put, within his reach,A box of counters and a red-vein'd stone,A piece of glass abraded by the beachAnd six or seven shells,A bottle with bluebellsAnd two French copper coins, ranged there with careful art,To comfort his sad heart.So when that night I pray'dTo God, I wept, and said:Ah, when at last we lie with tranced breath,Not vexing Thee in death,And Thou rememberest of what toysWe made our joys,How weakly understoodThy great commanded good,Then, fatherly not lessThan I whom Thou hast moulded from the clay,Thou'lt leave Thy wrath, and say,"I will be sorry for their childishness."


^^EOP^^

Through the meridian’s fine blue hairlines, the admirals are converging
in their fish-hulled ships, with their frogmen and sirens, and tanks with knotted chain flails
that beat the ground before them as they crawl. 
Behind them the cities dim out, on the foredeck the admirals sigh
to lean from the curving bows, to trail
their fingertips in the water . . . 
All alone on the landmass, the Ship’s Artist simply draws what he sees:
red men with arms like flesh clubs, blue-daubed men with parasol feet
and fish with weeping human faces. The sonic boom arrives at his feet 
in the palest ripples. In the painting, Gloriana rides under arms
towards Tilbury Town. Her profile shimmers in the sodium lights
that seem to cast no shadows before or behind her. 
Like compass pencils of light, their fingertips spread out
the nervous systems more complex than spiral nebulae.
Orchards of mines grow up on the ocean floor. 
Now under radar they study the green road glowing
and add a late-rising moon. The sea so full of maprooms, and the cliffs
chalked with weaponry symbols, trailing the phosphorescence of minesquads. 
Only the grassblown Norman ringmounds go on dreaming
of Monet picture hats and streaming scarves,
the bunker disguised as a picnic, that went on forever. 
Now the Cathedral at Bayeux, with its window and views, is rolled up
and the Conqueror’s navy on its blue worsted waves
and Hengist and Horsa, the Escorial with its green shoals of ships, all are safely rolled up. 
Behind the Atlantic Wall, that Rommel called “Cloud-Cuckoo-Land,” the white-and-liver-cows
moo through the milky light. The human faces carved
on Norman beams face out to the sea, which has grown 
this answering forest of rigging. And very soon, just as soon
as the sea can see the land and the land the sea
the two of them will go to war.


^^EOP^^

After three months, Virginia is still a frontier.
Late at night, I close the door
on my husband practicing Mozart, the dishpan fills
and the network affiliates sign off one by one.
Now the country stations, tuning up like crickets
on radios in scattered valley kitchens: Har yall this evenin folks!
(Wanting to say ‘I’m real fine’ I whisper ‘Wow.’) Got your Green Hill chicory perkin’? An army
of women, straightened and ironed and blued
like Picasso’s ironer—jerking coffeecups
back with one gesture, hips pressed to sinks.
Their suspendered husbands are reading—the paper? the Bible?
And it’s Jesus for you and for me, till midnight—the anthem—
and one soaped hand jerks out, and their lighted lives recede
to kitchens on the moon’s dark side, Mozart rising . . .
Daytimes, in post office, gas station, greasy spoon,
I don’t see them anywhere, it makes me nervous.
Black faces down here look “colored.”
I am afraid of the other, red faces. 
Take my first job in Boston,
the outgoing typist said, ‘You’ve got
to know the foms, we use so many foms.’
And I said O why farms?
I thought law firms had torts.
A tort, I thought, was like vous avez tort.
But I was wrong about the farms,
and after the Cardinal’s Vietnam speech
one of the girls said, ‘Think you’re smat with that accent?’ 
Still, nothing soothes me, sometimes,
like American voices, softened with distance,
with nearness, as murmurs in a darkened Greyhound:
‘It sure has been a scorcher.’ ‘Where you folks from?’
I keep yawning, lightworlds off in the dark . . .
Sometimes my lonesome standard English sleeps: The varied and ample land, the North and South in the light,
and the voices of Earth and Moon swell in my helmet
with prairie inflections, soft twangs of outer speech—
‘You’re looking real good,’ says Earth
‘—ain’t that somethin’?’
‘Roger. No sweat. Out.’


^^EOP^^

Sparrows tapping your shutters louvres? snow owls
guano your eaves? Spring rainstorms sway
in your gutters; down-cellar a green pipe pearls 
and roots find its fissures. Matter—outside us, out in le Vrai,
matter—un-does; fatiscit; a sort of eternal
breakdown and sloughage. Small wonder that Saturday 
finds you botanizing some mast-high aisle
in the Depot. Fazed by stock-names and numbers, distinctions
like drip-forged and molly- and carborundum-steel, 
or, in DIMENSIONAL LUMBER, the trunk chart. Its dotted lines
follow core cuts, mere spindles, out to the perimeter or “wane,”
a ring of two-by-twelves with moonrim bark ribbons. 
Yet even sparrows must nest-mend with worldstuff torn
out of somewhere. The joinery-bits in the MASTER JOINER
blister-pack point to his fast parataxes—copulas, common- 
alities, ship-lists, figures in carpets or slimmer
hex-keys in sets, the eternal angle (Egyptian)
or iron plane-handles tuned to the unheard rumor 
that joins them. The same slits reparied once with tendon-
thread in bone needles, bronze pins, the earliest factory-fittings
or the long floating line of the bass-baritone 
Leporello, his catàlogo of continents and couplings
ironizing, admiring, down to the final mel-
isma on DOES (you know the Don’s doings)  voi . . . sapete, voi . . . sapete . . . quel
che FA-AHH, ah-ahh, ah-ahh

^^EOP^^

All middle age invisible to us, all age
passed close enough behind to seize our napehairs
and whisper in a voice all thatch and smoke
some village-elder warning, some rasped-out Remember me . . . Mute and grey in her city
uniform (stitch-lettered JUVENILE), the matron
just pointed us to our lockers, and went out.
‘What an old bag!’ ‘Got a butt on you, honey?’ ‘Listen, 
did I get lost with these streetnames! Spruce
Street, Water, or get this, VANderwater—’ Cautiously, coolly,
we lit up, crooking palms for the ashes. All fifteen
or under, all from Manhattan, we loitered bare
to the waist for the X-rays. In the whorling light
from one rainy window, our shapes were mere
outlines from floor to wall, opaque
as plater, white, or terra-cotta, black . . . 
‘Names or numbers,’ a skinny white girl with pale blue eyes
shrugged her shoulders. ‘Why come here at all? You think little Susan
(thumb mockingly hooked at herself) needs working papers
to work in my uncle’s diner? If they’d let me off school
at noon now—that’s where the real tips are!’
And she smiled at our objections around her smoking
cigarette (I thought) like some museum mummy,
amber-fingered, fishhook collar bones— 
‘What are you talking? Don’t you know the city
keeps like an eye we don’t get overworked?’
‘Yeah, and your Social Security number, that’s
for life, girl, that ain’t worth something to you?’
The skinny girl just cackled, goospimpled arms
huddled against her ribs. ‘Whadda you two, work
for the mayor? What’s this (swinging her locker key
with its scarred wooden number)—the key to the city?’ 
She meant last week, when they’d offered it
to some visiting queen. Even I snickered. I
was younger than most of them, homesick among the near-
women’s breasts and hair, even the familiar
girls’ cloakroom odors: perspiration, powder, decades
of menstrual fust—‘Well, I’m coming back in six months.’
This was one of the black girls, elbow swivelled
on pelvic sidethrust, finest hair— 
filaments, finerimmed, sulky mouth. ‘She’ll be
sixteen, getting married,’ the girl next over
burst in eagerly, ‘He got a store job, still her folks
against it, they say stay in school. But every
afternoon—’ Distantly, the first girl listened to
her own story, only breaking in at the end: ‘I want a real
church wedding. Down here is just for the license, see?’
‘A license,’ said “little Susan,” sourly, ‘like for a job?’ 
‘His name is Harold Curtis,’ was all she answered, then ‘It too strong
for my parents. They see it too strong for them in the end.’
In our silence, the gutter slurred strangely. And for just one
moment, everyone breathless, the atmosphere grew
almost tender. But nobody knew what to say
except good luck, so we all went on smoking like chimneys
except the one murmur, of old and incurable
anger, ‘Listen. Listen. They get you coming and going.’ 
Now each girl tilts her face down, contemplating
her own unseen choices, real
tips, the solitary and common
square foot of imaginary chance . . . Outside, the rain
was letting up. The city, like a graph
of its own mountainous causes, climbed in a mist
across our window. And then the matron came, calling
our locker numbers, one by one, for the X-rays. 
‘Jesus, it’s late.’ ‘Hey honey, I’m ready!’ ‘Where’d we change
at from the D Train?’ Through the clearing air on the far
side of City Hall Park, I could see a narrow street
and a streetsign: Broadway. Miles to the north
my street had a number, and Broadway was really broad.
In the concrete prows of islands, the innumerable old women
were sitting, lonely as soldiers, silent as . . .
‘What’s up, girl? Goose step on your grave?’ 
Another number. And now, the room darker, each girl
cast about for the cheering word, when ‘Listen,’ I suddenly
heard my own voice saying, ‘Guess what I saw coming down? A street
called Anne Street.’—‘So what?’—‘So my name is Anne.’
A pause, then ‘Hey kid, that’s really funny!’ They all
grinned, and one of the older girls gave my shoulder
a tolerant punch. I was one of the youngest, and as far
as I can remember, that was all that I said.


^^EOP^^

Not soon, as late as the approach of my ninetieth year,   
I felt a door opening in me and I entered   
the clarity of early morning.    
One after another my former lives were departing,   
like ships, together with their sorrow.    
And the countries, cities, gardens, the bays of seas   
assigned to my brush came closer,   
ready now to be described better than they were before.    
I was not separated from people,   
grief and pity joined us.   
We forget—I kept saying—that we are all children of the King.    
For where we come from there is no division   
into Yes and No, into is, was, and will be.    
We were miserable, we used no more than a hundredth part   
of the gift we received for our long journey.    
Moments from yesterday and from centuries ago—   
a sword blow, the painting of eyelashes before a mirror   
of polished metal, a lethal musket shot, a caravel   
staving its hull against a reef—they dwell in us,   
waiting for a fulfillment.    
I knew, always, that I would be a worker in the vineyard,   
as are all men and women living at the same time,   
whether they are aware of it or not.   


^^EOP^^

I  I hear you are whispering there O stars of heaven,
O suns—O grass of graves. . .
If you do not say anything how can I say anything?

^^EOP^^

All seas are seas in the moon to these
lonely and full of light.
High above laundries and rooftops
the pinstriped silhouettes speak nightmare
as do the faces full of fire and orange peel.
Every citizen knows what’s the trouble: America’s longest
river is—New York; that’s w

^^EOP^^

When they did greet me Father, sudden AweWeigh'd down my spirit! I retired and kneltSeeking the throne of grace, but inly feltNo heavenly visitation upwards drawMy feeble mind, nor cheering ray impart.Ah me! before the Eternal Sire I broughtThe unquiet silence of confused ThoughtAnd shapeless feelings: my o'erwhelmed HeartTrembled: & vacant tears stream'd down my face.And now once more, O Lord! to thee I bend,Lover of souls! and groan for future grace,That, ere my Babe youth's perilous maze have trod,Thy overshadowing Spirit may descendAnd he be born again, a child of God!


^^EOP^^

Most truly honoured, and as truly dear,If worth in me or ought I do appear,Who can of right better demand the sameThan may your worthy self from whom it came?The principal might yield a greater sum,Yet handled ill, amounts but to this crumb;My stock's so small I know not how to pay,My bond remains in force unto this day;Yet for part payment take this simple mite,Where nothing's to be had, kings loose their right.Such is my debt I may not say forgive,But as I can, I'll pay it while I live;Such is my bond, none can discharge but I,Yet paying is not paid until I die.


^^EOP^^

Amidst the days of pleasant mirth,That throw their halo round our earth;Amidst the tender thoughts that riseTo call bright tears to happy eyes;Amidst the silken words that moveTo syllable the names we love;There glides no day of gentle blissMore soothing to the heart than this!No thoughts of fondness e'er appearMore fond, than those I write of here!No name can e'er on tablet shine,My father! more beloved than thine!'Tis sweet, adown the shady past,A lingering look of love to cast—Back th' enchanted world to call,That beamed around us first of all;And walk with Memory fondly o'erThe paths where Hope had been before—Sweet to receive the sylphic soundThat breathes in tenderness around,Repeating to the listening earThe names that made our childhood dear—For parted Joy, like Echo, kind,Will leave her dulcet voice behind,To tell, amidst the magic air,How oft she smiled and lingered there.


^^EOP^^

Come, Holy Spirit,   
bending or not bending the grasses,   
appearing or not above our heads in a tongue of flame,   
at hay harvest or when they plough in the orchards or when snow   
covers crippled firs in the Sierra Nevada.   
I am only a man: I need visible signs.   
I tire easily, building the stairway of abstraction.   
Many a time I asked, you know it well, that the statue in church   
lifts its hand, only once, just once, for me.   
But I understand that signs must be human,   
therefore call one man, anywhere on earth,   
not me—after all I have some decency—   
and allow me, when I look at him, to marvel at you.      Berkely, 1961


^^EOP^^

Now the god of rainy August hangs his mask
among the city’s spires and balustrades
and stone clocktowers half-effaced in clouds.
On Park the first reflecting pool dims
with a thousand smelted-silver circle-rims,
while west on Fifth a modiste scatters leaves
in fall vitrines, and felt-browed mannequins
resign the world with gestures of disdain. 
Now in the Cloister’s high parterres the rain
floods copper gutterings, boxwood, terraced urns
and mottoes. “The weather turns.” Clamped to their pier,
the smiling Gaul, the murderer Clotaire,
and Isaiah, green-throned, water-cowled, exchange
their fine-lit ironies for rotes of pain.


^^EOP^^

I 
                 Also reputed to be golden, Quivira:  
Cibola, unknown
to Coronado, meant ‘buffalo’ 
to the Indians, but onward, to El Dorado, ‘The Gilded One’,  
a country where
boats were incrusted with gold, where
golden bells hung from trees  
(tho the food there, 
                            said to be served on gold,   
was buffalo).  
 
   ‘We took the hump from both sides of the hump ribs, of all the carcasses.  In taking out the hump we inserted the knife at the coupling of the loin, cutting forward down the lower side, as far forward as the perpendicular ribs ran; then, starting at the loin again, would cut down the upper side, thus taking out a strip from a full-grown animal about three feet long.  Near the front of the hump ribs it would be ten or twelve inches wide & four or five inches thick.  When first taken out it was hung up for a couple of days with the big end down.  It became shrunken, tender & brittle, with no taint.  The front end had a streak of lean alternating with fat & when fried in tallow, made a feast for the gods’.   
                 The prairie soil was ‘black & fat’ &, 
                 according to Castaneda, the marrow of the land. 
On that soil, later to be stripped
for prairie sod-houses, 
wild turkeys
flocked among the persimmons 
their flesh succulent from golden sand plums,
bitter 
with china-berries.
The coyotes, 
their eyes aglow on the dark horizon, barked at a moon
above the lowing 
of buffalo, heard twenty miles
away. 
And cottonwood trees, from whose buds
the Indians 
made clear yellow, scattered their drift in spring
filling the gullies.   
                        The Quivirans
                        were to tell Coranado 
                        ‘the things
                        where you are now 
                        are of great importance’.    
II 
As Coronado turned to retrace his steps,
the Smoky Hills were visible north across a stream
enveloped in an atmospheric haze
in which the hills
became distant, impossible mountains— 
‘where you are now’ 
the Indians had said, ‘of great 
importance’.  
                  The country they traveled over
                  was so level,
                  if one looked at the buffalo 
                  the sky could be seen between their legs, 
                  so that at a distance they appeared
                  to be smooth-trunked pines whose tops jointed— 
                  & if there was
                  one bull, it seemed four
                  pines. 
                  The country was round, as if
                  a man should imagine himself in a bowl, & could see sky
                  at its edge 
                  an arrow’s shot away. 
                  And if any man
                  were to lie down on his back, he lost 
                  sight
                  of the ground.  
Did Coronado see also in that late summer storm,
before he turned south,
an horizon of dark funnels tapering
toward the earth, coming with the thunderous sound of a buffalo herd
out of the plains—a calm & sulphurous air
in which clouds were drawn like lightning toward the funnels—
scattering his men
to hide among grassy hollows?  
A tornado against the sky
like buffalo 
who were beared as
goats, 
with the hump of a camel, the mane
of a lion 
& who carried
their tails erect as they ran, 
like any European
scorpion. 
O Coronado, all country
is round to 
those who lose sight of the
ground. 
           Canceas, Cansez, Kansies, Konza: the Indian word 
           meaning smoky, 
                                   from an atmospheric condition 
           in the fall of the year, called 
           Indian Summer: 
smoke in the air, 
in Quivira.


^^EOP^^

        As the morning advanced the sun became bright and warm, cloudless, calm, serene. About nine an appearance very unusual began to demand our attention—a shower of cobwebs falling from very elevated regions, & continuing, without any interruption, till the close of the day . . .
 

       There is a natural occurrence to be met with upon the highest part of our down in hot summer days, and that is a loud audible humming of bees in the air, though not one insect is to be seen . . .
 

       In a district so diversified as this, so full of hollow vales and hanging woods, it is no wonder that echoes should abound. Many we have discovered that return a tunable ring of bells, or the melody of birds; but we were still at a loss for a polysyllabical, articulate echo, till a young gentleman, who had parted from his company in a summer walk, and was calling after them, stumbled upon a very curious one in a spot where it might least be expected . . .
 

       We procured a cuckoo, and cutting open the breastbone and exposing the intestines to sight, found the crop lying as mentioned above. This stomach was large and round, and stuffed hard, like a pincushion, with food, which upon nice examination, we found to consist of various insects, such as small scarabs, spiders, and dragon-flies; the last of which, as they were just emerging out of the aurelia state, we have seen cuckoos catching on the wing. Among this farrago also were to be seen maggots, and many seeds, which belonged either to gooseberries, currants, cranberries, or some such fruit . . .
 

       All nature is so full, that that district produces the greatest variety which is the most examined . . .  
                                                                                                    Gilbert White    1
Upon First Opening a Cuckoo

^^EOP^^

Extreme exertion
isolates a person
from help,
discovered Atlas.
Once a certain
shoulder-to-burden
ratio collapses,
there is so little
others can do:
they can’t
lend a hand
with Brazil
and not stand
on Peru.


^^EOP^^

The whole ball
of who we are
presses into
the green baize
at a single tiny
spot. An aural
track of crackle
betrays our passage
through the
fibrous jungle.
It’s hot and
desperate. Insects
spring out of it.
The pressure is
intense, and the
sense that we’ve
lost proportion.
As though bringing
too much to bear
too locally were
our decision.


^^EOP^^

Now like the Lady of Shalott,    I dwell within an empty room, And through the day and through the night    I sit before an ancient loom.  And like the Lady of Shalott    I look into a mirror wide, Where shadows come, and shadows go,    And ply my shuttle as they glide.  Not as she wove the yellow wool,    Ulysses’ wife, Penelope; By day a queen among her maids,    But in the night a woman, she,  Who, creeping from her lonely couch,    Unraveled all the slender woof; Or, with a torch, she climbed the towers,    To fire the fagots on the roof!  But weaving with a steady hand    The shadows, whether false or true, I put aside a doubt which asks    ‘Among these phantoms what are you?’  For not with altar, tomb, or urn,    Or long-haired Greek with hollow shield, Or dark-prowed ship with banks of oars,    Or banquet in the tented field;  Or Norman knight in armor clad,    Waiting a foe where four roads meet; Or hawk and hound in bosky dell,    Where dame and page in secret greet;  Or rose and lily, bud and flower,    My web is broidered. Nothing bright Is woven here: the shadows grow    Still darker in the mirror’s light!  And as my web grows darker too,    Accursed seems this empty room; For still I must forever weave    These phantoms by this ancient loom.


^^EOP^^

We are always
really carrying
a ladder, but it’s
invisible. We
only know
something’s
the matter:
something precious
crashes; easy doors
prove impassable.
Or, in the body,
there’s too much
swing or off-
center gravity.
And, in the mind,
a drunken capacity,
access to out-of-range
apples. As though
one had a way to climb
out of the damage
and apology.


^^EOP^^

He was hit back of the head for a haul of $15,
a Diner’s Club Card and picture of his daughter in a helmet
on a horse tethered to a pole that centered
its revolving universe. Pacing the halls, he’d ask 
for a blow job he didn’t want. The ward’s new visitors
didn’t know this request was all the injury
had left him to say, and would be shamed or pissed,
a few hitting him as he stood with his mouth 
slightly open and large frame leaning in. His wife
divorced him for good and blameless reasons. He would not
be coming home to share his thoughts on film and weather,
or remembering her any longer than it took to leave a room. 
He liked ham. Kept newspapers in drawers and under his bed,
each unread page hand-pressed flat. And when it snowed
he leaned into one of the sealed, unbreakable windows,
a cheek to the cool glass as he held his fingers 
over his mouth and moaned low and constant like the sound
of a boat on the far side of a lake. When he died
they cut him open to see how his habits had been rewired
and so tightly looped. Having known him they were afraid 
of what can happen when you cross the lot to the office
or pull up to a light and thump the wheel as you might
any hour. If you stare at the dyed
and beautiful cross sections of a brain, it’s natural 
to wonder how we extract the taste of coffee
or sense of a note accurately found and held on an oboe
from this bramble. On Duke’s slides they circled
the regions of blight which explain 
why almost all behavior we recognize as human was lost,
but not why a man who’d curl into a ball
like a caterpillar when barely touched, could only ask
for sex, for intimacy, for the very thing 
he could least accept and lived twelve years without,
no embrace or caress, no kiss on the lips before sleep,
until he died in the lounge looking out on winter sky
that seemed eager to snow all day but didn’t.


^^EOP^^




For W.G. Sebald, 1944-2001



This was the work
of St. Sebolt, one
of his miracles:
he lit a fire with
icicles. He struck
them like a steel
to flint, did St.
Sebolt. It
makes sense
only at a certain
body heat. How
cold he had
to get to learn
that ice would
burn. How cold
he had to stay.
When he could
feel his feet
he had to
back away.


^^EOP^^

The chickens
are circling and
blotting out the   
day. The sun is   
bright, but the   
chickens are in   
the way. Yes,
the sky is dark
with chickens,   
dense with them.
They turn and   
then they turn   
again. These   
are the chickens
you let loose
one at a time
and small—
various breeds.
Now they have   
come home
to roost—all
the same kind
at the same speed.


^^EOP^^

You could drive out of this country
and attack the world with your ambition,
invent wonder plasmas,
become an artist of the provocative gesture,
the suggestive nod, you could leave
wanting the world and return
carrying it, a noisy bundle
of steam and libido, a ball of fire
balanced on your tongue,
you might reclaim Main Street in a limo
longer than a sermon, wave at our red faces
while remembering that you were born
a clod hopper, a farmer’s kid,
and get over that hump once and for all
by telling A Great Man’s stories—
the dirty jokes of dictators, tidbits
of presidential hygiene, insights
into the psychotropic qualities of power
and the American tradition of kissing
moneyed ass. Your uncle would still
call you Roy Boy, pheasants
sun themselves beside the tracks,
waiting for the dew to burn off
before their first flight, and corn
grow so high that if you stood
in the field you’d disappear, the fact
aiming your eyes down the road.


^^EOP^^

Force of reason, who shut up the shrill
foul Furies in the dungeon of the Parthenon,
led whimpering to the cave they live in still, 
beneath the rock your city foundered on:
who, equivocating, taught revenge to sing
(or seem to, or be about to) a kindlier tune: 
mind that can make a scheme of anything—
a game, a grid, a system, a mere folder
in the universal file drawer: uncompromising 
mediatrix, virgin married to the welfare
of the body politic: deific contradiction,
warbonnet-wearing olive-bearer, author 
of the law’s delays, you who as talisman
and totem still wear the aegis, baleful
with Medusa’s scowl (though shrunken 
and self-mummified, a Gorgon still): cool
guarantor of the averted look, the guide
of Perseus, who killed and could not kill 
the thing he’d hounded to its source, the dread
thing-in-itself none can elude, whose counter-
feit we halfway hanker for: aware (gone mad 
with clarity) we have invented all you stand for,
though we despise the artifice—a space to savor
horror, to pre-enact our own undoing in—
living, we stare into the mirror of the Gorgon.


^^EOP^^

When children play the livelong day,    Like birds and butterflies; As free and gay, sport life away,    And know not care nor sighs: Then earth and air seem fresh and fair,    All peace below, above: Life’s flowers are there, and everywhere    Is innocence and love.  When children pray with fear all day,    A blight must be at hand: Then joys decay, and birds of prey    Are hovering o’er the land: When young hearts weep as they go to sleep,    Then all the world seems sad: The flesh must creep, and woes are deep    When children are not glad.


^^EOP^^

It mounts at sea, a concave wall
     Down-ribbed with shine,
And pushes forward, building tall
     Its steep incline. 
Then from their hiding rise to sight
     Black shapes on boards
Bearing before the fringe of white
     It mottles towards. 
Their pale feet curl, they poise their weight
     With a learn’d skill.
It is the wave they imitate
     Keeps them so still. 
The marbling bodies have become
     Half wave, half men,
Grafted it seems by feet of foam
     Some seconds, then, 
Late as they can, they slice the face
     In timed procession:
Balance is triumph in this place,
     Triumph possession. 
The mindless heave of which they rode
     A fluid shelf
Breaks as they leave it, falls and, slowed,
     Loses itself. 
Clear, the sheathed bodies slick as seals
     Loosen and tingle;
And by the board the bare foot feels
     The suck of shingle. 
They paddle in the shallows still;
     Two splash each other;
Then all swim out to wait until
     The right waves gather.


^^EOP^^

Oh, woman, woman in thy brightest hour Of conscious worth, of pride, of conscious power Oh, nobly dare to act a Christian’s part, That well befits a lovely woman’s heart! Dare to be good, as thou canst dare be great; Despise the taunts of envy, scorn and hate; Our ‘skins may differ,’ but from thee we claim A sister’s privilege, in a sister’s name.  We are thy sisters, Oh, woman, woman in thy brightest hour Of conscious worth, of pride, of conscious power Oh, nobly dare to act a Christian’s part, That well befits a lovely woman’s heart! Ddare to be good, as thou canst dare be great; Despise the taunts of envy, scorn and hate; Our ‘skins may differ,’ but from thee we claim A sister’s privilege, in a sister’s name.  We are thy sisters, – God has truly said, That of one blood, the nations he has made. Oh, christian woman, in a christian land, Canst thou unblushing read this great command? Suffer the wrongs which wring our inmost heart To draw one throb of pity on thy part; Our ‘skins may differ,’ but from thee we claim A sister’s privilege, in a sister’s name.  Oh, woman! – though upon thy fairer brow The hues of roses and of lilies grow—   These soon must wither in their kindred earth, From whence the fair and dark have equal birth. Let a bright halo o’er thy virtues shed A lustre, that shall live when thou art dead; Let coming ages learn to bless they name Upon the altar of immortal fame. 


^^EOP^^

‘Oh! sister, he is so swift and tall, Though I want the ride, he will spoil it all, For, when he sets out, he will let me fall,    And give me a bump, I know! Mamma, what was it I heard you say, About the world’s hobbies, the other day, How some would get on and gallop away,       To end with an overthrow?’  ‘I said, little prattler, the world was a race, That many would mount with a smile on the face, And ride to their ruin, or fall in disgrace:    That him, who was deaf to fear, And did not look our for a rein or a guide, His courser might cast on the highway side, In the mud, rocks and brambles, to end his ride,    Perchance with a sight and a tear!’  ‘Oh! sister, sister! I fear to try; For Brutus’s back is so live and high! It creeps at my touch – and he winks his eye—     I’m sure he is going to jump! Come! dear mother, tell us some more About the world’s ride, as you did before, Who helped it up – and all how it bore    The fall, and got over the bump!’


^^EOP^^

A tulip, just opened, had offered to hold    A butterfly, gaudy and gay; And, rocked in a cradle of crimson and gold,    The careless young slumberer lay.  For the butterfly slept, as such thoughtless ones will,    At ease, and reclining on flowers, If ever they study, ’t is how they may kill    The best of their mid-summer hours.  And the butterfly dreamed, as is often the case    With indolent lovers of change, Who, keeping the body at ease in its place,    Give fancy permission to range.  He dreamed that he saw, what he could but despise,    The swarm from a neighbouring hive; Which, having come out for their winter supplies,    Had made the whole garden alive.  He looked with disgust, as the proud often do,    On the diligent movements of those, Who, keeping both present and future in view,    Improve every hour as it goes. As the brisk little alchymists passed to and fro,    With anger the butterfly swelled; And called them mechanics – a rabble too low    To come near the station he held.  ‘Away from my presence!’ said he, in his sleep,    ‘Ye humbled plebeians! nor dare Come here with your colorless winglets to sweep    The king of this brilliant parterre!’  He thought, at these words, that together they flew,    And, facing about, made a stand; And then, to a terrible army they grew,    And fenced him on every hand.  Like hosts of huge giants, his numberless foes    Seemed spreading to measureless size: Their wings with a mighty expansion arose,    And stretched like a veil o’er the skies.  Their eyes seemed like little volcanoes, for fire,—      Their hum, to a cannon-peal grown,— Farina to bullets was rolled in their ire,    And, he thought, hurled at him and his throne.  He tried to cry quarter! his voice would not sound,    His head ached – his throne reeled and fell; His enemy cheered, as he came to the ground,    And cried, ‘King Papilio, farewell!’  His fall chased the vision – the sleeper awoke,    The wonderful dream to expound; The lightning’s bright flash from the thunder-cloud broke,    And hail-stones were rattling around.  He’d slumbered so long, that now, over his head,    The tempest’s artillery rolled; The tulip was shattered – the whirl-blast had fled,    And borne off its crimson and gold.  ’T is said, for the fall and the pelting, combined    With suppressed ebullitions of pride, This vain son of summer no balsam could find,    But he crept under covert and died.


^^EOP^^

And now, Mistress Mummy, since thus you’ve been found    By the world, that has long done without you, In your snug little hiding-place far under ground— Be pleased to speak out, as we gather around,    And let us hear something about you!  By the style of your dress you are not Madam Eve—     You of course had a father and mother; No more of your line have we power to conceive, As you furnish us nothing by which to believe    You had husband, child, sister, or brother.  We know you have lived, though we cannot tell when,    And that too by eating and drinking, To judge by your teeth, and the lips you had then And we see you are one of the children of men,    Though long from their looks you’ve been shrinking.  Who was it that made you a cavern so deep,    Refused your poor head a last pillow, And bad you sit still when you’d sunken to sleep, And they’d bound you and muffled you up in a heap    Of clothes made of hempen and willow?  Say, whose was the ear that could hear with delight    The musical trinket found nigh you? And who had the eye that was pleased with the sight Of this form (whose queer face might be brown, red, or white,)    Trick’d out in the jewels kept by you?


^^EOP^^

Just look, ’tis quarter past six, love—   
   And not even the fires are caught;
Well, you know I must be at the office—   
   But, as usual, the breakfast ’ll be late. 
Now hurry and wake up the children;
   And dress them as fast as you can;
‘Poor dearies,’ I know they’ll be tardy,
   Dear me, ‘what a slow, poky man!’ 
Have the tenderloin broiled nice and juicy—   
   Have the toast browned and buttered all right;
And be sure you settle the coffee:
   Be sure that the silver is bright. 
When ready, just run up and call me—
   At eight, to the office I go,
Lest poverty, grim, should o’ertake us—   
   ‘’Tis bread and butter,’ you know. 
The bottom from stocks may fall out,
   My bonds may get below par;
Then surely, I seldom could spare you
   A nickel, to buy a cigar. 
All ready? Now, while I am eating,
   Just bring up my wheel to the door;
Then wash up the dishes; and, mind now,
   Have dinner promptly at four; 
For tonight is our Woman’s Convention,
   And I am to speak first, you know—
The men veto us in private,
   But in public they shout, ‘That’s so.’ 
So ‘by-by’ – In case of a rap, love,
   Before opening the door, you must look;
O! how could a civilized woman
   Exist, without a man cook.


^^EOP^^

I know a place where the sun is like gold,    And the cherry blooms burst with snow, And down underneath is the loveliest nook,    Where the four-leaf clovers grow.  One leaf is for hope, and one is for faith,    And one is for love, you know, And God put another in for luck—    If you search, you will find where they grow.  But you must have hope, and you must have faith,    You must love and be strong – and so—If you work, if you wait, you will find the place       Where the four-leaf clovers grow.


^^EOP^^

Yes, nonsense is a treasure!   I love it from my heart; The only earthly pleasure    That never will depart.  But, as for stupid reason,     That stalking, ten-foot rule, She’s always out of season,     A tedious, testy fool.  She’s like a walking steeple,     With a clock for face and eyes, Still bawling to all people,    Time bids us to be wise.  While nonsense on the spire     A weathercock you’ll find, Than reason soaring higher,     And changing with the wind.  The clock too oft deceives,     Says what it cannot prove; While every one believes     The vane that turns above.  Reason oft speaks unbidden,     And chides us to our face; For which she should be chidden,     And taught to know her place.  While nonsense smiles and chatters,     And says such charming things, Like youthful hope she flatters;     And like a syren sings.  Her charm’s from fancy borrowed,     For she is fancy’s pet; Her name is on her forehead,     In rainbow colors set.  Then, nonsense let us cherish,     Far, far from reason’s light; Lest in her light she perish,    And vanish from our sight.


^^EOP^^

Dear Letters, Fond Letters,        Must I with you part? You are such a source of joy    To my lonely heart.  Sweet Letters, Dear Letters,        What a tell you tell; O, no power on earth can break    This strange mystic spell!  Dear Letters, Fond Letters,        You my secret know—Don’t you tell it, any one—     Let it live and grow.


^^EOP^^




XXI Dynasty



My body holds its shape. The genius is intact.   
Will I return to Thebes? In that lost country
The eucalyptus trees have turned to stone.
Once, branches nudged me, dropping swollen blossoms,
And passionflowers lit my father’s garden.
Is it still there, that place of mottled shadow,   
The scarlet flowers breathing in the darkness? 
I remember how I died. It was so simple!
One morning the garden faded. My face blacked out.
On my left side they made the first incision.
They washed my heart and liver in palm wine—
My lungs were two dark fruit they stuffed with spices.
They smeared my innards with a sticky unguent
And sealed them in a crock of alabaster. 
My brain was next. A pointed instrument
Hooked it through my nostrils, strand by strand.   
A voice swayed over me. I paid no notice.
For weeks my body swam in sweet perfume.
I came out scoured. I was skin and bone.
They lifted me into the sun again
And packed my empty skull with cinnamon. 
They slit my toes; a razor gashed my fingertips.
Stitched shut at last, my limbs were chaste and valuable,
Stuffed with paste of cloves and wild honey.   
My eyes were empty, so they filled them up,
Inserting little nuggets of obsidian.
A basalt scarab wedged between my breasts
Replaced the tinny music of my heart. 
Hands touched my sutures. I was so important!
They oiled my pores, rubbing a fragrance in.
An amber gum oozed down to soothe my temples.
I wanted to sit up. My skin was luminous,   
Frail as the shadow of an emerald.
Before I learned to love myself too much,   
My body wound itself in spools of linen. 
Shut in my painted box, I am a precious object.
I wear a wooden mask. These are my eyelids,
Two flakes of bronze, and here is my new mouth,
Chiseled with care, guarding its ruby facets.
I will last forever. I am not impatient—
My skin will wait to greet its old complexions.
I’ll lie here till the world swims back again. 
When I come home the garden will be budding,
White petals breaking open, clusters of night flowers,
The far-off music of a tambourine.   
A boy will pace among the passionflowers,
His eyes no longer two bruised surfaces.
I’ll know the mouth of my young groom, I’ll touch
His hands. Why do people lie to one another?


^^EOP^^




Directions  Let some one hold the book, and ask one of the questions. The answers being all numbered, the girl or boy who is questioned chooses a number, and the person who holds the book reads the answer to which that number belongs, aloud. For instance:  Question. What is your character? Answer. I choose No. 3  Questioner reads aloud:  No. 3. Gentle tempered, sweet and kind,            To no angry word inclined.  



          What Will Be Your Destiny?               FORTY-THREE ANSWERS  1. Just as you think you’ve gained great wealth,     Something will make you lose your health.  2. Your hair will be white in a single night,     From having an unexpected fright.  3. You will enjoy a sweet old age,     So kind and pure, so long and sage.  4. You will fall down at eighty-four,     And break a dozen ribs or more.  5. You will finish your days with God for your friend:     Who would not be glad of so blissful an end?  6. You will be ever absorbed in books,     And never give a thought to looks.  7. In peace and plenty you will lie,     And in the arms of friendship die.  8. You will have cause for many tears,     To cloud the beauty of your years.  9. Ah, is it so? when you are old,     you will be very poor, I’m told.  10. In the night-time you will weep,       And your painful vigils keep.  11. Nothing dreadful, nothing sad,       Comes to you; for this I’m glad.  12. You always will have an excellent table,       And full of horses will keep your stable.  13. The Sibyl says you’ll die in Rome,       Which for a time will be your home.  14. Your plenty and peace       Will never cease.  15. You will suddenly die in the crowded street,       If the age of a hundred years you meet.  16. You will ride in your carriage-and-four,       And be very kind to the suffering poor.  17. Never murmur, never care,       You will be a millionare.  18. Sick at heart, and sick at head,       You will wish that you were dead.  19. As the might of God you see,       Religious you will ever be.  20. To California you will go       To get the shining gold, you know.  21. Brightest pleasures you will see,       And happiness your portion be.  22. Love will gild your joyous life,       Free from pain and care and strife.  23. Don’t despond, and do not care,       You will be a nabob’s heir.  24. To California you will be sent,       But will return as poor as you went.  25. A missionary you will be,       Far o’er the billows of the sea.  26. It is your destiny to rule,       And you will keep a village school.  27. Ball and parties you will find       Alone are suited to your mind.  28. Through the vista of the years       I see you mourning and in tears.  29. A country life at length you’ll lead,       Rejoicing in your ambling steed.  30. Fair in the wild and prairied west,       Your tired frame at length you’ll rest.  31. A public singer’s place you’ll take,       And a sensation you will make.  32. You’ll only love your native home,       From which you will not care to roam.  33. A great pianist, you will gain       Bright laurels from the admiring train.  34. A kitchen garden you will keep,       And sell fresh vegetables cheap.  35. To higher virtues you will rise,       Until you’re ready for the skies.  36. To the city’s crowded street       You’ll direct your willing feet.  37. In digging in a worn-out field       You’ll see a box,

^^EOP^^

For our own private reasons
We live in each other for an hour.
Stranger, I take your body and its seasons,
Aware the moon has gone a little sour 
For us. The moon hangs up there like a stone
Shaken out of its proper setting.
We lie down in each other. We lie down alone
and watch the moon’s flawed marble getting 
Out of hand. What are the dead doing tonight?
The padlocks of their tongues embrace the black,
Each syllable locked in place, tucked out of sight.
Even this moon could never pull them back, 
Even if it held them in its arms
And weighed them down with stones,
Took them entirely on their own terms
And piled the orchard’s blossom on their bones. 
I am aware of your body and its dangers.
I spread my cloak for you in leafy weather
Where other fugitives and other strangers
Will put their mouths together.


^^EOP^^

Sleep, love sleep, The night winds sigh, In soft lullaby. The Lark is at rest With the dew on her breast. So close those dear eyes, That borrowed their hue From the heavens so blue, Sleep, love sleep.  Sleep, love sleep, The pale moon looks down On the valleys around, The Glow Moth is flying, The South wind is sighing, And I am low lying, With lute deftly strung, To pour out my song, Sleep, love sleep.


^^EOP^^

To live and not be Thine Own,Like Springtime is when birds are flown; Or liberty in prison bars, Or evening skies without the stars; Like diamonds that are lusterless, Or rest when there’s no weariness; Like lovely flower that have no scent, Or music when the sound is spent.


^^EOP^^

To have gold in your back yard and not know it. . .
I woke this morning before your dream had shredded
And found a curious thing: flowers made of gold, 
Six-sided—more than that—broken on flagstones,
Petals the color of a wedding band.
You are sleeping. The morning comes up gold. 
Perhaps I made those flowers in my head,
For I have counted snowflakes in July
Blowing across my eyes like bits of calcium, 
And I have stepped into your dream at night,
A stranger there, my body steeped in moonlight.
I watched you tremble, washed in all that silver. 
Love, the stars have fallen into the garden
And turned to frost. They have opened like a hand.
It is the color that breaks out of the bedsheets. 
This morning the garden is littered with dry petals
As yellow as the page of an old book.   
I step among them. They are brittle as bone china.


^^EOP^^

It is her right, to bind with warmest ties,    The lordly spirit of aspiring man, Making his home an earthly paradise,    Rich in all joys allotted to life’s span; Twining around each fibre of his heart,    With all the gentle influence of love’s might, Seeking no joy wherein he has no part –    This is undoubtedly – a woman’s right!  It is her right to teach the infant mind,    Training it ever upward in its course, To root out evil passions that would bind    The upward current of his reason’s force; To lead the erring spirit gently back,    When it has sunk in gloom of deepest night; To point the shining path of virtue’s track,    And urge him forward. This is woman’s right.  It is her right to soothe the couch of pain;    There her pure mission upon earth to prove, To calm with gentle care the frenzied brain,    And keep her vigil there of holiest love; To watch untiring by the lonely bed,    Through the bright day, and in the solemn night, ’Til health ensues, or the loved form is laid    To rest for ever. This is woman’s right.  She is a flower that blossoms best, unseen,    Sheltered within the precincts of her home; There, should no dark’ning storm-cloud intervene,    There, the loud-strife of worldlings never come. Let her not scorn to act a woman’s part,    Nor strive to cope with manhood in its might, But lay this maxim closely to her heart –    That that which God ordains is surely right.


^^EOP^^

Proudly swept the rain by the cliffs As on it glided through the trees Still following ever the liko The Ahihi lehua of the vale.        Chorus:       Farewell to thee, farewell to thee       Thou charming one who dwells in shaded bowers       One fond embrace ere I depart       Until we meet again.  Thus sweet memories come back to me Bringing fresh remembrance of the past Dearest one, yes, thou art mine own From thee, true love shall ne’er depart.  I have seen and watched thy loveliness, Thou sweet Rose of MaunawiliAnd ’tis there the birds oft love to dwell And sip the honey from thy lips.


^^EOP^^

Far, far out lie the white sails all at rest; Like spectral arms they seem to touch and cling Unto the wide horizon. Not a wing Of truant bird glides down the purpling west; No breeze dares to intrude, e’en on a quest To fan a lover’s brow; the waves to sing Have quite forgotten till the deep shall fling A bow across its vibrant chords. Then, lest One moment of the sea’s repose we lose, Nor furnish Fancy with a thousand themes Of unimagined sweetness, let us gaze On this serenity, for as we muse, Lo! all is restless motion: life’s best dreams Give changing moods to even halcyon days.


^^EOP^^

The soft-toned clock upon the stair chimed three—
   Too sweet for sleep, too early yet to rise.
   In restful peace I lay with half-closed eyes,
Watching the tender hours go dreamily;
The tide was flowing in; I heard the sea
   Shivering along the sands; while yet the skies
   Were dim, uncertain, as the light that lies
Beneath the fretwork of some wild-rose tree
Within the thicket gray. The chanticleer
   Sent drowsy calls across the slumbrous air;
   In solemn silence sweet it was to hear
My own heart beat . . . Then broad and deep and fair—
   Trembling in its new birth from heaven’s womb—
   One crimson shaft of dawn sank thro’ my room.


^^EOP^^

Close to the gates of Paradise I flee;    The night is hot and serpents leave their beds,    And slide along the dark, crooking their heads,— My God, my God, open the gates to me!  My eyes are burning so I cannot see;    My feet are bleeding and I suffer pain;    Let me come in on the cool grass again—My God, my God, open the gates to me!  I ate the fruit of the forbidden tree,    And was cast out into the barren drouth;    And since – the awful taste within my mouth! My God, my God, open the gates to me!  Am I shut out for all eternity?    I do repent me of my one black sin,    With prayers and tears of blood . . . Let me come in! My God, my God, open the gates to me!  Let me come in where birds and flowers be;    Let me once more lie naked in the grass    That trembles when the long wind-ripples pass! Lord God, Lord God, open the gates to me!


^^EOP^^

Better trust all, and be deceived,    And weep that trust, and that deceiving; Than doubt one heart, that, if believed,   Had blessed one’s life with true believing.  Oh, in this mocking world, too fast    The doubting fiend o’ertakes our youth! Better be cheated to the last,       Than lose the blessèd hope of truth.


^^EOP^^

As if the flow of the watersFrom the triple streams of heavenly showers So the sacred Ao of the eighth heavensWhose flames have scorched the land.        Chorus:       Should our hearts’ love be restored       And our rights be ours once more       Then will our sacred beloved shoals of Kane       Be the firm foundation of the land.  The heavens expand and bestow Her beauteous crownlets free Its life to her people for offerings given And from loyal hearts ascended prayers.  Cold words and looks reprove Oh, turn not thus away Give kindly greetings, words of love And a heart which beats within.


^^EOP^^




To a Venetian coin, the first Gazetta             For its generic title became debtor.  



Whither excursive Fancy tends thy Flight? Like Eastern Caliph masking thee at night, By Vezier memory attended still, Thou pertly pryest in each domicil. Woe! to the Caitiff then who in his cups, Unconscious with sublimity he sups, Shall vow in Bacchanalian truth or fun Thou art not kindred to the glorious sun! I fear thee not, clandestine ambulator! Thou most sophistical and specious traitor To Truth and Reason, those imperial twins Whose Empire with thy Martyrdom begins. What is thy drift in brandishing a flag, Whose motto is a metamorphosed rag! As by those motley streaks of white and jet, I trace that aboriginal Gazette, The British prototype of ’65 From which all modern journals we derive. At first confined to faction’s revelations, Mere politics, or plodding speculations. Now to a semi-cyclopedia risen Which the assembled arts, delight to dizen. Its grand mosaic ground work ever graced With polished gems of miscellaneous taste. Philosophy his portico regains In columns where profoundest science reigns. While in relief a neighboring sphere discloses Clio’s with Nature’s kind exotic roses. A curious melange of mental food In fragments thus promiscuously strewed; Rising Aeronauts, and sinking funds, Fearful phenomena of stars or suns. Men in the stocks, uneasy as old Kent, Others appalled by fluctuating rent. New ministers to preach, and spirit lamps, Foreign intelligence from Courts and Camps Don-Pedro – and a fresh supply of leeches A ball that blackens, and a wash that bleaches, Here, Hymen’s herald to the world declares When Love triumphant at his shrine appears. There, tenderness bereaved, its tribute brings And Hope’s crushed odours on Death’s altar flings.Advertisements of various commodities,   And anecdotes of Irish whims and oddities. Bills of mortality, and Board of Health, A fine green turtle – and a miser’s wealth. The prices current – a cheap hasty pudding, Detected fallacies – and falcon-hooding, Arrivals and departures – births and deaths, A dreadful Storm – and artificial wreaths, One fugitive forsakes the Cotton pod, In terror of the Supervisor’s rod. Another dreading critic castigation, Flies from the fields of rich imagination. Thus from discordant interests Genius hurled The elements that form this typic world.


^^EOP^^

An inland sea – blue as a sapphire – set   Within a sparkling, emerald mountain chain    Where day and night fir-needles sift like rain Thro’ the voluptuous air. The soft winds fret The waves, and beat them wantonly to foam.    The golden distances across the sea    Are shot with rose and purple. Languorously The silver seabirds in wide circles roam. The sun drops slowly down the flaming West    And flings its rays across to set aglow    The islands rocking on the cool waves’ crest And the great glistening domes of snow on snow.    And thro’ the mist the Olympics flash and float    Like opals linked around a beating throat.


^^EOP^^

Listen, Sanoe Dewy lehua bud Here I am Waiting for your voice.  The answer comesI am satisfied Softly, sweetheart You excite my whole being.  My body is waiting Waiting there in yearning belief How are we to fulfill The desire of our thoughts?  Calling to you, my water lily Budding for the two of us Here close by is a compliment The manu comes to deliver.  The Queen is listening The aroma of the scents comes together Mixes and rises upward So similar, so alike.


^^EOP^^

To catch the spirit in its wayward flight Through mazes manifold, what task supreme! For when to floods has grown the quiet stream, Much human skill must aid its rage to fight; And when wild winds invade the solemn night, Seems not man’s vaunted power but a dream? And still more futile, ay, we e’en must deem This quest to tame the soul, and guide aright Its restless wanderings, – to lure it back To shoals of calm. Full many a moan and sigh Attend the strife; till, effort merged in prayer, Oft uttered, clung to – when of strength the lack Seems direst – brings the answer to our cry: A gift from Him who lifts our ev’ry care.


^^EOP^^

Cover me with your everlasting arms,
   Ye guardian giants of this solitude!
   From the ill-sight of men, and from the rude,
Tumultuous din of yon wild world’s alarms!
Oh, knit your mighty limbs around, above,
   And close me in for ever! let me dwell
   With the wood spirits, in the darkest cell
That ever with your verdant locks ye wove.
   The air is full of countless voices, joined
In one eternal hymn; the whispering wind,
The shuddering leaves, the hidden water springs,
The work-song of the bees, whose honeyed wings
Hang in the golden tresses of the lime,
Or buried lie in purple beds of thyme.


^^EOP^^

Oft, when my lips I open to rehearse Thy wondrous spell of wisdom, and of power, And that my voice, and thy immortal verse, On listening ears, and hearts, I mingled pour, I shrink dismayed – and awful doth appear The vain presumption of my own weak deed; Thy glorious spirit seems to mine so near, That suddenly I tremble as I read – Thee an invisible auditor I fear: Oh, if it might be so, my master dear! With what beseeching would I pray to thee, To make me equal to my noble task, Succor from thee, how humbly would I ask, Thy worthiest works to utter worthily.


^^EOP^^

To those fair isles where crimson sunsets burn, We send a backward glance to gaze on thee, Brave Toussaint! thou was surely born to be A hero; thy proud spirit could but spurn  Each outrage on the race. Couldst thou unlearn The lessons taught by instinct? Nay! and we Who share the zeal that would make all men free, Must e’en with pride unto thy life-work turn. Soul-dignity was thine and purest aim; And ah! how sad that thou wast left to mourn In chains ’neath alien skies. On him, shame! shame! That mighty conqueror who dared to claim The right to bind thee. Him we heap with scorn, And noble patriot! guard with love thy name.


^^EOP^^

Death found strange beauty on that cherub brow, And dash’d it out. – There was a tint of rose O’er cheek and lip; – he touch’d the veins with ice, And the rose faded. – Forth from those blue eyes There spake a wistful tenderness, – a doubt Whether to grieve or sleep, which Innocence   Alone can wear. – With ruthless haste he bound The silken fringes of their curtaining lids Forever. – There had been a murmuring sound With which the babe would claim its mother’s ear, Charming her even to tears. – The spoiler set His seal of silence. – But there beam’d a smile, So fix’d and holy from that marble brow, –Death gazed and left it there; – he dared not steal The signet-ring of Heaven.


^^EOP^^




‘How can the red men be forgotten, while so many of our states and territories, bays, lakes, and rivers, are indelibly stamped by names of their giving?’



Ye say they all have passed away,    That noble race and brave, That their light canoes have vanished    From off the crested wave; That ’mid the forests where they roamed    There rings no hunter shout, But their name is on your waters,    Ye may not wash it out.  ’Tis where Ontario’s billow    Like Ocean’s surge is curled, Where strong Niagara’s thunders wake    The echo of the world. Where red Missouri bringeth    Rich tribute from the west, And Rappahannock sweetly sleeps    On green Virginia’s breast.  Ye say their cone-like cabins,    That clustered o’er the vale, Have fled away like withered leaves    Before the autumn gale, But their memory liveth on your hills,    Their baptism on your shore, Your everlasting rivers speak    Their dialect of yore.  Old Massachusetts wears it,    Within her lordly crown, And broad Ohio bears it,    Amid his young renown; Connecticut hath wreathed it    Where her quiet foliage waves, And bold Kentucky breathed it hoarse    Through all her ancient caves.  Wachuset hides its lingering voice    Within his rocky heart, And Alleghany graves its tone    Throughout his lofty chart; Monadnock on his forehead hoar    Doth seal the sacred trust, Your mountains build their monument,    Though ye destroy their dust.  Ye call these red-browned brethren    The insects of an hour, Crushed like the noteless worm amid    The regions of their power; Ye drive them from their father’s lands,    Ye break of faith the seal, But can ye from the court of Heaven     Exclude their last appeal?  Ye see their unresisting tribes,    With toilsome step and slow, On through the trackless desert pass    A caravan of woe; Think ye the Eternal’s ear is deaf?    His sleepless vision dim? Think ye the soul’s blood may not cry    From that far land to him?


^^EOP^^

Let me die on the prairie! and o’er my rude grave, In the soft breeze of summer the tall grass shall wave; I would breathe my last sigh as the bright hues of even Are melting away in the blue arch of Heaven.  Let me die on the prairie! unwept and unknown, I would pass from this fair Earth forgotten, alone;—Yet no! – there are hearts I have learned to revere, And methinks there is bliss in affection’s warm tear.  Oh, speak not to me of the green cypress shade; I would sleep where the bones of the Indian are laid, And the deer will bound o’er me with step light and free, And the carol of birds will my requiem be.  Let me die on the prairie! I have wished for it long; There floats in wild numbers the bold hunter’s song; ’Tis the spot of all others the dearest to me, And how sweet in its bosom my slumber will be!


^^EOP^^

I should be happy with my lot: A wife and mother – is it not Enough for me to be content? What other blessing could be sent?  A quiet house, and homely ways, That make each day like other days; I only see Time’s shadow now Darken the hair on baby’s brow!  No world’s work ever comes to me, No beggar brings his misery; I have no power, no healing art With bruised soul or broken heart.  I read the poets of the age, ’Tis lotus-eating in a cage; I study Art, but Art is dead To one who clamors to be fed  With milk from Nature’s rugged breast, Who longs for Labor’s lusty rest. O foolish wish! I still should pine If any other lot were mine.


^^EOP^^

Oh! could I see as thou hast seen,    The garden of the west, When Spring in all her loveliness    Fair nature’s face has dressed.  The rolling prairie, vast and wild!    It hath a charm for me—Its tall grass waving to the breeze,    Like billows on the sea.  Say, hast thou chased the bounding deer    When smiled the rosy morn? Or hast thou listened to the sound    Of the merry hunter’s horn?  Once could the noble red-man call    That prairie wild his home;—   His cabin now in ruins laid,    He must an exile roam,  And thou at twilight’s pensive hour,    Perchance hast seen him weep;—Tread lightly o’er the hallowed spot,    For there his kindred sleep.  I envy not the opulent    His proud and lordly dome; Far happier is the pioneer    Who seeks a prairie home;—    Where no discordant notes are heard,    But all is harmony; Where soars aloft unfettered thought,    And the heart beats light and free.


^^EOP^^

One morn I left him in his bed; A moment after some one said, ‘Your child is dying – he is dead.’  We made him ready for his rest, Flowers in his hair, and on his breast His little hands together prest.  We sailed by night across the sea; So, floating from the world were we, Apart from sympathy, we Three.  The wild sea moaned, the black clouds spread Moving shadows on its bed, But one of us lay midship dead.  I saw his coffin sliding down The yellow sand in yonder town, Where I put on my sorrow’s crown.  And we returned; in this drear place Never to see him face to face, I thrust aside the living race.  Mothers, who mourn with me today, Oh, understand me, when I say, I cannot weep, I cannot pray;  I gaze upon a hidden store, His books, his toys, the clothes he wore, And cry, ‘Once more, to me, once more!’  Then take, from me, this simple verse, That you may know what I rehearse— A grief – your and my Universe!


^^EOP^^

Morn on her rosy couch awoke,    Enchantment led the hour, And mirth and music drank the dews    That freshen’d Beauty’s flower, Then from her bower of deep delight,    I heard a young girl sing, ‘Oh, speak no ill of poetry,    For ’tis a holy thing.’  The Sun in noon-day heat rose high,    And on the heaving breast, I saw a weary pilgrim toil    Unpitied and unblest, Yet still in trembling measures flow’d    Forth from a broken string, ‘Oh, speak no ill of poetry,    For ’tis a holy thing.’  ’Twas night, and Death the curtains drew,    ’Mid agony severe, While there a willing spirit went    Home to a glorious sphere, Yet still it sigh’d, even when was spread   The waiting Angel’s wing, ‘Oh, speak no ill of poetry,    For ’tis a holy thing.’


^^EOP^^

An axe rang sharply ’mid those forest shades Which from creation toward the skies had tower’d In unshorn beauty. There, with vigorous arm Wrought a bold emigrant, and by his side His little son, with question and response, Beguiled the toil.                          ‘Boy, thou hast never seen Such glorious trees. Hark, when their giant trunks Fall, how the firm earth groans. Rememberest thou The mighty river, on whose breast we sail’d, So many days, on toward the setting sun? Our own Connecticut, compar’d to that, Was but a creeping stream.’                                          ‘Father, the brook That by our door went singing, where I launch’d My tiny boat, with my young playmates round, When school was o’er, is dearer far to me, Than all these bold, broad waters. To my eye They are as strangers. And those little trees My mother nutur’d in the garden bound, Of our first home, from whence the fragrant peach   Hung in its ripening gold, were fairer sure, Than this dark forest, shutting out the day.’ —‘What, ho! – my little girl,’ and with light stepA fairy creature hasted toward her sire, And setting down the basket that contain’d His noon-repast, look’d upward to his face With sweet, confiding smile.                                          ‘See, dearest, see, That bright-wing’d paroquet, and hear the song Of yon gay red-bird, echoing through the trees, Making rich music. Didst thou ever hear, In far New England, such a mellow tone?’ —‘I had a robin that did take the crumbs Each night and morning, and his chirping voice Still made me joyful, as I went to tend My snow-drops. I was always laughing then In that first home. I should be happier now Methinks, if I could find among these dells The same fresh violets.’                                    Slow night drew on, And round the rude hut of the Emigrant The wrathful spirit of the rising storm Spake bitter things. His weary children slept, And he, with head declin’d, sat listening long To the swoln waters of the Illinois, Dashing against their shores.                                           Starting he spake,—‘Wife! did I see thee brush away a tear? ’Twas even so. Thy heard was with the halls Of thy nativity. Their sparkling lights, Carpets, and sofas, and admiring guests, Befit thee better than these rugged walls Of shapeless logs, and this lone, hermit home.’    ‘No – no. All was so still around, methought Upon mine ear that echoes hymn did steal, Which ’mid the Church where erst we paid our vows, So tuneful peal’d. But tenderly thy voice Dissolv’d the illusion.’                                 And the gentle smile Lighting her brow, the fond caress that sooth’d Her waking infant, reassur’d his soul That wheresoe’er our best affections dwell, And strike a healthful root, is happiness. Content, and placid, to his rest he sank, But dreams, those wild magicians, that do play Such pranks when reason slumbers, tireless wrought Their will with him.                             Up rose the thronging mart Of his own native city, – roof and spire, All glittering bright, in fancy’s frost-work ray. The steed his boyhood nurtur’d proudly neigh’d, The favorite dog came frisking round his feet, With shrill and joyous bark, – familiar doors Flew open, – greeting hands with his were link’d In friendship’s grasp, – he heard the keen debate From congregated haunts, where mind with mind Doth blend and brighten, – and till morning rov’d ’Mid the loved scenery of his native land.


^^EOP^^

Husband, today could you and I behold  The sun that brought us to our bridal morn Rising so splendid in the winter sky (We though fair spring returned), when we were wed; Could the shades vanish from these fifteen years, Which stand like columns guarding the approach To that great temple of the double soul That is as one – would you turn back, my dear, And, for the sake of Love’s mysterious dream, As old as Adam and as sweet as Eve, Take me, as I took you, and once more go Towards that goal which none of us have reached? Contesting battles which but prove a loss, The victor vanquished by the wounded one; Teaching each other sacrifice of self, True immolation to the marriage bond; Learning the joys of birth, the woe of death, Leaving in chaos all the hopes of life—Heart-broken, yet with courage pressing on For fame and fortune, artists needing both? Or, would you rather – I will acquiesce— Since we must choose what is, and are grown gray, Stay in life’s desert, watch our setting sun, Calm as those statues in Egyptian sands, Hand clasping hand, with patience and with peace, Wait for a future which contains no past?


^^EOP^^

In front of the craft shop,a small nativity,mother, baby, sheepmade of whiteand blue balloons.

^^EOP^^

The night you died, I dreamed you came to campto hear confession from an Eagle Scouttortured by forty years of sin and doubt.You whispered vespers by a hissing lamp.Handlers, allowing you to hike with me,followed us to the Bad Axe waterfrontdown a ﬁrebreak this camper used to hunt.Through all I said you suffered silently.I blamed the authors of my unbelief:St. Paul, who would have deemed my love obscene,the Jesuit who raped me as a teen,the altar boy when I was six, the griefof a child chucked from Eden, left for deadby Peter’s Church and all the choirs above.In a thick Polish accent choked with love,

^^EOP^^

"Myrtle loves Harry"—It is sometimes hard to remember a thing like that,
Hard to think about it, and no one knows what to do with it when he has it,
So write it out on a billboard that stands under the yellow light of an "L" platform among popcorn wrappers and crushed cigars,
A poster that says "Mama I Love Crispy Wafers So."
Leave it on a placard where somebody else gave the blonde lady a pencil moustache, and another perplexed citizen deposited:
"Jesus Saves. Jesus Saves."
One can lay this bundle down there with the others,
And never lose it, or forget it, or want it.
"Myrtle loves Harry."
They live somewhere.


^^EOP^^

Harry loves Myrtle—He has strong arms, from the warehouse,
And on Sunday when they take the bus to emerald meadows he doesn't say:
"What will your chastity amount to when your flesh withers in a little while?"
No,
On Sunday, when they picnic in emerald meadows they look at the Sunday paper:
GIRL SLAYS BANKER-BETRAYER
They spread it around on the grass
BATH-TUB STIRS JERSEY ROW
And then they sit down on it, nice.
Harry doesn't say "Ziggin's Ointment for withered flesh,
Cures thousands of men and women of moles, warts, red veins, flabby throat, scalp and hair diseases,
Not expensive, and fully guaranteed."
No,
Harry says nothing at all,
He smiles,
And they kiss in the emerald meadows on the Sunday paper.


^^EOP^^

In siftings of chromatic sedimentShed by the winter hours as they decay,With slow descentLight settles through the lower sky in peach,Then mauve, then pale self-abnegating grayAgainst the water, now that day is spentAt Bennetts Beach,Under the high withdrawing blueness, bandOn band, like layers in a decorativeBottle of sand,Enclosed beneath the heavens’ dome, as thoughThis were the perfect realm in which to live,Preserved, unburdened by the least demand, Or wish, to know—And simply be. Along the beach conveneSome silver gulls which stand around reﬂectingUpon the sheenThat comes and goes about their scarlet feet,And crested terns ﬂy back and forth inspectingThe shallows for a last titbit to glean,And lightly treatA two-faced wind that works its way acrossThe metal of the sea it tries to planishAnd to emboss,While deep in its unbalanced buffetingsGannets alternately appear and vanish,Plunge, rise, and loft and give their heads a toss.These things, these things

^^EOP^^

On Fourteenth street the bugles blow,
   Bugles blow, bugles blow.
The red, red, red, red banner floats
Where sweating angels split their throats,
Marching in burlap petticoats,
   Blow, bugles, blow. 
God is a ten car Bronx express,
   Red eyes round, red eyes round.
"Oh where is my lustful lamb tonight,
His hair slicked down and his trousers tight?
I'll grind him back to my glory light!"
   Roll, subway, roll. 
Heaven is a free amusement park,
   Big gold dome, big gold dome.
Movies at night: "The life she led."
Everyone sleeps in one big bed.
The stars go around inside your head.
   Home, sweet home. 
On Fourteenth street the bugles blow,
   Bugles blow, bugles blow,
The torpid stones and pavements wake,
A million men and street-cars quake
In time with angel breasts that shake,
   Blow, bugles, blow!


^^EOP^^

Blessed assurance, Jesus is mine! O what a foretaste of glory divine! Heir of salvation, purchase of God, Born of His Spirit, washed in His blood!  Chorus:    This is my story, this is my song,    Praising my Saviour all the day long.  Perfect submission, perfect delight, Visions of rapture now burst on my sight; Angels descending bring from above Echoes of mercy, whispers of love.  Perfect submission, all is at rest, I in my Saviour am happy and blest,—  Watching and waiting, looking above, Filled with His goodness, lost in His love.


^^EOP^^

Mauve mist-shadow cloaks the sky’sRiver-blurred, inchoate border.Dawn’s old story; and light tries—Not the last time—to devise           Lasting order;From ﬁrst principles assignsLaws to frame day’s jurisdiction;Drawing contours, shapes, and linesFrom the nebula, it shines,           Strange as ﬁction.Such designs, though, won’t appearIn the plans of a committee.Look. The moon’s pale-copper sphereRings—a gong too faint to hear—           Through the city.Let them linger, unawake.Down the mountain’s wrinkled brillianceDarkness empties like a lake.Minted gold, house windows make           Coins worth millions.Both in disbelief and prideAll the buildings in the distanceOn the river’s farther sideTake up, as the shadows slide,           New existence.Shadow slides along the roof,Past the guttering and gable,Shrinks, and leaves the house aloofWhere the light reads out its proof           Like a fable.

^^EOP^^

Another one of those Pyrrhic experiences. Call itan ex

^^EOP^^

He found it strange at ﬁrst. A new dimension.  One he had never guessed. The fourth? The ﬁfth? How could he tell, who’d only known the third?Something to do with eyesight, depth of ﬁeld.Perspective quite beyond him. Everything ﬂator nearly ﬂat. The vanishing point they’d tried to teach at school was out of sightand out of mind. A blank.Now, this diaphanous dimension—onewith neither up nor down, nor east nor west,nor orienting star to give him north.Even his name had left him. Strayed like a dog. Yet he was bathed in some unearthly light,a delicate no-color that made his ﬂeshtransparent, see-through, a Saran-Wrap self.His body without substance and his mindwith nothing to think about—although intact—was totally minus purpose. He must

^^EOP^^

1-2-3 was the number he played but today the number came 3-2-1;
   bought his Carbide at 30 and it went to 29; had the favorite at Bowie but the track was slow— 
O, executive type, would you like to drive a floating power, knee-action, silk-upholstered six? Wed a Hollywood star? Shoot the course in 58? Draw to the ace, king, jack?
   O, fellow with a will who won't take no, watch out for three cigarettes on the same, single match; O democratic voter born in August under Mars, beware of liquidated rails— 
Denouement to denouement, he took a personal pride in the certain, certain way he lived his own, private life,
   but nevertheless, they shut off his gas; nevertheless, the bank foreclosed; nevertheless, the landlord called; nevertheless, the radio broke, 
And twelve o'clock arrived just once too often,
   just the same he wore one gray tweed suit, bought one straw hat, drank one straight Scotch, walked one short step, took one long look, drew one deep breath,
   just one too many, 
And wow he died as wow he lived,
   going whop to the office and blooie home to sleep and biff got married and bam had children and oof got fired,
   zowie did he live and zowie did he die, 
With who the hell are you at the corner of his casket, and where the hell we going on the right-hand silver knob, and who
the hell cares walking second from the end with an American Beauty wreath from why the hell not, 
Very much missed by the circulation staff of the New York Evening Post; deeply, deeply mourned by the B.M.T., 
Wham, Mr. Roosevelt; pow, Sears Roebuck; awk, big dipper; bop, summer rain;
   Bong, Mr., bong, Mr., bong, Mr., bong.


^^EOP^^

Touch and go. Our Cessna bumped the sand,       thumped its tundra tires,       lifted as if on wires,banked over ice and rocked its wings to land.We pitched our camp hard by the Hubbard’s face,       some sixty fathoms tall,       a seven-mile-long wallseven leagues from Yakutat, our base.

^^EOP^^




After John Milton



Our light is never spent.Is spent.Thus have we scooped outmaceration reservoirs.We will blaze forth  what remainsas pixels.Great angels  ﬂy at our behestbetween towers,along axons and dendrites,so that things standas they standin the recruited present.

^^EOP^^

Two shall be born the whole world wide apart,
And speak in different tongues, and pay their debts
In different kinds of coin; and give no heed
Each to the other’s being. And know not
That each might suit the other to a T,
If they were but correctly introduced.
And these, unconsciously, shall bend their steps,
Escaping Spaniards and defying war,
Unerringly toward the same trysting-place,
Albeit they know it not. Until at last
They enter the same door, and suddenly
They meet. And ere they’ve seen each other’s face
They fall into each other’s arms, upon
The Broadway cable car – and this is Fate!


^^EOP^^

I sing of simple people and the hardier virtues, by Associated Stuffed Shirts & Company, Incorporated, 358 West 42d Street, New York, brochure enclosed
   of Christ on the Cross, by a visitor to Calvary, first class
   art deals with eternal, not current verities, revised from last week's Sunday supplement
   guess what we mean, in The Literary System, and a thousand noble answers to a thousand empty questions, by a patriot who needs the dough. 
And so it goes.
   Books are the key to magic portals. Knowledge is power. Give the people light.
   Writing must be such a nice profession.
   Fill in the coupon. How do you know? Maybe you can be a writer, too.


^^EOP^^




The age demanded an imageof its accelerated grimace            —Ezra PoundIdiot Wind,Blowin' every time you move your teeth            —Bob Dylan



You were energized by your epoch.The difference between a harmless nut—John Doe, Jane Doe, plain Jane, practically any mediocrity—standing on a beachand the same harmless nut riding a wave of (now) cultural self-righteousnessabout to tube. A tsunami armed with thunderbolts.Empowered—yea, packing.You played everything to the sympathetic studio theaterof your hearers, a chorus-cum-sounding-board.They were your doo-wop boys and girls, your clique and claque and Marshall stack. The church hall chairs scraped, the cheap black crepe backdrop rustled “cutting edge” at you.You paid attention to how they oohed and aahed for you, and then pantomime hissed, and balled their ﬁsts and bayed for blood:the half-lustful half-men betraying their half-gender when they weren’t speculating what you were like in bed,the frightened girls who’d never seen anything like youbut thought it might be fun (after Goth) to be a Maenad,the Pharisaic mothers going home to their chilly ﬁres, their dim, furtive, put-upon husbands and their neo-feral offspringwith a “there but for the grace of God” on their bony lips.

^^EOP^^

It was an Artless Poster Girl pinned up against my wall, She was tremendous ugly, she was exceeding tall; I was gazing at her idly, and I think I must have slept, For that poster maiden lifted up her poster voice, and wept.  She said between her poster sobs, ‘I think it’s rather rough To be jeered and fleered and flouted, and I’ve stood it long enough; I’m tired of being quoted as a Fright and Fad and Freak, And I take this opportunity my poster mind to speak.  ‘Although my hair is carmine and my nose is edged with blue, Although my style is splashy and my shade effects are few, Although I’m out of drawing and my back hair is a show, Yet I have n’t half the whimseys of the maidens that you know.  ‘I never keep you waiting while I prink before the glass, I never talk such twaddle as that little Dawson lass, I never paint on china, nor erotic novels write, And I never have recited “Curfew must not ring tonight”.  ‘I don’t rave over Ibsen, I never, never flirt, I never wear a shirt waist with a disconnected skirt; I never speak in public on “The Suffrage”, or “The Race”, I never talk while playing whist, or trump my partner’s ace.’  I said: ‘O artless Poster Girl, you’re in the right of it, You are a joy forever, though a thing of beauty, nit!’ And from her madder eyebrows to her utmost purple swirl, Against all captious critics I’ll defend the Poster Girl.


^^EOP^^

The palm tree exposesa large numberof loose, carved spinesout of pleasure?Boredom?

^^EOP^^

Where analgesia may be found to ease the infinite, minute scars of the day;
What final interlude will result, picked bit by bit from the morning's hurry, the lunch-hour boredom, the fevers of the night;
Why this one is cherished by the gods, and that one not;
How to win, and win again, and again, staking wit alone against a sea of time;
Which man to trust and, once found, how far— 
Will not be found in Matthew, Mark, Luke, or John,
Nor Blackstone, nor Gray's, nor Dun & Bradstreet, nor Freud, nor Marx,
Nor the sage of the evening news, nor the corner astrologist, nor in any poet, 
Nor what sort of laughter should greet the paid pronouncements of the great,
Nor what pleasure the mulitudes have, brining lunch and the children to watch the condemned to be plunged into death, 
Nor why the sun should rise tomorrow,
Nor how the moon still weaves upon the ground, through the leaves, so much silence and so much peace.


^^EOP^^

The dramatis personae include a fly-specked Monday evening,
   A cigar store with stagnant windows,
   Two crooked streets,
   Six policemen and Louie Glatz.
Bass drums mumble and mutter an ominous portent
   As Louie Glatz holds up the cigar store and backs out with
$14.92.
Officer Dolan noticed something suspicious, it is supposed,
   And ordered him to halt,
   But dangerous, handsome, cross-eye'd Louie the rat
Spoke with his gat,
   Rat-a-tat-tat—
   Rat-a-tat-tat
   And Dolan was buried as quickly as possible.
But Louie didn't give a good god damn,
   He ran like a crazy shadow on a shadowy street
   With five policemen off that beat
   Hot on his trail, going Blam! Blam!-blam!
While rat-a-tat-tat
   Rat-a-tat-tat
   Said Louie's gat,
So loud that Peter Wendotti rolled away from his wife,
   Got out of bed to scratch his stomach and shiver on the cold floor
   Listening to the stammering syllables of instant death
   Met on secret floors in the big vacant galleries of night.
Then Louie sagged and fell and ran.
   With seven bullets through his caved-in skull and those feeble brains
   Spilling out like soup.
   He crawled behind a water-hydrant and stood them off another half minute.
"I'm not shot," he yelled, "I'm not shot," he screamed, "it isn't me they've shot in the head," he laughed, "Oh
I don't give a damn!"
   And rat-a-tat-tat
   Rat-a-tat-tat
   Muttered the gat
   Of Louie the rat,
   While the officers of the law went Blam! Blam!-blam!
Soft music. Violins moan like weeds swaying far under water.
   The vibrant throats of steam-ships hoot a sad defiance at distance and nothing.
   Space curls its arm across the flat roofs and dreary streets.
   Bricks bulge and sag.
Louie's soul arose through his mouth in the form of a derby hat
   That danced with cigarette butts and burned matches and specks of dust
   Where Louie sprawled.
   Close-up of Dolan's widow. Of Louie's mother.
   Picture of the fly-specked Monday evening and fade out slow.


^^EOP^^

That I might chisel a statue, line on line,    Out of a marble’s chaste severities!    Angular, harsh; no softened curves to please; Set tears within the eyes to make them shine, And furrows on the brow, deep, stern, yet fine;    Gaunt, awkward, tall; no courtier of ease;    The trousers bulging at the bony knees; Long nose, large mouth . . . But ah, the light divine Of Truth, – the light that set a people free!—    Burning upon it in a steady flame,    As sunset fires a white peak on the sky . . .Ah, God! To leave it nameless and yet see    Men looking weep and bow themselves and cry—    ‘Enough, enough! We know thy statue’s name!’


^^EOP^^

Even when your friend, the radio, is still; even when her dream, the magazine, is finished; even when his life, the ticker, is silent; even when their destiny, the boulevard, is bare;
And after that paradise, the dance-hall, is closed; after that theater, the clinic, is dark, 
Still there will be your desire, and hers, and his hopes and theirs,
Your laughter, their laughter,
Your curse and his curse, her reward and their reward, their dismay and his dismay and her dismay and yours— 
Even when your enemy, the collector, is dead; even when your counsellor, the salesman, is sleeping; even when your sweetheart, the movie queen, has spoken; even when your friend, the magnate, is gone.


^^EOP^^

Love cities, this is what my brother taught meas he cut soldiers’ hair, then tidied tomatoes watching Sonya and I dance on a soapy floor—I open the window, say in a low voice, my brother.The voice I do not hear when I speak to myself is the clearest voice.But the sky was all around us once.We played chess with empty matchboxes,he wrote love letters to my wife 

^^EOP^^

Deflores. What makes your lip so strange? This must not be betwixt us. Beatrice. The man talks wildly. Deflores. Come kisse me with a zeal now. Beatrice. Heaven I doubt him. Deflores. I will not stand so long to beg 'em shortly. Beatrice. Take heed Deflores of forgetfulness, 'twill soon betray us. Deflores. Take you heed first; Faith y'are grown much forgetfull, y'are to blame in't. Beatrice. He's bold, and I am blam'd for't. Deflores. I have eas'd you of your trouble, think on't, I'me in pain, And must be as'd of ou; 'tis a charity, Justice invites your blood to understand me. Beatrice. I dare not. Deflores. Quickly. Beatrice. Oh I never shall, speak if yet further of that I may lose What has been spoken, and no sound remain on't.  would not hear so much offence again for such another deed. Deflores. Soft, Lady, soft; the last is not yet paid for, oh this act Has put me into spirit; I was as greedy on't As the parcht earth of moisture when the clouds weep. Did you ot mark, I wrought my self into't. Nay sued, and kneel'd for't: Why was all that pains took? You see I have thrown contempt upon your gold, Not that I want it, for I doe piteously, In order I will come unto't, and make use on't, But 'twas not held so pretious to begin with; For I place wealth after the heels of pleasure, And where I not resolv'd in my belief That thy virginity were perfect in thee, I should but take my recompense with grudging, As if I had but halfe my hopes I agreed for. Beatrice. Why 'tis impossible thou canst be so wicked, Or shelter such a cunning cruelty, To make his death the murderer of my honor. Thy language is so bold and vitious, I cannot see which way I can forgive it with any modesty. Deflores. Push, you forget your selfe, a woman dipt in blood, and talk of modesty. Beatrice. O misery of sin! would I had been bound Perpetually unto my living hate In that Piracquo, then to hear these words. Think but upon the distance that Creation Set 'twixt thy blood and mine, and keep thee there. Deflores. Look but into your conscience, read me there, 'Tis a true Book, you'l find me there your equall: Push, flye not to your birth, but settle you In what the act has made you, y'are no more now, You must forget your parentage to me, Y'are the deeds creature, by that name You lost your first condition, and I challenge you, As peace and innocency has turn'd you out, And made you one with me. Beatrice. With thee, foul villain? Deflores. Yes, my fair murdress; Do you urge me? Though thou wri'st maid, thou whore in thy affection, 'Twas chang'd from thy first love, and that's a kind Of whoredome in thy heart, and he's chang'd now, To bring thy second on the Alsemero, Whom 'by all sweets that ever darkness tasted, If I enjoy thee not thou ne're enjoyst, I'le blast the hopes and joyes of marriage, I'le confess all, my life I rate at nothing. Beatrice. Deflores. Deflores. I shall rest from all lovers plagues then, I live in pain now: that shooting eye Will burn my heart to cinders. Beatrice. O sir, hear me. Deflores. She that in life and love refuses me, In death and shame my partner she shall be. Beatrice. Stay, hear me once for all, I make thee master Of all the wealth I have in gold and jewels, Let me go poor unto my bed with honor, And i am rich in all things. Deflores. Let this silence thee, The wealth of all Valentia shall not buy my pleasure from me, Can you weep Fate from its determin'd purpose? So soon may weep me. Beatrice. Vengeance begins; Murder I see is followed by more sins. Was my creation in the womb so curst, It must ingender with a Viper first? Deflores. Come, rise, and shrowd your blushes in my bosome, Silence is one of pleasures best receipts: Thy peace is wrought for ever in this yeelding. 'Lasse how the Turtle pants! Thou'lt love anon, What thou so fear'st, and faintst to venture on.                                                                              Exeunt.                                                                      (Act III, scene iv)  Enter Deflores bringing in Beatrice Deflores. Here we are, if you have any more   To say to us, speak quickly, I shall not, Give you the hearing else, I am so stout yet, and so I think that broken rib of mankind. Vermandero. An Host of enemies entred my Citadell, Could not amaze like this, Joanna, Beatrice, Joanna. Beatrice. O come not neer me sir, I shall defile you, I am that of your blood was taken from you For your better health, look no more upon't, But cast it to the ground regardlessly, Let the common shewer take it from distinction, Beneath the starres, upon yon Meteor Ever hang my fate, 'mongst things corruptible, I ne're could pluck ti from him, my loathing Was Prophet to the rest, but ne're believ'd Mine honour fell with him, and now my life. Alsemero, I am a stranger to your bed, Your bed was coz'ned on the nuptiall night, For which your false-bride died. Alfermero. Diaphanta? Deflores. Yes, and the while I coupled with your mate   At barly-break; now we are left in hell. Vermandero. We are all there, it circumscribes here. Deflores. I lov'd this woman in spite of her heart, Her love I earn'd out of Piracquos murder. Tomaso. Ha, my brothers murtherer. Deflores. Yes, and her honors prize Was my reward, I thank life for nothing But that pleasure, it was so sweet to me, That I have drunk up all, left none behinde, For any man to pledge me.                                                                       (Act V, scene iii)                             


^^EOP^^

Or the true feelings of those slaves who say they  would not be free. The following shows their              feelings when they are free.

^^EOP^^

I am not a poet, Sonya I inspectthe fragrant feet of younger ladies—

^^EOP^^

By the blue taper's trembling light, No more I waste the wakeful night, Intent with endless view to pore The schoolmen and the sages o'er: Their books from wisdom widely stray, Or point at best the longest way. I'll seek a readier path, and go Where wisdom's surely taught below.    How deep yon azure dyes the sky, Where orbs of gold unnumbered lie, While through their ranks in silver pride The nether crescent seems to glide. The slumb'ring breeze forgets to breathe, The lake is smooth and clear beneath, Where once again the spangled show Descends to meet our eyes below. The grounds, which on the right aspire, In dimness from the view retire: The left presents a place of graves, Whose wall the silent water laves. That steeple guides thy doubtful sight Among the livid gleams of night. There pass, with melancholy state, By all the solemn heaps of fate, And think, as softly-sad you tread Above the venerable dead, "Time was, like thee they life possessed, And time shall be, that thou shalt rest."    Those graves, with bending osier bound, That nameless heave the crumpled ground, Quick to the glancing thought disclose Where Toil and Poverty repose.    The flat smooth stones that bear a name, The chisel's slender help to fame (Which ere our set of friends decay Their frequent steps may wear away), A middle race of mortals own, Men, half ambitious, all unknown.    The marble tombs that rise on high, Whose dead in vaulted arches lie, Whose pillars swell with sculptured stones, Arms, angels, epitaphs and bones, These (all the poor remains of state) Adorn the rich, or praise the great; Who, while on earth in fame they live, Are senseless of the fame they give.    Ha! while I gaze, pale Cynthia fades, The bursting earth unveils the shades! All slow and wan, and wrapped with shrouds, They rise in visionary crowds, And all with sober accent cry, "Think, mortal, what it is to die."    Now from yon black and fun'ral yew, That bathes the charnel-house with dew, Methinks I hear a voice begin (Ye ravens, cease your croaking din, Ye tolling clocks, no time resound O'er the long lake and midnight ground); It sends a peal of hollow groans, Thus speaking from among the bones.    "When men my scythe and darts supply, How great a King of Fears am I! They view me like the last of things: They make, and then they dread, my stings. Fools! if you less provoked your fears, No more my spectre-form appears. Death's but a path that must be trod, If man would ever pass to God; A port of calms, a state of ease From the rough rage of swelling seas.    "Why then thy flowing sable stoles, Deep pendant cypress, mourning poles, Loose scarfs to fall athwart thy weeds, Long palls, drawn hearses, covered steeds, And plumes of black, that, as they tread, Nod o'er the scutcheons of the dead?    "Nor can the parted body know, Nor wants the soul, these forms of woe. As men who long in prison dwell, With lamps that glimmer round the cell, Whene'er their suffering years are run, Spring forth to greet the glitt'ring sun: Such joy, though far transcending sense, Have pious souls at parting hence. On earth, and in the body placed, A few, and evil, years they waste; But when their chains are cast aside, See the glad scene unfolding wide, Clap the glad wing, and tow'r away, And mingle with the blaze of day." 


^^EOP^^

Such is the story made of stubbornness and a little air,a story sung by those who danced before the Lord in quiet.Who whirled and leapt. Giving voice to consonants that risewith no protection but each other’s ears.We are on our bellies in this silence, Lord.Let us wash our faces in the wind and forget the strict shapes of affection.Let the pregnant woman hold something of clay in her hand.For the secret of patience is his wife’s patienceLet her man kneel on the roof, clearing his throat,he who loved roofs, tonight and tonight, making love to her and her forgetting,a man with a fast heartbeat, a woman dancing with a broom, uneven breath.Let them borrow the light from the blind.Let them kiss your forehead, approached from every angle.What is silence? Something of the sky in us.There will be evidence, there will be evidence.Let them speak of air and its necessities. Whatever they will open, will open.


^^EOP^^

                    
                    
                    A little called anything shows shudders. Come and say what prints all day. A whole few watermelon. There is no pope. No cut in pennies and little dressing and choose wide soles and little spats really little spices. A little lace makes boils. This is not true. Gracious of gracious and a stamp a blue green white bow a blue green lean, lean on the top. If it is absurd then it is leadish and nearly set in where there is a tight head. A peaceful life to arise her, noon and moon and moon. A letter a cold sleeve a blanket a shaving house and nearly the best and regular window. Nearer in fairy sea, nearer and farther, show white has lime in sight, show a stitch of ten. Count, count more so that thicker and thicker is leaning. I hope she has her cow. Bidding a wedding, widening received treading, little leading mention nothing. Cough out cough out in the leather and really feather it is not for. Please could, please could, jam it not plus more sit in when.
                

^^EOP^^

Shorter and shorter now the twilight clips    The days, as though the sunset gates they crowd, And Summer from her golden collar slips    And strays through stubble-fields, and moans aloud,  Save when by fits the warmer air deceives,    And, stealing hopeful to some sheltered bower, She lies on pillows of the yellow leaves,    And tries the old tunes over for an hour.  The wind, whose tender whisper in the May    Set all the young blooms listening through th’ grove, Sits rustling in the faded boughs to-day    And makes his cold and unsuccessful love.  The rose has taken off her tire of red—    The mullein-stalk its yellow stars have lost, And the proud meadow-pink hangs down her head    Against earth’s chilly bosom, witched with frost.  The robin, that was busy all the June,    Before the sun had kissed the topmost bough, Catching our hearts up in his golden tune,    Has given place to the brown cricket now.  The very cock crows lonesomely at morn—    Each flag and fern the shrinking stream divides— Uneasy cattle low, and lambs forlorn    Creep to their strawy sheds with nettled sides.  Shut up the door: who loves me must not look    Upon the withered world, but haste to bring His lighted candle, and his story-book,    And live with me the poetry of Spring.


^^EOP^^

When the corn’s all cut and the bright stalks shine    Like the burnished spears of a field of gold; When the field-mice rich on the nubbins dine,    And the frost comes white and the wind blows cold; Then its heigho fellows and hi-diddle-diddle, For the time is ripe for the corn-stalk fiddle.  And you take a stalk that is straight and long,    With an expert eye to its worthy points, And you think of the bubbling strains of song    That are bound between its pithy joints— Then you cut out strings, with a bridge in the middle, With a corn-stalk bow for a corn-stalk fiddle.  Then the strains that grow as you draw the bow    O’er the yielding strings with a practiced hand! And the music’s flow never loud but low    Is the concert note of a fairy band. Oh, your dainty songs are a misty riddle To the simple sweets of the corn-stalk fiddle.  When the eve comes on and our work is done    And the sun drops down with a tender glance, With their hearts all prime for the harmless fun,    Come the neighbor girls for the evening’s dance, And they wait for the well-known twist and twiddle, More time than tune—from the corn-stalk fiddle.  Then brother Jabez takes the bow,    While Ned stands off with Susan Bland, Then Henry stops by Milly Snow    And John takes Nellie Jones’s hand, While I pair off with Mandy Biddle, And scrape, scrape, scrape goes the corn-stalk fiddle.  “Salute your partners,” comes the call,    “All join hands and circle round,” “Grand train back,” and “Balance all,”    Footsteps lightly spurn the ground, “Take your lady and balance down the middle” To the merry strains of the corn-stalk fiddle.  So the night goes on and the dance is o’er,    And the merry girls are homeward gone,   But I see it all in my sleep once more,    And I dream till the very break of dawn Of an impish dance on a red-hot griddle To the screech and scrape of a corn-stalk fiddle.  


^^EOP^^

Dare a mighty row in Zion an’ de debbil’s gittin’ high, An’ de saints done beat de sinners, a-cussin’ on de sly; What for it am? you reckon, well, I’ll tell you how it ’gin Twuz ’bout a mighty leetle thing, de linin’ ub de hymns.  De young folks say taint stylish to lin’ out no mo’, Dat dey’s got edikashun, an’ dey wants us all to know Dat dey likes to hab dar singin’ books a-holin’ fore dar eyes, An sing de hymns right straight along to mansion in de skies.  Dat it am awful fogy to gin um out by lin’, An’ ef de ole folks will kumplain ’cause dey is ole an’ blin An’ slabry’s chain don kep dem back from larnin how to read, Dat dey mus’ take a corner seat, and let de young folks lead.  We bin peatin’ hine de pastor when he sez dat lubly pray’r Cause some un us don kno’ it an’ kin not say it squar, But dey sez we mus’ peat wid him, an’ ef we kan keep time, De gospel train will drap us off from follin’ long behin’.  Well p’haps dez’s right, I kin not say, my lims is growin’ ole, But I likes to sing dem dear ole hymns ’tis music to my soul An’ ’pears to me twon’t do much harm to gin um out by lin’, So we ole folk dat kin not read kin foller long behin’.  But few ub us am lef here now dat bore de slabry’s chain, We don edekate our boys an’ gals we’d do de sam’ agin An Zion’s all dat’s lef us now to cheer us wid its song, Dey mought ’low us to sing wid dem, it kin not be fur long.  De sarmons high-falutin’ an’ de chuch am mighty fin’, We trus’ dat God still understans ez he did in olden times; When we do ign’ant po an’ mean still worshiped wid de soul Do oft akross our peac’ful breas’ de wabes ub trouble rolled.  De old time groans an’ shouts an’ moans am passin’ out ub sight, Edikashun changed all dat, and we believe it right: We should serb God wid ’telligence but fur dis thing I plead, Jes lebe a leetle place in chuch fur dem as kin not read.  


^^EOP^^

’Tis strange indeed to hear us plead    For selling and for buying When yesterday we said: “Away    With all good things but dying.”      The world’s ago, and we’re agog    To have our first brief inning; So let’s away through surge and fog    However slight the winning.  What deeds have sprung from plow and pick!    What bank-rolls from tomatoes! No dainty crop of rhetoric    Can match one of potatoes.  Ye orators of point and pith,    Who force the world to heed you, What skeletons you’ll journey with    Ere it is forced to feed you.  A little gold won’t mar our grace,    A little ease our glory. This world’s a better biding place    When money clinks its story.  


^^EOP^^

“Oh! for a thousand tongues to sing    My great Redeemer’s praise: The glories of my Lord and King,    The triumphs of His grace.”  Oh! for a thousand cedar posts    To fence my garden ’round. To hinder the neighbors’ pigs and goats    From rooting up my potato ground.  Oh! for a thousand hickory rails,    To make my fence secure; A thousand patent locks and keys,    To lock my stable door.  Oh! for a thousand bricks and stones,    To build my chimney higher, To keep the neighbors’ boys and girls    From putting out my fire.  Oh! for a thousand old shot guns,    That I might be a match, For all the tramps that I can find    In my watermelon patch.  Oh! for a thousand pumpkin seeds,    To plant for my son John; He says that pumpkin pies are good    When the winter time comes on.  Oh! for a thousand cribs of corn,    Filled chuck up to the beam; And a thousand pails that’s good and strong,    To keep the milk and cream.  Oh! for a thousand turnip bads,    Placed all into a row; Lord! please send a little rain,    To make the ’tatoes grow.  Oh! for a thousand tongues to ask    My maker, who’s on high, To keep my smoke-house filled with meal,    Fat bacon, rock and rye.  Now, Lord, I close my humble prayer,    Which (to some) may seem a vision; Numbers ask for all I’ve named,    Whilst few ask for RELIGION.  


^^EOP^^

The last days of the summer: bright and clear     Shines the warm sun down on the quiet land, Where corn-fields, thick and heavy in the ear,     Are slowly ripening for the laborer’s hand; Seed-time and harvest — since the bow was set, Not vainly has man hoped your coming yet!  To the quick rush of sickles, joyously     The reapers in the yellow wheat-fields sung, And bound the pale sheaves of the ripened rye,     When the first tassels of the maize were hung; That precious seed into the furrow cast Earliest in spring-time, crowns the harvest last.  Ever, when summer’s sun burns faint and dim,     And rare and few the pleasant days are given, When the sweet praise of our thankgiving hymn     Makes beautiful music in the ear of Heaven, I think of other harvests whence the sound Of singing comes not as the sheaves are bound.  Not where the rice-fields whiten in the sun,       And the warm South casts down her yellow fruit, Shout they the labors of the autumn done —         For there Oppression casts her deadly root, And they, who sow and gather in that clime Share not the treasures of the harvest-time.  God of the seasons! thou who didst ordain       Bread for the eater who shall plant the soil, How have they heard thee, who have forged the chain       And built the dungeon for the sons of toil? Burdening their hearts, not with the voice of prayer, But the dull cries of almost dumb despair.  They who would see that growth of wickedness       Planted where now the peaceful prairie waves, And make the green paths of our wilderness       Red with the torn and bleeding feet of slaves — Forbid it, Heaven! and let the sharp axe be Laid at the root of that most poison tree!  Let us behold its deadly leaves begin       A fainter shadow o’er the world to cast, And the long day that nursed its growth of sin       Wane to a sunset that shall be its last; So that the day-star, rising from the sea, Shall light a land whose children will be free!


^^EOP^^

What is a home? A guarded space,    Wherein a few, unfairly blest, Shall sit together, face to face,    And bask and purr and be at rest?  Where cushioned walls rise up between    Its inmates and the common air, The common pain, and pad and screen    From blows of fate or winds of care?  Where Art may blossom strong and free,    And Pleasure furl her silken wing, And every laden moment be    A precious and peculiar thing?  And Past and Future, softly veiled    In hiding mists, shall float and lie Forgotten half, and unassailed    By either hope or memory?  While the luxurious Present weaves    Her perfumed spells untried, untrue, Broiders her garments, heaps her sheaves,    All for the pleasure of a few?  Can it be this, the longed-for thing    Which wanderers on the restless foam, Unsheltered beggars, birds on wing,     Aspire to, dream of, christen ‘Home’?  No. Art may bloom, and peace and bliss;    Grief may refrain and Death forget; But if there be no more than this,    The soul of home is wanting yet.  Dim image from far glory caught,    Fair type of fairer things to be, The true home rises in our thought,    A beacon set for men to see.  Its lamps burn freely in the night,    Its fire-glows unchidden shed Their cheering and abounding light    On homeless folk uncomforted.  Each sweet and secret thing within    Gives out a fragrance on the air,—    A thankful breath, sent forth to win    A little smile from others’ care.  The few, they bask in closer heat;    The many catch the further ray. Life higher seems, the world more sweet,    And hope and Heaven less far away.  So the old miracle anew    Is wrought on earth and provéd good, And crumbs apportioned for a few,    God-Blessed, suffice a multitude.


^^EOP^^




On Hearing Kelley’s Music to ‘Macbeth’



O melody, what children strange are these    From thy most vast, illimitable realm?    These sounds that seize upon and overwhelm    The soul with shuddering ecstasy! Lo! here    The night is, and the deeds that make night fear; Wild winds and waters, and the sough of trees    Tossed in the tempest; wail of spirits banned,    Wandering, unhoused of clay, in the dim land; The incantation of the Sisters Three,    Nameless of deed and name – the mystic chords    Weird repetitions of the mystic words;    The mad, remorseful terrors of the Thane,    And bloody hands – which bloody must remain.    Last, the wild march; the battle hand to hand Of clashing arms, in awful harmony,    Sublimely grand, and terrible as grand! The clan-cries; the barbaric trumpetry;    And the one fateful note, that, throughout all,    Leads, follows, calls, compels, and holds in thrall.


^^EOP^^

O foolish wisdom sought in books!    O aimless fret of household tasks! O chains that bind the hand and mind—      A fuller life my spirit asks!  For there the grand hills, summer-crowned,    Slope greenly downward to the seas; One hour of rest upon their breast    Were worth a year of days like these.  Their cool, soft green to ease the pain    Of eyes that ache o’er printed words; This weary noise – the city’s voice,    Lulled in the sound of bees and birds.  For Eden’s life within me stirs,    And scorns the shackles that I wear; The man-life grand – pure soul, strong hand,    The limb of steel, the heart of air!  And I could kiss, with longing wild,    Earth’s dear brown bosom, loved so much, A grass-blade fanned across my hand,    Would thrill me like a lover’s touch. The trees would talk with me; the flowers    Their hidden meanings each make known—   The olden lore revived once more,    When man’s and nature’s heart were one!  And as the pardoned pair might come    Back to the garden God first framed, And hear Him call at even-fall,    And answer, ‘Here am I,’ unshamed—    So I, from out these toils, wherein    The Eden-faith grows stained and dim, Would walk, a child, through nature’s wild,    And hear His voice and answer Him.


^^EOP^^

O, come erlong, come erlong,       Wut’s de use er hol’in back;    O, hit it strong, er hit it strong,       Mek de ol’ flo’ ben’ an’ crack. O, hoop tee doo, uh, hoop tee doo! Dat’s de way ter knock it froo.              Right erlong, right erlong,          Slide de lef’ foot right erlong.              Hoop tee doo, O, hoop tee doo,          See, my lub, I dawnce ter you.              Ho, boy! Ho, boy!          Well done, meh lady!     O, slide erlong, slide erlong—       Fas’ah wid dat pattin’, Sam!    Dar’s music in dis lef’ heel’s song,         Mis’ah right foot, doan’ you sham! O, hoop tee doo, oh, hoop tee doo! Straight erlong I dawnce ter you.              Slide erlong, slide erlong,          Mek dat right foot hit it strong.              Hoop tee do, O, hoop tee doo,          See, my lub, I dawnce ter you.              Ho, boy! Ho, boy!          Well done, meh lady!


^^EOP^^




               (A Pantoum)



Of making many books there is no end,    Though myriads have to deep oblivion gone; Each day new manuscripts are being penned,    And still the ceaseless tide of ink flows on.  Though myriads have to deep oblivion gone,    New volumes daily issue from the press; And still the ceaseless tide of ink flows on—    The prospect is disheartening, I confess.  New volumes daily issue from the press;    My pile of unread books I view aghast. The prospect is disheartening, I confess;    Why will these modern authors write so fast?  My pile of unread books I view aghast—   Of course I must keep fairly up to date— Why will these modern authors write so fast?    They seem to get ahead of me of late.  Of course I must keep fairly up to date;    The books of special merit I must read; They seem to get ahead of me of late,    Although I skim them very fast indeed.  The books of special merit I must read;    And then the magazines come round again; Although I skim them very fast indeed,    I can’t get through with more than eight or ten.  And then the magazines come round again!    How can we stem this tide of printer’s ink? I can’t get through with more than eight or ten—    It is appalling when I stop to think.  How can we stem this tide of printer’s ink?    Of making many books there is no end. It is appalling when I stop to think    Each day new manuscripts are being penned!


^^EOP^^

Ur ol’ Hyar lib in ur house on de hill, He hunner yurs ol’ an’ nebber wuz ill; He yurs dee so long an’ he eyes so beeg, An’ he laigs so spry dat he dawnce ur jeeg; He lib so long dat he know ebbry tings ’Bout de beas’ses dat walks an’ de bu’ds dat sings—                                         Dis Ol’ Doc’ Hyar,                                         Whar lib up dar Een ur mighty fine house on ur mighty high hill.  He doctah fur all de beas’ses an’ bu’ds— He put on he specs an’ he use beeg wu’ds, He feel dee pu’s’ den he look mighty wise, He pull out he watch an’ he shet bofe eyes; He grab up he hat an’ grab up he cane, Den—“blam!” go de do’—he gone lak de train,                                         Dis Ol’ Doc’ Hyar,                                         Whar lib up dar Een ur mighty fine house on ur mighty high hill.  Mistah Ba’r fall sick—dee sont fur Doc’ Hyar, “O, Doctah, come queeck, an’ see Mr. B’ar; He mighty nigh daid des sho’ ez you b’on!” “Too much ur young peeg, too much ur green co’n,” Ez he put on he hat, said Ol’ Doc’ Hyar; “I’ll tek ’long meh lawnce, an’ lawnce Mistah B’ar,”                                         Said Ol’ Doc’ Hyar,                                         Whar lib up dar Een ur mighty fine house on ur mighty high hill.  Mistah B’ar he groaned, Mistah B’ar he growled, W’ile de ol’ Mis’ B’ar an’ de chillen howled; Doctah Hyar tuk out he sha’p li’l lawnce, An’ pyu’ced Mistah B’ar twel he med him prawnce Den grab up he hat an’ grab up he cane “Blam!” go de do’ an’ he gone lak de train,                                         Dis Ol’ Doc’ Hyar,                                          Whar lib up dar Een ur mighty find house on ur mighty high hill.  But de vay naix day Mistah B’ar he daid; Wen dee tell Doc’ Hyar, he des scratch he haid: “Ef pashons git well ur pashons git wu’s, Money got ter come een de Ol’ Hyar’s pu’s; Not wut folkses does, but fur wut dee know Does de folkses get paid”—an’ Hyar larfed low,                                         Dis sma’t Ol’ Hyar,                                         Whar lib up dar Een mighty fine house on de mighty high hill!  


^^EOP^^

Backward, turn backward, O Time, in your flight, Make me a child again just for tonight! Mother, come back from the echoless shore, Take me again to your heart as of yore; Kiss from my forehead the furrows of care, Smooth the few silver threads out of my hair; Over my slumbers your loving watch keep;—      Rock me to sleep, mother, – rock me to sleep!  Backward, flow backward, O tide of the years! I am so weary of toil and of tears,—      Toil without recompense, tears all in vain,—   Take them, and give me my childhood again! I have grown weary of dust and decay,—    Weary of flinging my soul-wealth away; Weary of sowing for others to reap;—    Rock me to sleep, mother – rock me to sleep!  Tired of the hollow, the base, the untrue, Mother, O mother, my heart calls for you! Many a summer the grass has grown green, Blossomed and faded, our faces between: Yet, with strong yearning and passionate pain, Long I tonight for your presence again. Come from the silence so long and so deep;—    Rock me to sleep, mother, – rock me to sleep!  Over my heart, in the days that are flown, No love like mother-love ever has shone; No other worship abides and endures,—       Faithful, unselfish, and patient like yours: None like a mother can charm away pain From the sick soul and the world-weary brain. Slumber’s soft calms o’er my heavy lids creep;—      Rock me to sleep, mother, – rock me to sleep!  Come, let your brown hair, just lighted with gold, Fall on your shoulders again as of old; Let it drop over my forehead tonight, Shading my faint eyes away from the light; For with its sunny-edged shadows once more Haply will throng the sweet visions of yore; Lovingly, softly, its bright billows sweep;—    Rock me to sleep, mother, – rock me to sleep!  Mother, dear mother, the years have been long Since I last listened your lullaby song: Sing, then, and unto my soul it shall seem Womanhood’s years have been only a dream. Clasped to your heart in a loving embrace, With your light lashes just sweeping my face, Never hereafter to wake or to weep;—      Rock me to sleep, mother, – rock me to sleep!


^^EOP^^




‘This is the key which was given by the angel Michael to Pali, and by Pali to Moses. If “thou canst read it, then shalt thou understand the words of men, … the whistling of birds, the language of date-trees, the unity of hearts, ... nay, even the thoughts of the rains.”’ Gleanings after the Talmud 



Ah! could I read Schemhammphorasch, The wondrous keynote of the world, What voices could I always hear From tempests, with their black wings furled, That on the sudden west winds steer, And, muttering low their awful song, Or pealing through the mountains strong, Robe all the skies with sheeted fire; That pour from heaven a rushing river, That bid the hill-tops bow and quiver, Mad with some fierce and wild desire.  The dreadful anthem of the wind, That sweeps through forests as a plow, That lays the greensward heaped below, Would chant its meaning to my mind, And I could tell the tale to man In words that burn and glow with splendor; Then should the whole wide sky surrender Its hidden voice, its wondrous plan, Asleep since earliest time began; And all my soul, most like a blaze That burns the branches whence it springeth, Should flame to heaven in mightier lays Than any mortal poet singeth, If I could read Schemhammphorasch.  If I could read Schemhammphorasch, When little birds are softly singing, Or twitter from their greenwood nests, Where safe and still the mother rests; Or else, upon the glad wind springing, Send up their tender morning song; Then should I know their secret blisses, The thrill of life and love they feel When summer’s sun their bright heads kisses, Or summer’s winds about them steal. Or, listening to the early blossoms That are so fleeting and so fair, With perfume sighing from their bosoms Its incense on the gracious air, I think that I should hear a prayer So sweet, so patient, and so lowly, That mortal words most pure and rare Would scarce unveil its meaning holy. From forests whence the murmurous leaves Breathe their content in rustling quiver, Or droop when any rain-wind grieves, Or where some broad and brimming river O’erflowing to the mighty sea, Sings the proud joy of destiny, The glad acclaim of life and breath; The courage of confronted death; Ah! what a rapturous, glorious song Should seize with bliss this earthly throng, If I could read Schemhammphorasch!  If I could read Schemhammphorasch, Then should I know the souls of men, Too deep for any other ken; I could translate the silent speech Of glittering eye and knotted brow, Though still the wily tongue might teach A different script with voice and vow. The blood that runs in traitorous veins; The breath that gasps with hope or fear; The stifled sigh, the hidden tear; The death-pang of immortal pains, That hide their mortal agony, Would have their own low voice for me; Their tale of hate and misery, Their sob of passion and despair, Their sacred love, their frantic prayer. My soul would be the listening priest To hear confession far and near, And woe and want from first to least Would shriek its utterance in my ear. Ah, could I bear to live and hear These cries that heaven itself might flee, These terrors heaven alone may see, If I could read Schemhammphorasch?  If I could read Schemhammphorasch, My brain would burn with such a fire As lights the awful cherubim; My heart would burst with woe and ire, My flesh would shrivel and expire; Yea! God himself grow far and dim. I cannot hold the boundless sea In one small chalice lent to me; I cannot grasp the starry sky In one weak hand, and bid it lie Where I would have a canopy; I cannot hate and love together; I cannot poise the heavy world, Or hear its hiss through chaos hurled, Or stay the falling of a feather. No, not if Michael came once more, Standing upon the sea and shore, And held his right hand down to me, That I that awful word might see, And learn to read its lesson dread. My soul in dust would bow her head, Mine eyes would close, my lips would say, ‘Oh, Master! take thy gift away: Leave me to live my little day In peace and trust while yet I may. For could I live, or love, or pray, If I could read Schemhammphorasch?’


^^EOP^^

Methought a sweet sound from the street uprose,—       And as I pause, and strive again to hear, ‘St Patrick’s Day’ draws softly to its close,    And ‘Jordan’s’ waves flow sweetly to my ear, What though from humble source the chorus floats?    Music is music, and I listen still; I have ‘an ear’, — ay, two! — Even jews-harp notes    Pass current with me, hear them where I will, A slight Italian boy, with jetty hair    Shading dark eyes, grinds out the melody, Pulverized music! — In his garb and air    I read of sunnier lands beyond the sea, And, dreaming, wander to a fairer clime, Recalled, too suddenly, by — ‘If you please, a dime!’


^^EOP^^

I saw an eagle sweep to the sky— The Godlike! – seeking his place on high, With a strong, and wild, and rapid wing—A dark, and yet a dazzling thing; And his arching neck, his bristling crest, And the dark plumes quivering upon his breast; And his eye, bent up to each beam of light, Like a bright sword flash’d with a sword in fight.  I saw him rise o’er the forest trees; I saw his pinion ride the breeze; Beyond the clouds I watched him tower On his path of pride – his flight of power. I watched him wheeling, stern and lone, Where the keenest ray of the sun was thrown; Soaring, circling – bathed in light: Such was that desert eagle’s flight.  Suddenly, then, to my straining eye, I saw the strong wing slack on high; Falling, falling to earth once more; The dark breast covered with foam and gore; The dark eyes’ glory dim with pain; Sick to death with a sun-struck brain! Reeling down from that height divine, Eagle of heaven! such fall was thine!  Even so we see the sons of light, Up to the day-beam steer their flight; And the wing of genius cleaves the sky, As the clouds rush on when the winds are high: Then comes the hour of sudden dread—  Then is the blasting sunlight shed; And the gifted fall in their agony, Sund-struck eagle! to die like thee!


^^EOP^^




‘Be not among wine-bibbers; among riotous eaters of flesh; for the drunkard and the glutton shall come to poverty; and drowsiness shall clothe a man with rags.’  Proverbs, 23: 20, 21 



I’ll tell you two fortunes, my fine little lad,       For you to accept or refuse. The one of them good, and the other one bad;       Now hear them, and say which you choose!  I see by my gift, within reach of your hand,       A fortune right fair to behold; A house and a hundred good acres of land,       With harvest fields yellow as gold.  I see a great orchard, the boughs hanging down       With apples of russet and red; I see droves of cattle, some white and brown,       But all of them sleek and well-fed.  I see doves and swallows about the barn doors,       See the fanning-mill whirling so fast, See men that are threshing the wheat on the floors;       And now the bright picture is past!  And I see, rising dismally up in the place       Of the beautiful house and the land, A man with a fire-red nose on his face,       And a little brown jug in his hand!  Oh! if you beheld him, my lad, you would wish       That he were less wretched to see; For his boot-toes, they gape like the mouth of a fish,       And his trousers are out at the knee!  In walking he staggers, now this way, now that,       And his eyes they stand out like a bug’s, And he wears an old coat and a battered-in hat,       And I think that the fault is the jug’s!  For our text says the drunkard shall come to be poor,       And drowsiness clothes men with rags; And he doesn’t look much like a man, I am sure,       Who has honest hard cash in his bags.  Now which will you choose? to be thrifty and snug,       And to be right side up with your dish; Or to go with your eyes like the eyes of a bug,       And your shoes like the mouth of a fish!


^^EOP^^

I am weary of the working,    Weary of the long day’s heat; To thy comfortable bosom,    Wilt thou take me, spirit sweet?  Weary of the long, blind struggle    For a pathway bright and high,— Weary of the dimly dying    Hopes that never quite all die.  Weary searching a bad cipher    For a good that must be meant; Discontent with being weary,—    Weary with my discontent.  I am weary of the trusting    Where my trusts but torments prove; Wilt thou keep faith with me? wilt thou    Be my true and tender love?  I am weary drifting, driving    Like a helmless bark at sea; Kindly, comfortable spirit,    Wilt thou give thyself to me?  Give thy birds to sing me sonnets?    Give thy winds my cheeks to kiss? And thy mossy rocks to stand for    The memorials of our bliss?  I in reverence will hold thee,    Never vexed with jealous ills, Though thy wild and wimpling waters    Wind about a thousand hills.


^^EOP^^




                                  FOR EZRA POUND
                                IL MIGLIOR FABBRO



              I. The Burial of the Dead 
  April is the cruellest month, breeding
Lilacs out of the dead land, mixing
Memory and desire, stirring
Dull roots with spring rain.
Winter kept us warm, covering
Earth in forgetful snow, feeding
A little life with dried tubers.
Summer surprised us, coming over the Starnbergersee
With a shower of rain; we stopped in the colonnade,
And went on in sunlight, into the Hofgarten,
And drank coffee, and talked for an hour.
Bin gar keine Russin, stamm’ aus Litauen, echt deutsch.
And when we were children, staying at the arch-duke’s,
My cousin’s, he took me out on a sled,
And I was frightened. He said, Marie,
Marie, hold on tight. And down we went.
In the mountains, there you feel free.
I read, much of the night, and go south in the winter. 
  What are the roots that clutch, what branches grow
Out of this stony rubbish? Son of man,
You cannot say, or guess, for you know only
A heap of broken images, where the sun beats,
And the dead tree gives no shelter, the cricket no relief,
And the dry stone no sound of water. Only
There is shadow under this red rock,
(Come in under the shadow of this red rock),
And I will show you something different from either
Your shadow at morning striding behind you
Or your shadow at evening rising to meet you;
I will show you fear in a handful of dust.                       Frisch weht der Wind                       Der Heimat zu                       Mein Irisch Kind,                       Wo weilest du?
“You gave me hyacinths first a year ago;
“They called me the hyacinth girl.”
—Yet when we came back, late, from the Hyacinth garden,
Your arms full, and your hair wet, I could not
Speak, and my eyes failed, I was neither
Living nor dead, and I knew nothing,
Looking into the heart of light, the silence. Oed’ und leer das Meer. 
  Madame Sosostris, famous clairvoyante,
Had a bad cold, nevertheless
Is known to be the wisest woman in Europe,
With a wicked pack of cards. Here, said she,
Is your card, the drowned Phoenician Sailor,
(Those are pearls that were his eyes. Look!)
Here is Belladonna, the Lady of the Rocks,
The lady of situations.
Here is the man with three staves, and here the Wheel,
And here is the one-eyed merchant, and this card,
Which is blank, is something he carries on his back,
Which I am forbidden to see. I do not find
The Hanged Man. Fear death by water.
I see crowds of people, walking round in a ring.
Thank you. If you see dear Mrs. Equitone,
Tell her I bring the horoscope myself:
One must be so careful these days. 
  Unreal City,
Under the brown fog of a winter dawn,
A crowd flowed over London Bridge, so many,
I had not thought death had undone so many.
Sighs, short and infrequent, were exhaled,
And each man fixed his eyes before his feet.
Flowed up the hill and down King William Street,
To where Saint Mary Woolnoth kept the hours
With a dead sound on the final stroke of nine.
There I saw one I knew, and stopped him, crying: “Stetson!
“You who were with me in the ships at Mylae!
“That corpse you planted last year in your garden,
“Has it begun to sprout? Will it bloom this year?
“Or has the sudden frost disturbed its bed?
“Oh keep the Dog far hence, that’s friend to men,
“Or with his nails he’ll dig it up again!
“You! hypocrite lecteur!—mon semblable,—mon frère!”  
              II. A Game of Chess 
The Chair she sat in, like a burnished throne,
Glowed on the marble, where the glass
Held up by standards wrought with fruited vines
From which a golden Cupidon peeped out
(Another hid his eyes behind his wing)
Doubled the flames of sevenbranched candelabra
Reflecting light upon the table as
The glitter of her jewels rose to meet it,
From satin cases poured in rich profusion;
In vials of ivory and coloured glass
Unstoppered, lurked her strange synthetic perfumes,
Unguent, powdered, or liquid—troubled, confused
And drowned the sense in odours; stirred by the air
That freshened from the window, these ascended
In fattening the prolonged candle-flames,
Flung their smoke into the laquearia,
Stirring the pattern on the coffered ceiling.
Huge sea-wood fed with copper
Burned green and orange, framed by the coloured stone,
In which sad light a carvéd dolphin swam.
Above the antique mantel was displayed
As though a window gave upon the sylvan scene
The change of Philomel, by the barbarous king
So rudely forced; yet there the nightingale
Filled all the desert with inviolable voice
And still she cried, and still the world pursues,
“Jug Jug” to dirty ears.
And other withered stumps of time
Were told upon the walls; staring forms
Leaned out, leaning, hushing the room enclosed.
Footsteps shuffled on the stair.
Under the firelight, under the brush, her hair
Spread out in fiery points
Glowed into words, then would be savagely still. 
  “My nerves are bad tonight. Yes, bad. Stay with me.
“Speak to me. Why do you never speak. Speak.
  “What are you thinking of? What thinking? What?
“I never know what you are thinking. Think.” 
  I think we are in rats’ alley
Where the dead men lost their bones. 
  “What is that noise?”
                          The wind under the door.
“What is that noise now? What is the wind doing?”
                           Nothing again nothing.
                                                        “Do
“You know nothing? Do you see nothing? Do you remember
“Nothing?” 
       I remember
Those are pearls that were his eyes.
“Are you alive, or not? Is there nothing in your head?”   
          
                                                                           But
O O O O that Shakespeherian Rag—
It’s so elegant
So intelligent
“What shall I do now? What shall I do?”
“I shall rush out as I am, and walk the street
“With my hair down, so. What shall we do tomorrow?
“What shall we ever do?”
                                               The hot water at ten.
And if it rains, a closed car at four.
And we shall play a game of chess,
Pressing lidless eyes and waiting for a knock upon the door. 
  When Lil’s husband got demobbed, I said—
I didn’t mince my words, I said to her myself,
HURRY UP PLEASE ITS TIME
Now Albert’s coming back, make yourself a bit smart.
He’ll want to know what you done with that money he gave you
To get yourself some teeth. He did, I was there.
You have them all out, Lil, and get a nice set,
He said, I swear, I can’t bear to look at you.
And no more can’t I, I said, and think of poor Albert,
He’s been in the army four years, he wants a good time,
And if you don’t give it him, there’s others will, I said.
Oh is there, she said. Something o’ that, I said.
Then I’ll know who to thank, she said, and give me a straight look.
HURRY UP PLEASE ITS TIME
If you don’t like it you can get on with it, I said.
Others can pick and choose if you can’t.
But if Albert makes off, it won’t be for lack of telling.
You ought to be ashamed, I said, to look so antique.
(And her only thirty-one.)
I can’t help it, she said, pulling a long face,
It’s them pills I took, to bring it off, she said.
(She’s had five already, and nearly died of young George.)
The chemist said it would be all right, but I’ve never been the same.
You are a proper fool, I said.
Well, if Albert won’t leave you alone, there it is, I said,
What you get married for if you don’t want children?
HURRY UP PLEASE ITS TIME
Well, that Sunday Albert was home, they had a hot gammon,
And they asked me in to dinner, to get the beauty of it hot—
HURRY UP PLEASE ITS TIME
HURRY UP PLEASE ITS TIME
Goonight Bill. Goonight Lou. Goonight May. Goonight.
Ta ta. Goonight. Goonight.
Good night, ladies, good night, sweet ladies, good night, good night.  
              III. The Fire Sermon 
  The river’s tent is broken: the last fingers of leaf
Clutch and sink into the wet bank. The wind
Crosses the brown land, unheard. The nymphs are departed.
Sweet Thames, run softly, till I end my song.
The river bears no empty bottles, sandwich papers,
Silk handkerchiefs, cardboard boxes, cigarette ends
Or other testimony of summer nights. The nymphs are departed.
And their friends, the loitering heirs of city directors;
Departed, have left no addresses.
By the waters of Leman I sat down and wept . . .
Sweet Thames, run softly till I end my song,
Sweet Thames, run softly, for I speak not loud or long.
But at my back in a cold blast I hear
The rattle of the bones, and chuckle spread from ear to ear. 
A rat crept softly through the vegetation
Dragging its slimy belly on the bank
While I was fishing in the dull canal
On a winter evening round behind the gashouse
Musing upon the king my brother’s wreck
And on the king my father’s death before him.
White bodies naked on the low damp ground
And bones cast in a little low dry garret,
Rattled by the rat’s foot only, year to year.
But at my back from time to time I hear
The sound of horns and motors, which shall bring
Sweeney to Mrs. Porter in the spring.
O the moon shone bright on Mrs. Porter
And on her daughter
They wash their feet in soda water Et O ces voix d’enfants, chantant dans la coupole!  
Twit twit twit
Jug jug jug jug jug jug
So rudely forc’d.
Tereu 
Unreal City
Under the brown fog of a winter noon
Mr. Eugenides, the Smyrna merchant
Unshaven, with a pocket full of currants
C.i.f. London: documents at sight,
Asked me in demotic French
To luncheon at the Cannon Street Hotel
Followed by a weekend at the Metropole. 
At the violet hour, when the eyes and back
Turn upward from the desk, when the human engine waits
Like a taxi throbbing waiting,
I Tiresias, though blind, throbbing between two lives,
Old man with wrinkled female breasts, can see
At the violet hour, the evening hour that strives
Homeward, and brings the sailor home from sea,
The typist home at teatime, clears her breakfast, lights
Her stove, and lays out food in tins.
Out of the window perilously spread
Her drying combinations touched by the sun’s last rays,
On the divan are piled (at night her bed)
Stockings, slippers, camisoles, and stays.
I Tiresias, old man with wrinkled dugs
Perceived the scene, and foretold the rest—
I too awaited the expected guest.
He, the young man carbuncular, arrives,
A small house agent’s clerk, with one bold stare,
One of the low on whom assurance sits
As a silk hat on a Bradford millionaire.
The time is now propitious, as he guesses,
The meal is ended, she is bored and tired,
Endeavours to engage her in caresses
Which still are unreproved, if undesired.
Flushed and decided, he assaults at once;
Exploring hands encounter no defence;
His vanity requires no response,
And makes a welcome of indifference.
(And I Tiresias have foresuffered all
Enacted on this same divan or bed;
I who have sat by Thebes below the wall
And walked among the lowest of the dead.)
Bestows one final patronising kiss,
And gropes his way, finding the stairs unlit . . . 
She turns and looks a moment in the glass,
Hardly aware of her departed lover;
Her brain allows one half-formed thought to pass:
“Well now that’s done: and I’m glad it’s over.”
When lovely woman stoops to folly and
Paces about her room again, alone,
She smoothes her hair with automatic hand,
And puts a record on the gramophone. 
“This music crept by me upon the waters”
And along the Strand, up Queen Victoria Street.
O City city, I can sometimes hear
Beside a public bar in Lower Thames Street,
The pleasant whining of a mandoline
And a clatter and a chatter from within
Where fishmen lounge at noon: where the walls
Of Magnus Martyr hold
Inexplicable splendour of Ionian white and gold. 
               The river sweats
               Oil and tar
               The barges drift
               With the turning tide
               Red sails
               Wide
               To leeward, swing on the heavy spar.
               The barges wash
               Drifting logs
               Down Greenwich reach
               Past the Isle of Dogs.
                                 Weialala leia
                                 Wallala leialala 
               Elizabeth and Leicester
               Beating oars
               The stern was formed
               A gilded shell
               Red and gold
               The brisk swell
               Rippled both shores
               Southwest wind
               Carried down stream
               The peal of bells
               White towers
                                Weialala leia
                                Wallala leialala 
“Trams and dusty trees.
Highbury bore me. Richmond and Kew
Undid me. By Richmond I raised my knees
Supine on the floor of a narrow canoe.” 
“My feet are at Moorgate, and my heart
Under my feet. After the event
He wept. He promised a ‘new start.’
I made no comment. What should I resent?” 
“On Margate Sands.
I can connect
Nothing with nothing.
The broken fingernails of dirty hands.
My people humble people who expect
Nothing.”
                       la la 
To Carthage then I came 
Burning burning burning burning
O Lord Thou pluckest me out
O Lord Thou pluckest 
burning  
              IV. Death by Water 
Phlebas the Phoenician, a fortnight dead,
Forgot the cry of gulls, and the deep sea swell
And the profit and loss.
                                   A current under sea
Picked his bones in whispers. As he rose and fell
He passed the stages of his age and youth
Entering the whirlpool.
                                   Gentile or Jew
O you who turn the wheel and look to windward,
Consider Phlebas, who was once handsome and tall as you.  
              V. What the Thunder Said 
  After the torchlight red on sweaty faces
After the frosty silence in the gardens
After the agony in stony places
The shouting and the crying
Prison and palace and reverberation
Of thunder of spring over distant mountains
He who was living is now dead
We who were living are now dying
With a little patience 
Here is no water but only rock
Rock and no water and the sandy road
The road winding above among the mountains
Which are mountains of rock without water
If there were water we should stop and drink
Amongst the rock one cannot stop or think
Sweat is dry and feet are in the sand
If there were only water amongst the rock
Dead mountain mouth of carious teeth that cannot spit
Here one can neither stand nor lie nor sit
There is not even silence in the mountains
But dry sterile thunder without rain
There is not even solitude in the mountains
But red sullen faces sneer and snarl
From doors of mudcracked houses
                                      If there were water
   And no rock
   If there were rock
   And also water
   And water
   A spring
   A pool among the rock
   If there were the sound of water only
   Not the cicada
   And dry grass singing
   But sound of water over a rock
   Where the hermit-thrush sings in the pine trees
   Drip drop drip drop drop drop drop
   But there is no water 
Who is the third who walks always beside you?
When I count, there are only you and I together
But when I look ahead up the white road
There is always another one walking beside you
Gliding wrapt in a brown mantle, hooded
I do not know whether a man or a woman
—But who is that on the other side of you? 
What is that sound high in the air
Murmur of maternal lamentation
Who are those hooded hordes swarming
Over endless plains, stumbling in cracked earth
Ringed by the flat horizon only
What is the city over the mountains
Cracks and reforms and bursts in the violet air
Falling towers
Jerusalem Athens Alexandria
Vienna London
Unreal 
A woman drew her long black hair out tight
And fiddled whisper music on those strings
And bats with baby faces in the violet light
Whistled, and beat their wings
And crawled head downward down a blackened wall
And upside down in air were towers
Tolling reminiscent bells, that kept the hours
And voices singing out of empty cisterns and exhausted wells. 
In this decayed hole among the mountains
In the faint moonlight, the grass is singing
Over the tumbled graves, about the chapel
There is the empty chapel, only the wind’s home.
It has no windows, and the door swings,
Dry bones can harm no one.
Only a cock stood on the rooftree
Co co rico co co rico
In a flash of lightning. Then a damp gust
Bringing rain 
Ganga was sunken, and the limp leaves
Waited for rain, while the black clouds
Gathered far distant, over Himavant.
The jungle crouched, humped in silence.
Then spoke the thunder
DA Datta: what have we given?
My friend, blood shaking my heart
The awful daring of a moment’s surrender
Which an age of prudence can never retract
By this, and this only, we have existed
Which is not to be found in our obituaries
Or in memories draped by the beneficent spider
Or under seals broken by the lean solicitor
In our empty rooms
DA Dayadhvam: I have heard the key
Turn in the door once and turn once only
We think of the key, each in his prison
Thinking of the key, each confirms a prison
Only at nightfall, aethereal rumours
Revive for a moment a broken Coriolanus
DA Damyata: The boat responded
Gaily, to the hand expert with sail and oar
The sea was calm, your heart would have responded
Gaily, when invited, beating obedient
To controlling hands
 
                                    I sat upon the shore
Fishing, with the arid plain behind me
Shall I at least set my lands in order?
London Bridge is falling down falling down falling down Poi s’ascose nel foco che gli affina Quando fiam uti chelidon—O swallow swallow Le Prince d’Aquitaine à la tour abolie
These fragments I have shored against my ruins
Why then Ile fit you. Hieronymo’s mad againe.
Datta. Dayadhvam. Damyata.
                  Shantih     shantih     shantih


^^EOP^^

I sit in my sorrow a-weary, alone;     I have nothing sweet to hope or remember, For the spring o’ th’ year and of life has flown;     ’Tis the wildest night o’ the wild December,   And dark in my spirit and dark in my chamber.  I sit and list to the steps in the street,     Going and coming, and coming and going, And the winds at my shutter they blow and beat;     ’Tis the middle of night and the clouds are snowing;     And the winds are bitterly beating and blowing.  I list to the steps as they come and go,     And list to the winds that are beating and blowing, And my heart sinks down so low, so low;     No step is stayed from me by the snowing,     Nor stayed by the wind so bitterly blowing.  I think of the ships that are out at sea,     Of the wheels in th’ cold, black waters turning; Not one of the ships beareth news to me,     And my head is sick, and my heart is yearning,     As I think of the wheels in the black waters turning.  Of the mother I think, by her sick baby’s bed,     Away in her cabin as lonesome and dreary, And little and low as the flax-breaker’s shed;     Of her patience so sweet, and her silence so weary,     With cries of the hungry wolf hid in the prairie.  I think of all things in the world that are sad;     Of children in homesick and comfortless places; Of prisons, of dungeons, of men that are mad;     Of wicked, unwomanly light in the faces     Of women that fortune has wronged with disgraces.  I think of a dear little sun-lighted head,     That came where no hand of us all could deliver; And crazed with the cruelest pain went to bed     Where the sheets were the foam-fretted waves of the river;     Poor darling! may God in his mercy forgive her.  The footsteps grow faint and more faint in the snow;     I put back the curtain in very despairing; The masts creak and groan as th’ winds come and go;     And the light in the light-house all weirdly is flaring;     But what glory is this, in the gloom of despairing!  I see at the window just over the street,     A maid in the lamplight her love-letter reading. Her red mouth is smiling, her news is so sweet;     And the heart in my bosom is cured of its bleeding,     As I look on the maiden her love-letter reading.  She has finished the letter, and folding it, kisses,     And hides it — a secret too sacred to know; And now in the hearth-light she softly undresses:     A vision of grace in the roseate glow,     I see her unbinding the braids of her tresses.  And now as she stoops to the ribbon that fastens     Her slipper, they tumble o’er shoulder and face; And now, as she patters in bare feet, she hastens     To gather them up in a fillet of lace;     And now she is gone, but in fancy I trace  The lavendered linen updrawn, the round arm     Half sunk in the counterpane’s broidered roses, Revealing the exquisite outline of form;     A willowy wonder of grace that reposes     Beneath the white counterpane, fleecy with roses.  I see the small hand lying over the heart,     Where the passionate dreams are so sweet in their sally; The fair little fingers they tremble and part,     As part to th’ warm waves the leaves of the lily,     And they play with her hand like the waves with the lily.  In white fleecy flowers, the queen o’ the flowers!     What to her is the world with its bad, bitter weather? Wide she opens her arms — ah, her world is not ours!     And now she has closed them and clasped them together —     What to her is our world, with its clouds and rough weather?  Hark! midnight! the winds and the snows blow and beat;     I drop down the curtain and say to my sorrow, Thank God for the window just over the street;     Thank God there is always a light whence to borrow     When darkness is darkest, and sorrow most sorrow.


^^EOP^^

I couldn't have waited. By the time you return it would have rotted on the vine. So I cut the first tomato into eighths, salted the pieces in the dusk and found the flesh not mealy (like last year's) or bitter, even when I swallowed the green crown of the stem that made my throat feel dusty and warm.  Pah. I could have gagged on the sweetness. The miser accused by her red sums. Better had I eaten the dirt itself on this the first night in my life when I have not been too busy for my loneliness— at last, it comes.


^^EOP^^




Highlight Actions
Enable or disable annotations




The Christmas twigs crispencrispen To make crisp and needles rattle
Along the window-ledge.
             A solitary pearl
Shed from the necklace spilled at last week’s party
Lies in the suety,suety Fatty; from suet, an animal fat used in cooking to create tallow snow-luminous plainness
Of morning, on the window-ledge beside them.   
And all the furniture that circled stately
And hospitable when these rooms were brimmed
With perfumes, furs, and black-and-silver
Crisscross of seasonal conversation, lapses
Into its previous largeness.
             I remember   
Anne’s rose-sweet gravity, and the stiff grave
Where cold so little can contain;
I mark the queer delightful skull and crossbones
Starlings and sparrows left, taking the crust,
And the long loop of winter wind
Smoothing its arc from dark ArcturusArcturus The brightest star in the northern sky, located in the constellation Boötes  down
To the bricked corner of the drifted courtyard,
And the still window-ledge.
             Gentle and just pleasure
It is, being human, to have won from space
This unchill,unchill Warmed, thawed  habitable interior
Which mirrors quietly the light
Of the snow, and the new year.


^^EOP^^

I.
I’m trying to spell out a state of amazement,
A sweet dilation, the sway of spirit,
That only finds room in your shape.
They say that
Transposed in our alphabet
A Chinese sentence can turn into
A series of one and the same conjunction.
For instance: “And and. And and and. And and and and.”
This is a genuine transcription of the beautiful poem
“The Dance of the Yangtze River Valley
And the Yangtze River.” 
II.
Well, how many miracles, how many Chinese miracles,
Have I missed this time?
Too shrunk within the heart of Europe,
Stuck to Greek reason,
Spoiled by syllogism,
And born too late for the Far East! 
III.
No one gave me a silk scroll as a present
At the time of the Han dynasty,
Much less during the coming ones.
My feet didn’t develop corns on the silk road,
My shadow didn’t pass on the winding way
To take the desert oases in its arms.
I never wrapped my shoulders
In the wavy mantle of the Yellow River. 
In 120 B.C.
I didn’t show myself — idiot! —
At the Music Chamber.
What melodies I could have heard!
My ear, a shell devoid of the sea’s roar,
Missed the treasure of sounds
Invading north to south.
Would I have still remained
With so many uncertainties? 
IV.
I was late to the contest of impromptu poems
And didn’t make libations to the Muse
Along with Wang Xizhi.
I wish I’d seen how they spelled
“The literary spirit and the dragon engravings.”
Humble observer, hidden in a fold of time,
I wish I could participate unseen
In the painting of the world’s first landscape.
It would have included me no doubt
As an accident on the horizon,
A leaf on the sky’s water.
I wish I’d been a judge when the names were checked
Or, lazily lying in the Doctrine of the Great Vehicle,
I wish I’d wandered beyond nature’s limits,
And been struck by the sensation of a universal vacuum. 
V.
I wonder if
The five rice measures
Would have finally revealed
The vital principle. 
VI.
Can’t you say anything,
Beautifully written character?
The Great Wall fits into you
Like the moon in a cacoon.
Open the silk door a moment
And let this state of amazement in —
Include this lotus flower
In your closed-circuit breath. 
Why are you so silent,
When you used to tell me about all these things?


^^EOP^^

quincunx of succulents
subtle colors and forms
succinct in dust 
appropriate the pot
assigned, set each
for spill into Other 
always my core dream
winding a garden
secret in every sense


^^EOP^^

                                    I  Behoild Pelides with his yellow hair, Proud child of Thetis, hero loved of Jove; Above the frowning of his brows of wove A crown of gold, well combed, with Spartan care. Who might have seen him, sullen, great, and fair, As with the wrongful world he proudly strove, And by high deeds his wilder passion shrove, Mastering love, resentment, and despair. He knew his end, and Phoebus’ arrow sure He braved for fame immortal and a friend, Despising life; and we, who know our end, Know that in our decay he shall endure And all our children’s hearts to grief inure, With whose first bitter battles his shall blend.                                      II  Who brought thee forth, immortal vision, who In Phthia or in Tempe brought thee forth? Out of the sunlight and the sapful earth What god the simples of thy spirit drew? A goddess rose from the green waves, and threw Her arms about a king, to give thee birth; A centaur, patron of thy boyish mirth, Over the meadows in thy footsteps flew. Now Thessaly forgets thee, and the deep Thy keeled bark furrowed answers not thy prayer; But far away new generations keep Thy laurels fresh; where branching Isis hems The lawns of Oxford round about, or where Enchanted Eton sits by pleasant Thames.                                      III  I gaze on thee as Phidias of old Or Polyclitus gazed, when first he saw These hard and shining limbs, without a flaw, And cast his wonder in heroic mould. Unhappy me who only may behold, Nor make immutable and fix in awe A fair immortal form no worm shall gnaw, A tempered mind whose faith was never told! The godlike mien, the lion’s lock and eye, The well-knit sinew, utter a brave heart Better than many words that part by part Spell in strange symbols what serene and whole In nature lives, nor can in marble die. The perfect body itself the soul.


^^EOP^^

After you’ve learned to walk,
Tell one thing from another,
Your first care as a child
Is to get used to your name.
What is it?
They keep asking you.
You hesitate, stammer,
And when you start to give a fluent answer
Your name’s no longer a problem. 
When you start to forget your name,
It’s very serious.
But don’t despair,
An interval will set in. 
And soon after your death,
When the mist rises from your eyes,
And you begin to find your way
In the everlasting darkness,
Your first care (long forgotten,
Long since buried with you)
Is to get used to your name.
You’re called — just as arbitrarily —
Dandelion, cowslip, cornel,
Blackbird, chaffinch, turtle dove,
Costmary, zephyr — or all these together.
And when you nod, to show you’ve got it,
Everything’s all right:
The earth, almost round, may spin
Like a top among stars.


^^EOP^^

Saved two children last night.
They lay under thin black ice
one gone blue, the other grey.
I laid them out on grass
that snapped under my step
wrung their bodies warm and dry
gave them the gust of my breath.

Then I looked out at the morning
that lay lukewarm on the water
put on a tank top
arranged some grasses in a vase
fished two children out of sleep.


^^EOP^^

All the museums are afraid of me,
Because each time I spend a whole day
In front of a painting
The next day they announce
The painting’s disappeared. 
Every night I’m caught stealing
In another part of the world,
But I don’t even care
About the bullets hissing toward my ear,
And the police dogs who are onto
The smell of my tracks,
Better than lovers who know
The perfume of their mistress. 
I talk to the canvases that put my life in danger,
Hang them from clouds and trees,
Step back for some perspective.
You can easily engage the Italian masters in conversation. 
What noise of colors!
And hence I’m caught
Very quickly with them,
Seen and heard from a distance
As if I had a parrot in my arms. 
The hardest to steal is Rembrandt:
Stretch a hand out, there’s darkness —
The terror seizes you, his men don’t have bodies,
Just closed eyes in dark cellars. 
Van Gogh’s canvases are insane,
They whirl and roll their heads,
And you have to hold on tight
With both hands,
They’re sucked by a force from the moon. 
I don’t know why, Breughel makes me want to cry.
He wasn’t any older than me,
But they called him the old man
Because he knew it all when he died. 
I try to learn from him too
But can’t stop my tears
From flowing over the gold frames
When I run off with The Four Seasons under my armpits. 
As I was saying, every night
I steal one painting
With enviable dexterity.
But the road’s very long 
So I’m caught in the end
And get home late at night
Tired and torn to shreds by dogs
Holding a cheap imitation in my hands.


^^EOP^^

Lincoln? He was a mystery in smoke and flags Saying yes to the smoke, yes to the flags, Yes to the paradoxes of democracy, Yes to the hopes of government Of the people by the people for the people, No to debauchery of the public mind, No to personal malice nursed and fed, Yes to the Constitution when a help, No to the Constitution when a hindrance Yes to man as a struggler amid illusions, Each man fated to answer for himself: Which of the faiths and illusions of mankind Must I choose for my own sustaining light To bring me beyond the present wilderness?         Lincoln? Was he a poet?        And did he write verses? “I have not willingly planted a thorn        in any man’s bosom.” I shall do nothing through malice: what        I deal with is too vast for malice.”  Death was in the air. So was birth.


^^EOP^^

Oh you saints,
Let me enter your society,
If only as a statistician. 
You’re old,
Perhaps the years are
Getting you down by now,
Laying themselves over you
In layers of color. 
Just let me take care
Of your dirty work in
All the nooks and crannies. 
For example I could
Swallow light
At the Last Supper
And exhale your halos
After the devotionals. 
From time to time,
At a distance of half a wall,
I could
Form my hands into a horn
And shout,
Now for the believers,
Now for the unbelievers
Hallelujah! Hallelujah!


^^EOP^^

MARIA NEFELE:
   I walk in thorns in the dark  
   of what’s to happen and what has
   with my only weapon my only defense
   my nails purple like cyclamens.  ANTIPHONIST:       
   I saw her everywhere. Holding a glass and staring in space. Lying down
   listening to records. Walking the streets in wide trousers and an old
   gabardine. In front of children’s-store windows. Sadder then. And in
   discotheques, more nervous, eating her nails. She smokes innumerable
   cigarettes. She is pale and beautiful. But if you talk to her she doesn’t hear
   at all. As if something is happening – she alone hears it and is frightened.
   She holds your hand tight, tears, but is not there. I never touched her and I
   never took from her anything.  MN:
   He understood nothing. He kept asking all the time “Remember?” What’s to
   remember? My dreams alone I remember because I see them at night. Days
   I feel bad – how to say: unprepared. I found myself so suddenly, in life –
   where I’d hardly expected. I’d say “Bah, I’ll get used to it.” And everything
   around me ran. Things and people ran, ran – until I set myself to run like
   crazy. But, it seems, I overdid. Because – I don’t know – something strange
   happened in the end. First I’d see the corpse and then the murder. First
   came the blood and then the blow and cry. And now, when I hear rain I don’t
   know what’s waiting...  A:
   “Why don’t they bury people standing up like archbishops?” – that’s what
   she’d say to me. And once, I remember, summer on the island, all of us
   coming from a party, dawn, we jumped over the bars of the museum’s
   garden. She danced on the stones and she saw nothing.  MN:
   I saw his eyes.  I saw some old olive groves.  A:
   I saw a column on a grave. A girl in relief on the stone. She seemed sad
   and held a small bird in her cupped hand.  MN:
   He was looking at me, I know, he was looking at me. We both were looking
   at the same stone. We looked at each other through the stone.  A:
   She was calm and in her palm she held a small bird.  MN: 
   She was sitting and she was dead.  A: 
   She was sitting and in her palm she held a small bird.
   You’ll never hold a bird like that – you aren’t able.  MN:
   Oh if they let me, if they let me.  A:
   If who let you?  MN:
   The one who lets nothing.  A:
   He, he who lets nothing
   is cut by his shadow and walks away.  MN:
   His words are white and unspeakable
   his eyes deep and without sleep...  A:
   But the whole upper part of the stone was taken. And with it her name.  MN:
   ARIMNA – as if I could still see the letters carved inside the light...
   ARIMNA EFE EL...  A:
   Gone. The whole top gone. There were no letters at all.  MN:
   ARIMNA EFE EL – there, on the EL the stone had cut and broken. I remember
   it well.  A:
   She must have seen it in a dream since she remembers.  MN:
   In my dreams, yes. In a large sleep that will come sometimes all light and
   heat and small stony steps. The children will walk in the streets arm in arm   
   like in some old Italian movies. Song everywhere and enormous women in
   small balconies watering their flowers.  A:
   A large blue balloon will take us high then, here and there, the wind will beat
   us. The silver domes will stand out first, then the belfries. The streets will
   appear narrower and straighter than we imagined. The terraces with the
   white television antennas. And all around the hills, and the kites – so close
   we’ll just shave past them. Until one moment we’ll see the whole sea. On it
   the souls will be leaving small white steams.  MN:
   I have lifted my hand against the mountains, the dark and the demonic of
   this world. I’ve asked love “Why?” and rolled her on the floor. War and war
   and not one rag to hide deep in our things and forget. Who listens? Who
   listened? Judges, priests, police, which is your country? One body is left me
   and I give it. On it those who know cultivate the holy, as the gardeners in
   Holland, tulips. And in it drown who never learned of sea or swimming... Flux
   of the sea and you stars’ distant influx – stand by me!  A:
   I have lifted my hand against the
   unexorcised demons of the world
   and from the place of illness I have exited
   to the sun and to the light self-exiled!  MN:
   And from too many storms I’ve exited
   self among humans exiled!


^^EOP^^

Carried her unprotesting out the door.
Kicked back the casket-stand. But it can't hold her,
That stuff and satin aiming to enfold her,
The lid's contrition nor the bolts before.
Oh oh. Too much. Too much. Even now, surmise,
She rises in the sunshine. There she goes,
Back to the bars she knew and the repose
In love-rooms and the things in people's eyes.
Too vital and too squeaking. Must emerge.
Even now she does the snake-hips with a hiss,
Slops the bad wine across her shantung, talks
Of pregnancy, guitars and bridgework, walks
In parks or alleys, comes haply on the verge
Of happiness, haply hysterics. Is.


^^EOP^^

The Year’s twelve daughters had in turn gone by, Of measured pace tho’ varying mien all twelve, Some froward, some sedater, some adorn’d For festival, some reckless of attire. The snow had left the mountain-top; fresh flowers Had withered in the meadow; fig and prune Hung wrinkling; the last apple glow’d amid Its freckled leaves; and weary oxen blinkt Between the trodden corn and twisted vine, Under whose bunches stood the empty crate, To creak ere long beneath them carried home. This was the season when twelve months before, O gentle Hamadryad, true to love! Thy mansion, thy dim mansion in the wood Was blasted and laid desolate: but none Dared violate its precincts, none dared pluck The moss beneath it, which alone remain’d Of what was thine.                              Old Thallinos sat mute In solitary sadness. The strange tale (Not until Rhaicos died, but then the whole) Echion had related, whom no force Could ever make look back upon the oaks. The father said “Echion! thou must weigh, Carefully, and with steady hand, enough (Although no longer comes the store as once!) Of wax to burn all day and night upon That hollow stone where milk and honey lie: So may the Gods, so may the dead, be pleas’d!” Thallinos bore it thither in the morn, And lighted it and left it.                                            First of those Who visited upon this solemn day The Hamadryad’s oak, were Rhodope And Acon; of one age, one hope, one trust. Graceful was she as was the nymph whose fate She sorrowed for: he slender, pale, and first  Lapt by the flame of love: his father’s lands Were fertile, herds lowed over them afar. Now stood the two aside the hollow stone And lookt with stedfast eyes toward the oak Shivered and black and bare.                                             “May never we Love as they loved!” said Acon. She at this Smiled, for he said not what he meant to say, And thought not of its bliss, but of its end. He caught the flying smile, and blusht, and vow’d Nor time nor other power, whereto the might Of love hath yielded and may yield again, Should alter his.                             The father of the youth Wanted not beauty for him, wanted not Song, that could lift earth’s weight from off his heart, Discretion, that could guide him thro’ the world, Innocence, that could clear his way to heaven; Silver and gold and land, not green before The ancestral gate, but purple under skies Bending far off, he wanted for his heir.         Fathers have given life, but virgin heart They never gave; and dare they then control Or check it harshly? dare they break a bond Girt round it by the holiest Power on high?         Acon was grieved, he said, grieved bitterly, But Acon had complied . . ’twas dutiful!         Crush thy own heart, Man! Man! but fear to wound The gentler, that relies on thee alone, By thee created, weak or strong by thee; Touch it not but for worship; watch before Its sanctuary; nor leave it till are closed The temple-doors and the last lamp is spent.         Rhodope, in her soul’s waste solitude, Sate mournful by the dull-resounding sea, Often not hearing it, and many tears Had the cold breezes hardened on her cheek. Meanwhile he sauntered in the wood of oaks, Nor shun’d to look upon the hollow stone That held the milk and honey, nor to lay His plighted hand where recently ’twas laid Opposite hers, when finger playfully Advanced and pusht back finger, on each side. He did not think of this, as she would do If she were there alone.                                       The day was hot; The moss invited him; it cool’d his cheek, It cool’d his hands; he thrust them into it And sank to slumber. Never was there dream Divine as his. He saw the Hamadryad. She took him by the arm and led him on Along a valley, where profusely grew The smaller lilies with their pendent bells, And, hiding under mint, chill drosera, The violet shy of butting cyclamen, The feathery fern, and, browser of moist banks, Her offspring round her, the soft strawberry; The quivering spray of ruddy tamarisk, The oleander’s light-hair’d progeny Breathing bright freshness in each other’s face, And graceful rose, bending her brow, with cup  Of fragrance and of beauty, boon for Gods. The fragrance fill’d his breast with such delight His senses were bewildered, and he thought He saw again the face he most had loved. He stopt: the Hamadryad at his side Now stood between; then drew him farther off: He went, compliant as before: but soon Verdure had ceast: altho’ the ground was smooth, Nothing was there delightful. At this change He would have spoken, but his guide represt All questioning, and said,                                          “Weak youth! what brought Thy footstep to this wood, my native haunt, My life-long residence? this bank, where first I sate with him . . the faithful (now I know, Too late!) the faithful Rhaicos. Haste thee home; Be happy, if thou canst; but come no more Where those whom death alone could sever, died.”         He started up: the moss whereon he slept Was dried and withered: deadlier paleness spread Over his cheek; he sickened: and the sire Had land enough; it held his only son.


^^EOP^^

I have been one acquainted with the night.
I have walked out in rain—and back in rain.
I have outwalked the furthest city light. 
I have looked down the saddest city lane.
I have passed by the watchman on his beat
And dropped my eyes, unwilling to explain. 
I have stood still and stopped the sound of feet
When far away an interrupted cry
Came over houses from another street, 
But not to call me back or say good-bye;
And further still at an unearthly height,
One luminary clock against the sky 
Proclaimed the time was neither wrong nor right. 
I have been one acquainted with the night.


^^EOP^^

We chose this animal to be our pet.
His indifference allowed us to sleep. 
Cat, who made your ears bend back,
who made you lazy as quick? 
Who made you work?
It is a wonder any sun is left. 
Still it is always so abrupt.
Sleep like an umbrella going up, 
clumsy like a broken umbrella coming down,
this waking, and into what? 
I did not ask to be afraid.
I did not ask for pleasure, but there it was, 
it exfoliated at its own leisure,
grew until it was all that was— 
The brief interruption of who I am
interrupts and punctuates the day 
I always assumed that I would share—
Cat who cut the sun down from the sky 
and then responsible put it up again?
There must be one of us that you prefer.


^^EOP^^

Wind whistling, as it does   
in winter, and I think   
nothing of it until 
it snaps a shutter off
her bedroom window, spins   
it over the roof and down 
to crash on the deck in back,   
like something out of Oz.
We look up, stunned—then glad 
to be safe and have a story,   
characters in a fable   
we only half-believe. 
Look, in my surprise
I somehow split a wall,   
the last one in the house 
we’re making of gingerbread.   
We’ll have to improvise:   
prop the two halves forward 
like an open double door   
and with a tube of icing   
cement them to the floor. 
Five days until Christmas,
and the house cannot be closed.   
When she peers into the cold 
interior we’ve exposed,   
she half-expects to find   
three magi in the manger, 
a mother and her child.   
She half-expects to read   
on tablets of gingerbread 
a line or two of Scripture,   
as she has every morning   
inside a dated shutter 
on her Advent calendar.   
She takes it from the mantel   
and coaxes one fingertip 
under the perforation,   
as if her future hinges
on not tearing off the flap 
under which a thumbnail picture   
by Raphael or Giorgione,   
Hans Memling or David 
of apses, niches, archways,   
cradles a smaller scene   
of a mother and her child, 
of the lidded jewel-box   
of Mary’s downcast eyes.    Flee into Egypt, cries 
the angel of the Lord   
to Joseph in a dream, for Herod will seek the young    child to destroy him. While   
she works to tile the roof   
with shingled peppermints, 
I wash my sugared hands   
and step out to the deck   
to lug the shutter in, 
a page torn from a book   
still blank for the two of us,   
a mother and her child.


^^EOP^^

Ah! why, because the dazzling sunRestored my earth to joyHave you departed, every one,And left a desert sky?
All through the night, your glorious eyesWere gazing down in mine,And with a full heart's thankful sighsI blessed that watch divine!
I was at peace, and drank your beamsAs they were life to meAnd revelled in my changeful dreamsLike petrel on the sea.
Thought followed thought—star followed starThrough boundless regions on,While one sweet influence, near and far,Thrilled through and proved us one.
Why did the morning rise to breakSo great, so pure a spell,And scorch with fire the tranquil cheekWhere your cool radiance fell?
Blood-red he rose, and arrow-straight,His fierce beams struck my brow;The soul of Nature sprang elate,But mine sank sad and low!
My lids closed down—yet through their veilI saw him blazing still;And bathe in gold the misty dale,And flash upon the hill.
I turned me to the pillow thenTo call back Night, and seeYour worlds of solemn light, againThrob with my heart and me!
It would not do—the pillow glowedAnd glowed both roof and floor,And birds sang loudly in the wood,And fresh winds shook the door.
The curtains waved, the wakened fliesWere murmuring round my room,Imprisoned there, till I should riseAnd give them leave to roam.
O Stars and Dreams and Gentle Night;O Night and Stars return!And hide me from the hostile lightThat does not warm, but burn—
That drains the blood of suffering men;Drinks tears, instead of dew:Let me sleep through his blinding reign,And only wake with you!


^^EOP^^

What if we got outside ourselves and there   
really was an outside out there, not just   
our insides turned inside out? What if there   
really were a you beyond me, not just   
the waves off my own fire, like those waves off   
the backyard grill you can see the next yard through,   
though not well -- just enough to know that off   
to the right belongs to someone else, not you.   
What if, when we said I love you, there were   
a you to love as there is a yard beyond   
to walk past the grill and get to? To endure   
the endless walk through the self, knowing through a bond   
that has no basis (for ourselves are all we know)   
is altruism: not giving, but coming to know   
someone is there through the wavy vision   
of the self's heat, love become a decision.


^^EOP^^

I O come you pious youth! adore     The wisdom of thy God, In bringing thee from distant shore,     To learn His holy word.                                                                   Eccles. xii.      II Though mightst been left behind     Amidst a dark abode; God’s tender mercy still combined,     Thou hast the holy word.                                                                   Psal. cxxv. 2, 3.      III Fair wisdom’s ways are paths of peace,     And they that walk therein, Shall reap the joys that never cease,     And Christ shall be their king.                                                                   Psal. i. 1, 2; Prov. iii. 7.      IV God’s tender mercy brought thee here;     Tossed o’er the raging main; In Christian faith thou hast a share,     Worth all the gold of Spain.                                                                   Psal. ciii. 1, 3, 4.      V While thousands tossed by the sea,    And others settled down, God’s tender mercy set thee free,    From dangers that come down.                                                                   Death.      VI That thou a pattern still might be,    To youth of Boston town, The blessed Jesus set thee free,    From every sinful wound.                                                                   2 Cor. v. 10.      VII The blessed Jesus, who came down,    Unveiled his sacred face, To cleanse the soul of every wound,    And give repenting grace.                                                                   Rom. v. 21.      VIII That we poor sinners may obtain,    The pardon of our sin; Dear blessed Jesus now constrain,    And bring us flocking in.                                                                   Psal. xxxiv. 6, 7, 8.      IX Come you, Phillis, now aspire,    And seek the living God, So step by step thous mayst go higher,    Till perfect in the word.                                                                   Matth. vii. 7, 8.      X While thousands moved to distant shore,    And others left behind, The blessed Jesus still adore,    Implant this in thy mind.                                                                   Psal. lxxxix. 1.      XI Thous hast left the heathen shore;    Through mercy of the Lord, Among the heathen live no more,    Come magnify thy God.                                                                   Psal. xxxiv. 1, 2, 3.      XII I pray the living God may be,    The shepherd of thy soul; His tender mercies still are free,    His mysteries to unfold.                                                                   Psal. lxxx. 1, 2, 3.      XIII Thou, Phillis, when thou hunger hast,    Or pantest for thy God; Jesus Christ is thy relief,    Thou hast the holy word.                                                                   Psal. xiii. 1, 2, 3.      XIV The bounteous mercies of the Lord,    Are hid beyond the sky, And holy souls that love His word,    Shall taste them when they die.                                                                   Psal. xvi. 10, 11.      XV These bounteous mercies are from God,    The merits of His son; The humble soul that loves His word,    He chooses for His own.                                                                   Psal. xxxiv. 15.      XVI Come, dear Phillis, be advised,    To drink Samaria’s flood; There nothing that shall suffice    But Christ’s redeeming blood.                                                                   John iv. 13, 14.      XVII While thousands muse with earthly toys;    And range about the street, Dear Phillis, seek for heaven’s joys,    Where we do hope to meet.                                                                   Matth. vi. 33.      XVIII When God shall send his summons down,    And number saints together, Blest angels chant, (triumphant sound),    Come live with me forever.                                                                   Psal. cxvi. 15.      XIX The humble soul shall fly to God,    And leave the things of time, Start forth as ’twere at the first word,    To taste things more divine.                                                                   Matth. v. 3, 8.      XX Behold! the soul shall waft away,    Whene’er we come to die, And leave its cottage made of clay,    In twinkling of an eye.                                                                   Cor. xv. 51, 52, 53.      XXI Now glory be to the Most High,    United praises given, By all on earth, incessantly,    And all the host of heav’n.                                                                   Psal. cl. 6.  


^^EOP^^

I  Leaguered in fire The wild black promontories of the coast extend Their savage silhouettes; The sun in universal carnage sets, And, halting higher, The motionless storm-clouds mass their sullen threats, Like an advancing mob in sword-points penned, That, balked, yet stands at bay. Mid-zenith hangs the fascinated day In wind-lustrated hollows crystalline, A wan Valkyrie whose wide pinions shine Across the ensanguined ruins of the fray, And in her hand swings high o’erhead, Above the waster of war, The silver torch-light of the evening star Wherewith to search the faces of the dead.                                      II  Lagooned in gold, Seem not those jetty promontories rather The outposts of some ancient land forlorn, Uncomforted of morn, Where old oblivions gather, The melancholy unconsoling fold Of all things that go utterly to death And mix no more, no more With life’s perpetually awakening breath? Shall Time not ferry me to such a shore, Over such sailless seas, To walk with hope’s slain importunities In miserable marriage? Nay, shall not All things be there forgot, Save the sea’s golden barrier and the black Close-crouching promontories? Dead to all shames, forgotten of all glories, Shall I not wander there, a shadow’s shade, A spectre self-destroyed, So purged of all remembrance and sucked back Into the primal void, That should we on the shore phantasmal meet I should not know the coming of your feet?


^^EOP^^

Home, thou return'st from Thames, whose Naiads long     Have seen thee ling'ring, with a fond delay,     Mid those soft friends, whose hearts, some future day, Shall melt, perhaps, to hear thy tragic song. Go, not unmindful of that cordial youth,     Whom, long endear'd, thou leav'st by Lavant's side; Together let us wish him lasting truth,     And joy untainted with his destined bride. Go! nor regardless, while these numbers boast     My short-lived bliss, forget my social name; But think far off how, on the southern coast,     I met thy friendship with an equal flame! Fresh to that soil thou turn'st, whose ev'ry vale     Shall prompt the poet, and his song demand: To thee thy copious subjects ne'er shall fail;     Thou need'st but take the pencil to thy hand, And paint what all believe who own thy genial land.  There must thou wake perforce thy Doric quill,     'Tis Fancy's land to which thou sett'st thy feet;       Where still, 'tis said, the fairy people meet Beneath each birken shade, on mead or hill. There each trim lass that skims the milky store     To the swart tribes their creamy bowl allots; By night they sip it round the cottage-door,     While airy minstrels warble jocund notes. There ev'ry herd, by sad experience, knows     How, winged with fate, their elf-shot arrows fly, When the sick ewe her summer food forgoes,     Or, stretched on earth, the heart-smit heifers lie. Such airy beings awe th' untutored swain:     Nor thou, though learned, his homelier thoughts neglect; Let thy sweet muse the rural faith sustain;     These are the themes of simple, sure effect, That add new conquests to her boundless reign.     And fill with double force her heart-commanding strain.  Ev'n yet preserv'd, how often may'st thou hear,     Where to the pole the Boreal mountains run,     Taught by the father to his list'ning son Strange lays, whose pow'r had charmed a Spenser's ear. At ev'ry pause, before thy mind possessed,     Old Runic bards shall seem to rise around, With uncouth lyres, in many-coloured vest,     Their matted hair with boughs fantastic crowned: Whether thou bidd'st the well-taught hind repeat     The choral dirge that mourns some chieftain brave, When ev'ry shrieking maid her bosom beat,     And strewed with choicest herbs his scented grave; Or whether, sitting in the shepherd's shiel,     Thou hear'st some sounding tale of war's alarms; When, at the bugle's call, with fire and steel,     The sturdy clans pour'd forth their bonny swarms, And hostile brothers met to prove each other's arms.  'Tis thine to sing how, framing hideous spells,     In Skye's lone isle the gifted wizard seer,     Lodged in the wintry cave with [          ] Or in the depth of Uist's dark forest dwells: How they, whose sight such dreary dreams engross,     With their own visions oft astonished droop, When o'er the wat'ry strath or quaggy moss     They see the gliding ghosts unbodied troop. Or if in sports, or on the festive green,     Their [      ] glance some fated youth descry, Who, now perhaps in lusty vigour seen     And rosy health, shall soon lamented die. For them the viewless forms of air obey,     Their bidding heed, and at their beck repair. They know what spirit brews the stormful day,     And heartless, oft like moody madness stare To see the phantom train their secret work prepare.  [Stanza 5 and the first eight lines of stanza 6 are missing]  What though far off, from some dark dell espied,     His glimm'ring mazes cheer th' excursive sight, Yet turn, ye wand'rers, turn your steps aside,     Nor trust the guidance of that faithless light! For watchful, lurking mid th' unrustling reed,     At those mirk hours the wily monster lies, And listens oft to hear the passing steed,     And frequent round him rolls his sullen eyes, If chance his savage wrath may some weak wretch surprise.  Ah, luckless swain, o'er all unblest indeed!     Whom late bewildered in the dank, dark fen,     Far from his flocks and smoking hamlet then! To that sad spot [            ]: On him, enraged, the fiend, in angry mood,     Shall never look with pity's kind concern, But instant, furious, raise the whelming flood       O'er its drowned banks, forbidding all return. Or, if he meditate his wished escape     To some dim hill that seems uprising near, To his faint eye the grim and grisly shape,     In all its terrors clad, shall wild appear. Meantime, the wat'ry surge shall round him rise,     Poured sudden forth from ev'ry swelling source. What now remains but tears and hopeless sighs?     His fear-shook limbs have lost their youthly force, And down the waves he floats, a pale and breathless corse.  For him in vain his anxious wife shall wait,     Or wander forth to meet him on his way;     For him in vain, at to-fall of the day, His bairns shall linger at th' unclosing gate. Ah, ne'er shall he return! Alone, if night     Her travell'd limbs in broken slumbers steep, With drooping willows dressed, his mournful sprite     Shall visit sad, perhaps, her silent sleep: Then he, perhaps, with moist and watry hand,     Shall fondly seem to press her shudd'ring cheek, And with his blue swoll'n face before her stand,     And, shiv'ring cold, these piteous accents speak: 'Pursue, dear wife, thy daily toils pursue     At dawn or dusk, industrious as before; Nor e'er of me one hapless thought renew,     While I lie welt'ring on the osiered shore, Drown'd by the kaelpie's wrath, nor e'er shall aid thee more!'  Unbounded is thy range; with varied style     Thy Muse may, like those feath'ry tribes which spring     From their rude rocks, extend her skirting wing Round the moist marge of each cold Hebrid isle, To that hoar pile which still its ruin shows:     In whose small vaults a pigmy-folk is found, Whose bones the delver with his spade upthrows,     And culls them, wond'ring, from the hallowed ground! Or thither, where beneath the show'ry west     The mighty kings of three fair realms are laid; Once foes, perhaps, together now they rest.     No slaves revere them, and no wars invade: Yet frequent now, at midnight's solemn hour,     The rifted mounds their yawning cells unfold, And forth the monarchs stalk with sov'reign pow'r,     In pageant robes, and wreathed with sheeny gold, And on their twilight tombs aerial council hold.  But, O! o'er all, forget not Kilda's race,     On whose bleak rocks, which brave the wasting tides,     Fair Nature's daughter, Virtue, yet abides! Go, just as they, their blameless manners trace! Then to my ear transmit some gentle song,     Of those whose lives are yet sincere and plain, Their bounded walks the rugged cliffs along,     And all their prospect but the wintry main. With sparing temp'rance, at the needful time,     They drain the sainted spring, or, hunger-pressed, Along th' Atlantic rock undreading climb,     And of its eggs despoil the solan's nest. Thus blest in primal innocence they live,     Sufficed and happy with that frugal fare Which tasteful toil and hourly danger give.     Hard is their shallow soil, [      ] and bare; Nor ever vernal bee was heard to murmur there!  Nor need'st thou blush, that such false themes engage     Thy gentle mind, of fairer stores possessed;     For not alone they touch the village breast, But filled in elder time th' historic page. There Shakespeare's self, with ev'ry garland crowned, In musing hour, his Wayward Sisters found,     And with their terrors dressed the magic scene. From them he sung, when mid his bold design,     Before the Scot afflicted and aghast, The shadowy kings of Banquo's fated line     Through the dark cave in gleamy pageant passed. Proceed, nor quit the tales which, simply told,     Could once so well my answ'ring bosom pierce; Proceed, in forceful sounds and colours bold     The native legends of thy land rehearse; To such adapt thy lyre and suit thy pow'rful verse. In scenes like these, which, daring to depart     From sober truth, are still to nature true,     And call forth fresh delight to Fancy's view, Th' heroic Muse employed her Tasso's art! How have I trembled when, at Tancred's stroke,     Its gushing blood the gaping cypress poured; When each live plant with mortal accents spoke,     And the wild blast up-heaved the vanished sword! How have I sat, where piped the pensive wind,     To hear his harp, by British Fairfax strung, Prevailing poet, whose undoubting mind     Believed the magic wonders which he sung! Hence at each sound imagination glows; Hence his warm lay with softest sweetness flows;     Melting it flows, pure, num'rous, strong, and clear, And fills th' impassioned heart, and lulls th' harmonious ear.  All hail, ye scenes that o'er my soul prevail,     Ye [       ] friths and lakes which, far away,     Are by smooth Annan filled or past'ral Tay, Or Don's romantic springs, at distance, hail! The time shall come when I, perhaps, may tread     Your lowly glens, o'erhung with spreading broom, Or, o'er your stretching heaths by Fancy led: Then will I dress once more the faded bow'r,     Where Jonson sat in Drummond's [      ] shade; Or crop from Tiviot's dale each [       ]     And mourn on Yarrow's banks [       ] Meantime, ye pow'rs, that on the plains which bore     The cordial youth, on Lothian's plains attend, Where'er he dwell, on hill or lowly muir,     To him I lose, your kind protection lend, And, touched with love like mine, preserve my absent friend 


^^EOP^^

My dear, you are the high-speed car chase, and I,   
I am the sheet of glass being carefully carried   
across the street by two employees of Acme Moving   
who have not parked on the right side   
because the plot demands that they make   
the perilous journey across traffic,   
and so they are cursing as rehearsed   
as they angle me into the street, acting as if   
they intend to get me to the department store, as if   
I will ever take my place as the display window, ever clear   
the way for a special exhibit at Christmas, or be Windexed   
once a day, or even late at night, be pressed against   
by a couple who can’t make it back to his place,   
and so they angle me into the street, a bright lure,   
a provocative claim, their teaser, and indeed   
you can’t resist my arguments, fatally flawed   
though they are, so you come careening to but and butt   
and rebut, you come careening, you being   
both cars, both chaser and chased, both good and bad, both   
done up with bullets that haven’t yet done you in.   
I know I’m done for: there’s only one street   
on this set and you’ve got a stubborn streak a mile long.   
I can smell the smoke already.   
                                                No matter, I’d rather shatter   
than be looked through all day. So come careening; I know   
you’ve other clichés to hammer home: women with groceries   
to send spilling, canals to leap as the bridge is rising.   
And me? I’m so through. I’ve got a thousand places to be.


^^EOP^^

Fashionable women in luxurious homes, With men to feed them, clothe them, pay their bills, Bow, doff the hat, and fetch the handkerchief; Hostess or guest, and always so supplied With graceful deference and courtesy; Surrounded by their servants, horses, dogs, —  These tell us they have all the rights they want.  Successful women who have won their way Alone, with strength of their unaided arm, Or helped by friends, or softly climbing up By the sweet aid of ‘woman’s influence’; Successful any way, and caring naught For any other woman’s unsuccess, —  These tell us they have all the rights they want.  Religious women of the feebler sort, —  Not the religion of a righteous world, A free, enlightened, upward-reaching world, But the religion that considers life As something to back out of! — whose ideal Is to renounce, submit, and sacrifice, Counting on being patted on the head And given a high chair when they get to heaven, — These tell us they have all the rights they want.  Ignorant women — college-bred sometimes, But ignorant of life’s realities And principles of righteous government, And how the privileges they enjoy Were won with blood and tears by those before —  Those they condemn, whose ways they now oppose; Saying, ‘Why not let well enough alone? Our world is very pleasant as it is,’ —  These tell us they have all the rights they want.  And selfish women, — pigs in petticoats, — Rich, poor, wise, unwise, top or bottom round, But all sublimely innocent of thought, And guiltless of ambition, save the one Deep, voiceless aspiration — to be fed! These have no use for rights or duties more. Duties today are more than they can meet, And law insures their right to clothes and food, —  These tell us they have all the rights they want.  And, more’s the pity, some good women, too; Good conscientious women, with ideas; Who think — or think they think — that woman’s cause Is best advanced by letting it alone; That she somehow is not a human thing, And not to be helped on by human means, Just added to humanity — an ‘L’ — A wing, a branch, an extra, not mankind, —  These tell us they have all the rights they want.  And out of these has come a monstrous thing, A strange, down-sucking whirlpool of disgrace, Women uniting against womanhood, And using that great name to hide their sin! Vain are their words as that old king’s command Who set his will against the rising tide. But who shall measure the historic shame Of these poor traitors — traitors are they all — To great Democracy and Womanhood!


^^EOP^^




for my sisters



Because we did not have threads
of turquoise, silver, and gold,
we could not sew a sun nor sky.
And our hands became balls of fire.
And our arms spread open like wings. 
Because we had no chalk or pastels,
no toad, forest, or morning-grass slats
of paper, we had no colour
for creatures. So we squatted
and sprang, squatted and sprang. 
Four young girls, plaits heavy
on our backs, our feet were beating
drums, drawing rhythms from the floor;
our mouths became woodwinds;
our tongues touched teeth and were reeds.


^^EOP^^

The lilacs lift in generous bloom    Their plumes of dear old-fashioned flowers; Their fragrance fills the still old house    Where left alone I count the hours.  High in the apple-trees the bees    Are humming, busy in the sun,— An idle robin cries for rain    But once or twice and then is done.  The Sunday-morning quiet holds    In heavy slumber all the street, While from the church, just out of sight    Behind the elms, comes slow and sweet  The organ’s drone, the voices faint    That sing the quaint long-meter hymn— I somehow feel as if shut out    From some mysterious temple, dim  And beautiful with blue and red    And golden lights from windows high, Where angels in the shadows stand    And earth seems very near the sky.  The day-dream fades—and so I try    Again to catch the tune that brings No thought of temple nor of priest,    But only of a voice that sings.


^^EOP^^

To see a World in a Grain of Sand And a Heaven in a Wild Flower Hold Infinity in the palm of your hand And Eternity in an hourA Robin Red breast in a Cage Puts all Heaven in a Rage A Dove house filld with Doves & Pigeons Shudders Hell thr' all its regions A dog starvd at his Masters Gate Predicts the ruin of the State A Horse misusd upon the Road Calls to Heaven for Human blood Each outcry of the hunted Hare A fibre from the Brain does tear A Skylark wounded in the wing A Cherubim does cease to sing The Game Cock clipd & armd for fight Does the Rising Sun affright Every Wolfs & Lions howl Raises from Hell a Human Soul The wild deer, wandring here & there Keeps the Human Soul from Care The Lamb misusd breeds Public Strife And yet forgives the Butchers knife The Bat that flits at close of Eve Has left the Brain that wont BelieveThe Owl that calls upon the Night Speaks the Unbelievers frightHe who shall hurt the little Wren Shall never be belovd by Men He who the Ox to wrath has movd Shall never be by Woman lovdThe wanton Boy that kills the Fly Shall feel the Spiders enmity He who torments the Chafers Sprite Weaves a Bower in endless Night The Catterpiller on the Leaf Repeats to thee thy Mothers grief Kill not the Moth nor Butterfly For the Last Judgment draweth nigh He who shall train the Horse to War Shall never pass the Polar Bar The Beggars Dog & Widows Cat Feed them & thou wilt grow fat The Gnat that sings his Summers Song Poison gets from Slanders tongue The poison of the Snake & Newt Is the sweat of Envys Foot The poison of the Honey Bee Is the Artists JealousyThe Princes Robes & Beggars Rags Are Toadstools on the Misers Bags A Truth thats told with bad intent Beats all the Lies you can invent It is right it should be so Man was made for Joy & Woe And when this we rightly know Thro the World we safely go Joy & Woe are woven fine A Clothing for the soul divine Under every grief & pine Runs a joy with silken twine The Babe is more than swadling BandsThroughout all these Human Lands Tools were made & Born were hands Every Farmer UnderstandsEvery Tear from Every Eye Becomes a Babe in Eternity This is caught by Females bright And returnd to its own delight The Bleat the Bark Bellow & Roar Are Waves that Beat on Heavens Shore The Babe that weeps the Rod beneath Writes Revenge in realms of Death The Beggars Rags fluttering in AirDoes to Rags the Heavens tear The Soldier armd with Sword & Gun Palsied strikes the Summers SunThe poor Mans Farthing is worth more Than all the Gold on Africs ShoreOne Mite wrung from the Labrers hands Shall buy & sell the Misers Lands Or if protected from on high Does that whole Nation sell & buy He who mocks the Infants Faith Shall be mockd in Age & Death He who shall teach the Child to Doubt The rotting Grave shall neer get out He who respects the Infants faith Triumphs over Hell & Death The Childs Toys & the Old Mans Reasons Are the Fruits of the Two seasons The Questioner who sits so sly Shall never know how to Reply He who replies to words of Doubt Doth put the Light of Knowledge out The Strongest Poison ever known Came from Caesars Laurel Crown Nought can Deform the Human Race Like to the Armours iron brace When Gold & Gems adorn the Plow To peaceful Arts shall Envy Bow A Riddle or the Crickets Cry Is to Doubt a fit Reply The Emmets Inch & Eagles Mile Make Lame Philosophy to smile He who Doubts from what he sees Will neer Believe do what you Please If the Sun & Moon should Doubt Theyd immediately Go out To be in a Passion you Good may Do But no Good if a Passion is in you The Whore & Gambler by the State Licencd build that Nations Fate The Harlots cry from Street to Street Shall weave Old Englands winding Sheet The Winners Shout the Losers Curse Dance before dead Englands Hearse Every Night & every Morn Some to Misery are Born Every Morn and every Night Some are Born to sweet delight Some are Born to sweet delight Some are Born to Endless Night We are led to Believe a Lie When we see not Thro the Eye Which was Born in a Night to perish in a Night When the Soul Slept in Beams of Light God Appears & God is Light To those poor Souls who dwell in Night But does a Human Form Display To those who Dwell in Realms of day


^^EOP^^

’Twas when the Proclamation came,—
 Far in the sixties back,—He left his lord, and changed his name
 To “Mister Bartow Black.”
He learned to think himself a man,
 And privileged, you know,To adopt a new and different plan,—
 To lay aside the hoe.
He took the lead in politics, 
 And handled all the “notes,”—For he was up to all the tricks
 That gather in the votes;
For when the war came to a close
 And negroes “took a stand,”Young Bartow with the current rose,
 The foremost in command.
His voice upon the “stump” was heard;
 He “Yankeedom” did prate;The “carpet-bagger” he revered;
 The Southerner did hate.
He now was greater than the lord
 Who used to call him slave,For he was on the “County Board,”
 With every right to rave.
But this amazing run of luck
 Was far too good to stand;And soon the chivalrous “Ku-Klux”
 Rose in the Southern land.
Then Bartow got a little note,—
 ’Twas very queerly signed,—It simply told him not to vote,
 Or be to death resigned.
Young Bartow thought this little game
 Was very fine and niceTo bring his courage rare to shame
 And knowledge of justice.
“What right have they to think I fear?”
 He to himself did say.“Dare they presume that I do care
 How loudly they do bray?
“This is my home, and here I die,
 Contending for my right!Then let them come! My colors fly!
I’m ready now to fight!  “Let those who think that Bartow Black,—
 An office-holder, too!—Will to the cowards show his back,
 Their vain presumption rue!”
Bartow pursued his office game,
 And made the money, too,But home at nights he wisely came
 And played the husband true.
When they had got their subject tame,
 And well-matured their plan, They at the hour of midnight came,
 And armed was every man!
They numbered fifty Southern sons,
 And masked was every face;And Winfield rifles were their guns,—
 You could that plainly trace.
One Southern brave did have a key,
 An entrance quick to make;They entered all; but meek, you see,
 Their victim not to wake!
They reached his room! He was in bed,—
 His wife was by his side!They struck a match above his head,—
 His eyes he opened wide!
Poor Bartow could not reach his gun,
 Though quick his arm did stretch,For twenty bullets through him spun,
 That stiffly laid the wretch.
And then they rolled his carcass o’er,
 And filled both sides with lead;And then they turned it on the floor,
 And shot away his head!
Ere Black his bloody end did meet
 His wife had swooned away;The Southern braves did now retreat,—
 There was no need to stay!



^^EOP^^

LO, praise of the prowess of people-kings
of spear-armed Danes, in days long sped,
we have heard, and what honor the athelings won!
Oft Scyld the Scefing from squadroned foes,
from many a tribe, the mead-bench tore,
awing the earls. Since erst he lay
friendless, a foundling, fate repaid him:
for he waxed under welkin, in wealth he throve,
till before him the folk, both far and near,
who house by the whale-path, heard his mandate,
gave him gifts: a good king he!
To him an heir was afterward born,
a son in his halls, whom heaven sent
to favor the folk, feeling their woe
that erst they had lacked an earl for leader
so long a while; the Lord endowed him,
the Wielder of Wonder, with world’s renown.
Famed was this Beowulf: far flew the boast of him,
son of Scyld, in the Scandian lands.
So becomes it a youth to quit him well
with his father’s friends, by fee and gift,
that to aid him, aged, in after days,
come warriors willing, should war draw nigh,
liegemen loyal: by lauded deeds
shall an earl have honor in every clan.
Forth he fared at the fated moment,
sturdy Scyld to the shelter of God.
Then they bore him over to ocean’s billow,
loving clansmen, as late he charged them,
while wielded words the winsome Scyld,
the leader beloved who long had ruled....
In the roadstead rocked a ring-dight vessel,
ice-flecked, outbound, atheling’s barge:
there laid they down their darling lord
on the breast of the boat, the breaker-of-rings,   
by the mast the mighty one. Many a treasure
fetched from far was freighted with him.
No ship have I known so nobly dight
with weapons of war and weeds of battle,
with breastplate and blade: on his bosom lay
a heaped hoard that hence should go
far o’er the flood with him floating away.
No less these loaded the lordly gifts,
thanes’ huge treasure, than those had done
who in former time forth had sent him
sole on the seas, a suckling child.
High o’er his head they hoist the standard,
a gold-wove banner; let billows take him,
gave him to ocean. Grave were their spirits,
mournful their mood. No man is able
to say in sooth, no son of the halls,
no hero ‘neath heaven, — who harbored that freight!
Now Beowulf bode in the burg of the Scyldings,
leader beloved, and long he ruled
in fame with all folk, since his father had gone
away from the world, till awoke an heir,
haughty Healfdene, who held through life,
sage and sturdy, the Scyldings glad.
Then, one after one, there woke to him,
to the chieftain of clansmen, children four:
Heorogar, then Hrothgar, then Halga brave;
and I heard that — was —’s queen,
the Heathoscylfing’s helpmate dear.
To Hrothgar was given such glory of war,
such honor of combat, that all his kin
obeyed him gladly till great grew his band
of youthful comrades. It came in his mind
to bid his henchmen a hall uprear,
a master mead-house, mightier far
than ever was seen by the sons of earth,
and within it, then, to old and young
he would all allot that the Lord had sent him,
save only the land and the lives of his men.
Wide, I heard, was the work commanded,
for many a tribe this mid-earth round,
to fashion the folkstead. It fell, as he ordered,
in rapid achievement that ready it stood there,
of halls the noblest: Heorot   he named it
whose message had might in many a land.
Not reckless of promise, the rings he dealt,
treasure at banquet: there towered the hall,
high, gabled wide, the hot surge waiting
of furious flame.   Nor far was that day
when father and son-in-law stood in feud
for warfare and hatred that woke again.   
With envy and anger an evil spirit
endured the dole in his dark abode,
that he heard each day the din of revel
high in the hall: there harps rang out,
clear song of the singer. He sang who knew
tales of the early time of man,
how the Almighty made the earth,
fairest fields enfolded by water,
set, triumphant, sun and moon
for a light to lighten the land-dwellers,
and braided bright the breast of earth
with limbs and leaves, made life for all
of mortal beings that breathe and move.
So lived the clansmen in cheer and revel
a winsome life, till one began
to fashion evils, that field of hell.
Grendel this monster grim was called,
march-riever mighty, in moorland living,
in fen and fastness; fief of the giants
the hapless wight a while had kept
since the Creator his exile doomed.
On kin of Cain was the killing avenged
by sovran God for slaughtered Abel.
Ill fared his feud, and far was he driven,
for the slaughter’s sake, from sight of men.
Of Cain awoke all that woful breed,
Etins   and elves and evil-spirits,
as well as the giants that warred with God
weary while: but their wage was paid them!
WENT he forth to find at fall of night
that haughty house, and heed wherever
the Ring-Danes, outrevelled, to rest had gone.
Found within it the atheling band
asleep after feasting and fearless of sorrow,
of human hardship. Unhallowed wight,
grim and greedy, he grasped betimes,
wrathful, reckless, from resting-places,
thirty of the thanes, and thence he rushed
fain of his fell spoil, faring homeward,
laden with slaughter, his lair to seek.
Then at the dawning, as day was breaking,
the might of Grendel to men was known;
then after wassail was wail uplifted,
loud moan in the morn. The mighty chief,
atheling excellent, unblithe sat,
labored in woe for the loss of his thanes,
when once had been traced the trail of the fiend,
spirit accurst: too cruel that sorrow,
too long, too loathsome. Not late the respite;
with night returning, anew began
ruthless murder; he recked no whit,
firm in his guilt, of the feud and crime.
They were easy to find who elsewhere sought
in room remote their rest at night,
bed in the bowers,   when that bale was shown,
was seen in sooth, with surest token, —
the hall-thane’s   hate. Such held themselves
far and fast who the fiend outran!
Thus ruled unrighteous and raged his fill
one against all; until empty stood
that lordly building, and long it bode so.
Twelve years’ tide the trouble he bore,
sovran of Scyldings, sorrows in plenty,
boundless cares. There came unhidden
tidings true to the tribes of men,
in sorrowful songs, how ceaselessly Grendel
harassed Hrothgar, what hate he bore him,
what murder and massacre, many a year,
feud unfading, — refused consent
to deal with any of Daneland’s earls,
make pact of peace, or compound for gold:
still less did the wise men ween to get
great fee for the feud from his fiendish hands.
But the evil one ambushed old and young
death-shadow dark, and dogged them still,
lured, or lurked in the livelong night
of misty moorlands: men may say not
where the haunts of these Hell-Runes   be.
Such heaping of horrors the hater of men,
lonely roamer, wrought unceasing,
harassings heavy. O’er Heorot he lorded,
gold-bright hall, in gloomy nights;
and ne’er could the prince   approach his throne,
— ‘twas judgment of God, — or have joy in his hall.
Sore was the sorrow to Scyldings’-friend,
heart-rending misery. Many nobles
sat assembled, and searched out counsel
how it were best for bold-hearted men
against harassing terror to try their hand.
Whiles they vowed in their heathen fanes
altar-offerings, asked with words   
that the slayer-of-souls would succor give them
for the pain of their people. Their practice this,
their heathen hope; ‘twas Hell they thought of
in mood of their mind. Almighty they knew not,
Doomsman of Deeds and dreadful Lord,
nor Heaven’s-Helmet heeded they ever,
Wielder-of-Wonder. — Woe for that man
who in harm and hatred hales his soul
to fiery embraces; — nor favor nor change
awaits he ever. But well for him
that after death-day may draw to his Lord,
and friendship find in the Father’s arms!
THUS seethed unceasing the son of Healfdene
with the woe of these days; not wisest men
assuaged his sorrow; too sore the anguish,
loathly and long, that lay on his folk,
most baneful of burdens and bales of the night.
This heard in his home Hygelac’s thane,
great among Geats, of Grendel’s doings.
He was the mightiest man of valor
in that same day of this our life,
stalwart and stately. A stout wave-walker
he bade make ready. Yon battle-king, said he,
far o’er the swan-road he fain would seek,
the noble monarch who needed men!
The prince’s journey by prudent folk
was little blamed, though they loved him dear;
they whetted the hero, and hailed good omens.
And now the bold one from bands of Geats
comrades chose, the keenest of warriors
e’er he could find; with fourteen men
the sea-wood   he sought, and, sailor proved,
led them on to the land’s confines.
Time had now flown;   afloat was the ship,
boat under bluff. On board they climbed,
warriors ready; waves were churning
sea with sand; the sailors bore
on the breast of the bark their bright array,
their mail and weapons: the men pushed off,
on its willing way, the well-braced craft.
Then moved o’er the waters by might of the wind
that bark like a bird with breast of foam,
till in season due, on the second day,
the curved prow such course had run
that sailors now could see the land,
sea-cliffs shining, steep high hills,
headlands broad. Their haven was found,
their journey ended. Up then quickly
the Weders’   clansmen climbed ashore,
anchored their sea-wood, with armor clashing
and gear of battle: God they thanked
for passing in peace o’er the paths of the sea.
Now saw from the cliff a Scylding clansman,
a warden that watched the water-side,
how they bore o’er the gangway glittering shields,
war-gear in readiness; wonder seized him
to know what manner of men they were.
Straight to the strand his steed he rode,
Hrothgar’s henchman; with hand of might
he shook his spear, and spake in parley.
“Who are ye, then, ye armed men,
mailed folk, that yon mighty vessel
have urged thus over the ocean ways,
here o’er the waters? A warden I,
sentinel set o’er the sea-march here,
lest any foe to the folk of Danes
with harrying fleet should harm the land.
No aliens ever at ease thus bore them,
linden-wielders:   yet word-of-leave
clearly ye lack from clansmen here,
my folk’s agreement. — A greater ne’er saw I
of warriors in world than is one of you, —   
yon hero in harness! No henchman he
worthied by weapons, if witness his features,
his peerless presence! I pray you, though, tell
your folk and home, lest hence ye fare
suspect to wander your way as spies
in Danish land. Now, dwellers afar,
ocean-travellers, take from me
simple advice: the sooner the better
I hear of the country whence ye came.”
To him the stateliest spake in answer;
the warriors’ leader his word-hoard unlocked:—
“We are by kin of the clan of Geats,
and Hygelac’s own hearth-fellows we.
To folk afar was my father known,
noble atheling, Ecgtheow named.
Full of winters, he fared away
aged from earth; he is honored still
through width of the world by wise men all.
To thy lord and liege in loyal mood
we hasten hither, to Healfdene’s son,
people-protector: be pleased to advise us!
To that mighty-one come we on mickle errand,
to the lord of the Danes; nor deem I right
that aught be hidden. We hear — thou knowest
if sooth it is — the saying of men,
that amid the Scyldings a scathing monster,
dark ill-doer, in dusky nights
shows terrific his rage unmatched,
hatred and murder. To Hrothgar I
in greatness of soul would succor bring,
so the Wise-and-Brave   may worst his foes, —
if ever the end of ills is fated,
of cruel contest, if cure shall follow,
and the boiling care-waves cooler grow;
else ever afterward anguish-days
he shall suffer in sorrow while stands in place
high on its hill that house unpeered!”
Astride his steed, the strand-ward answered,
clansman unquailing: “The keen-souled thane
must be skilled to sever and sunder duly
words and works, if he well intends.
I gather, this band is graciously bent
to the Scyldings’ master. March, then, bearing
weapons and weeds the way I show you.
I will bid my men your boat meanwhile
to guard for fear lest foemen come, —
your new-tarred ship by shore of ocean
faithfully watching till once again
it waft o’er the waters those well-loved thanes,
— winding-neck’d wood, — to Weders’ bounds,
heroes such as the hest of fate
shall succor and save from the shock of war.”
They bent them to march, — the boat lay still,
fettered by cable and fast at anchor,
broad-bosomed ship. — Then shone the boars   
over the cheek-guard; chased with gold,
keen and gleaming, guard it kept
o’er the man of war, as marched along
heroes in haste, till the hall they saw,
broad of gable and bright with gold:
that was the fairest, ‘mid folk of earth,
of houses ‘neath heaven, where Hrothgar lived,
and the gleam of it lightened o’er lands afar.
The sturdy shieldsman showed that bright
burg-of-the-boldest; bade them go
straightway thither; his steed then turned,
hardy hero, and hailed them thus:—
“Tis time that I fare from you. Father Almighty
in grace and mercy guard you well,
safe in your seekings. Seaward I go,
‘gainst hostile warriors hold my watch.”
STONE-BRIGHT the street:   it showed the way
to the crowd of clansmen. Corselets glistened
hand-forged, hard; on their harness bright
the steel ring sang, as they strode along
in mail of battle, and marched to the hall.
There, weary of ocean, the wall along
they set their bucklers, their broad shields, down,
and bowed them to bench: the breastplates clanged,
war-gear of men; their weapons stacked,
spears of the seafarers stood together,
gray-tipped ash: that iron band
was worthily weaponed! — A warrior proud
asked of the heroes their home and kin.
“Whence, now, bear ye burnished shields,
harness gray and helmets grim,
spears in multitude? Messenger, I,
Hrothgar’s herald! Heroes so many
ne’er met I as strangers of mood so strong.
‘Tis plain that for prowess, not plunged into exile,
for high-hearted valor, Hrothgar ye seek!”
Him the sturdy-in-war bespake with words,
proud earl of the Weders answer made,
hardy ‘neath helmet:—”Hygelac’s, we,
fellows at board; I am Beowulf named.
I am seeking to say to the son of Healfdene
this mission of mine, to thy master-lord,
the doughty prince, if he deign at all
grace that we greet him, the good one, now.”
Wulfgar spake, the Wendles’ chieftain,
whose might of mind to many was known,
his courage and counsel: “The king of Danes,
the Scyldings’ friend, I fain will tell,
the Breaker-of-Rings, as the boon thou askest,
the famed prince, of thy faring hither,
and, swiftly after, such answer bring
as the doughty monarch may deign to give.”
Hied then in haste to where Hrothgar sat
white-haired and old, his earls about him,
till the stout thane stood at the shoulder there
of the Danish king: good courtier he!
Wulfgar spake to his winsome lord:—
“Hither have fared to thee far-come men
o’er the paths of ocean, people of Geatland;
and the stateliest there by his sturdy band
is Beowulf named. This boon they seek,
that they, my master, may with thee
have speech at will: nor spurn their prayer
to give them hearing, gracious Hrothgar!
In weeds of the warrior worthy they,
methinks, of our liking; their leader most surely,
a hero that hither his henchmen has led.”
HROTHGAR answered, helmet of Scyldings:—
“I knew him of yore in his youthful days;
his aged father was Ecgtheow named,
to whom, at home, gave Hrethel the Geat
his only daughter. Their offspring bold
fares hither to seek the steadfast friend.
And seamen, too, have said me this, —
who carried my gifts to the Geatish court,
thither for thanks, — he has thirty men’s
heft of grasp in the gripe of his hand,
the bold-in-battle. Blessed God
out of his mercy this man hath sent
to Danes of the West, as I ween indeed,
against horror of Grendel. I hope to give
the good youth gold for his gallant thought.
Be thou in haste, and bid them hither,
clan of kinsmen, to come before me;
and add this word, — they are welcome guests
to folk of the Danes.” [To the door of the hall
Wulfgar went] and the word declared:—
“To you this message my master sends,
East-Danes’ king, that your kin he knows,
hardy heroes, and hails you all
welcome hither o’er waves of the sea!
Ye may wend your way in war-attire,
and under helmets Hrothgar greet;
but let here the battle-shields bide your parley,
and wooden war-shafts wait its end.”
Uprose the mighty one, ringed with his men,
brave band of thanes: some bode without,
battle-gear guarding, as bade the chief.
Then hied that troop where the herald led them,
under Heorot’s roof: [the hero strode,]
hardy ‘neath helm, till the hearth he neared.
Beowulf spake, — his breastplate gleamed,
war-net woven by wit of the smith:—
“Thou Hrothgar, hail! Hygelac’s I,
kinsman and follower. Fame a plenty
have I gained in youth! These Grendel-deeds
I heard in my home-land heralded clear.
Seafarers say how stands this hall,
of buildings best, for your band of thanes
empty and idle, when evening sun
in the harbor of heaven is hidden away.
So my vassals advised me well, —
brave and wise, the best of men, —
O sovran Hrothgar, to seek thee here,
for my nerve and my might they knew full well.
Themselves had seen me from slaughter come
blood-flecked from foes, where five I bound,
and that wild brood worsted. I’ the waves I slew
nicors   by night, in need and peril
avenging the Weders,   whose woe they sought, —
crushing the grim ones. Grendel now,
monster cruel, be mine to quell
in single battle! So, from thee,
thou sovran of the Shining-Danes,
Scyldings’-bulwark, a boon I seek, —
and, Friend-of-the-folk, refuse it not,
O Warriors’-shield, now I’ve wandered far, —
that I alone with my liegemen here,
this hardy band, may Heorot purge!
More I hear, that the monster dire,
in his wanton mood, of weapons recks not;
hence shall I scorn — so Hygelac stay,
king of my kindred, kind to me! —
brand or buckler to bear in the fight,
gold-colored targe: but with gripe alone
must I front the fiend and fight for life,
foe against foe. Then faith be his
in the doom of the Lord whom death shall take.
Fain, I ween, if the fight he win,
in this hall of gold my Geatish band
will he fearless eat, — as oft before, —
my noblest thanes. Nor need’st thou then
to hide my head;   for his shall I be,
dyed in gore, if death must take me;
and my blood-covered body he’ll bear as prey,
ruthless devour it, the roamer-lonely,
with my life-blood redden his lair in the fen:
no further for me need’st food prepare!
To Hygelac send, if Hild   should take me,
best of war-weeds, warding my breast,
armor excellent, heirloom of Hrethel
and work of Wayland.   Fares Wyrd   as she must.”
HROTHGAR spake, the Scyldings’-helmet:—
“For fight defensive, Friend my Beowulf,
to succor and save, thou hast sought us here.
Thy father’s combat   a feud enkindled
when Heatholaf with hand he slew
among the Wylfings; his Weder kin
for horror of fighting feared to hold him.
Fleeing, he sought our South-Dane folk,
over surge of ocean the Honor-Scyldings,
when first I was ruling the folk of Danes,
wielded, youthful, this widespread realm,
this hoard-hold of heroes. Heorogar was dead,
my elder brother, had breathed his last,
Healfdene’s bairn: he was better than I!
Straightway the feud with fee   I settled,
to the Wylfings sent, o’er watery ridges,
treasures olden: oaths he   swore me.
Sore is my soul to say to any
of the race of man what ruth for me
in Heorot Grendel with hate hath wrought,
what sudden harryings. Hall-folk fail me,
my warriors wane; for Wyrd hath swept them
into Grendel’s grasp. But God is able
this deadly foe from his deeds to turn!
Boasted full oft, as my beer they drank,
earls o’er the ale-cup, armed men,
that they would bide in the beer-hall here,
Grendel’s attack with terror of blades.
Then was this mead-house at morning tide
dyed with gore, when the daylight broke,
all the boards of the benches blood-besprinkled,
gory the hall: I had heroes the less,
doughty dear-ones that death had reft.
— But sit to the banquet, unbind thy words,
hardy hero, as heart shall prompt thee.”
Gathered together, the Geatish men
in the banquet-hall on bench assigned,
sturdy-spirited, sat them down,
hardy-hearted. A henchman attended,
carried the carven cup in hand,
served the clear mead. Oft minstrels sang
blithe in Heorot. Heroes revelled,
no dearth of warriors, Weder and Dane.
UNFERTH spake, the son of Ecglaf,
who sat at the feet of the Scyldings’ lord,
unbound the battle-runes.   — Beowulf’s quest,
sturdy seafarer’s, sorely galled him;
ever he envied that other men
should more achieve in middle-earth
of fame under heaven than he himself. —
“Art thou that Beowulf, Breca’s rival,
who emulous swam on the open sea,
when for pride the pair of you proved the floods,
and wantonly dared in waters deep
to risk your lives? No living man,
or lief or loath, from your labor dire
could you dissuade, from swimming the main.
Ocean-tides with your arms ye covered,
with strenuous hands the sea-streets measured,
swam o’er the waters. Winter’s storm
rolled the rough waves. In realm of sea
a sennight strove ye. In swimming he topped thee,
had more of main! Him at morning-tide
billows bore to the Battling Reamas,
whence he hied to his home so dear
beloved of his liegemen, to land of Brondings,
fastness fair, where his folk he ruled,
town and treasure. In triumph o’er thee
Beanstan’s bairn   his boast achieved.
So ween I for thee a worse adventure
— though in buffet of battle thou brave hast been,
in struggle grim, — if Grendel’s approach
thou darst await through the watch of night!”
Beowulf spake, bairn of Ecgtheow:—
“What a deal hast uttered, dear my Unferth,
drunken with beer, of Breca now,
told of his triumph! Truth I claim it,
that I had more of might in the sea
than any man else, more ocean-endurance.
We twain had talked, in time of youth,
and made our boast, — we were merely boys,
striplings still, — to stake our lives
far at sea: and so we performed it.
Naked swords, as we swam along,
we held in hand, with hope to guard us
against the whales. Not a whit from me
could he float afar o’er the flood of waves,
haste o’er the billows; nor him I abandoned.
Together we twain on the tides abode
five nights full till the flood divided us,
churning waves and chillest weather,
darkling night, and the northern wind
ruthless rushed on us: rough was the surge.
Now the wrath of the sea-fish rose apace;
yet me ‘gainst the monsters my mailed coat,
hard and hand-linked, help afforded, —
battle-sark braided my breast to ward,
garnished with gold. There grasped me firm
and haled me to bottom the hated foe,
with grimmest gripe. ‘Twas granted me, though,
to pierce the monster with point of sword,
with blade of battle: huge beast of the sea
was whelmed by the hurly through hand of mine.
ME thus often the evil monsters
thronging threatened. With thrust of my sword,
the darling, I dealt them due return!
Nowise had they bliss from their booty then
to devour their victim, vengeful creatures,
seated to banquet at bottom of sea;
but at break of day, by my brand sore hurt,
on the edge of ocean up they lay,
put to sleep by the sword. And since, by them
on the fathomless sea-ways sailor-folk
are never molested. — Light from east,
came bright God’s beacon; the billows sank,
so that I saw the sea-cliffs high,
windy walls. For Wyrd oft saveth
earl undoomed if he doughty be!
And so it came that I killed with my sword
nine of the nicors. Of night-fought battles
ne’er heard I a harder ‘neath heaven’s dome,
nor adrift on the deep a more desolate man!
Yet I came unharmed from that hostile clutch,
though spent with swimming. The sea upbore me,
flood of the tide, on Finnish land,
the welling waters. No wise of thee
have I heard men tell such terror of falchions,
bitter battle. Breca ne’er yet,
not one of you pair, in the play of war
such daring deed has done at all
with bloody brand, — I boast not of it! —
though thou wast the bane   of thy brethren dear,
thy closest kin, whence curse of hell
awaits thee, well as thy wit may serve!
For I say in sooth, thou son of Ecglaf,
never had Grendel these grim deeds wrought,
monster dire, on thy master dear,
in Heorot such havoc, if heart of thine
were as battle-bold as thy boast is loud!
But he has found no feud will happen;
from sword-clash dread of your Danish clan
he vaunts him safe, from the Victor-Scyldings.
He forces pledges, favors none
of the land of Danes, but lustily murders,
fights and feasts, nor feud he dreads
from Spear-Dane men. But speedily now
shall I prove him the prowess and pride of the Geats,
shall bid him battle. Blithe to mead
go he that listeth, when light of dawn
this morrow morning o’er men of earth,
ether-robed sun from the south shall beam!”
Joyous then was the Jewel-giver,
hoar-haired, war-brave; help awaited
the Bright-Danes’ prince, from Beowulf hearing,
folk’s good shepherd, such firm resolve.
Then was laughter of liegemen loud resounding
with winsome words. Came Wealhtheow forth,
queen of Hrothgar, heedful of courtesy,
gold-decked, greeting the guests in hall;
and the high-born lady handed the cup
first to the East-Danes’ heir and warden,
bade him be blithe at the beer-carouse,
the land’s beloved one. Lustily took he
banquet and beaker, battle-famed king.
Through the hall then went the Helmings’ Lady,
to younger and older everywhere
carried the cup, till come the moment
when the ring-graced queen, the royal-hearted,
to Beowulf bore the beaker of mead.
She greeted the Geats’ lord, God she thanked,
in wisdom’s words, that her will was granted,
that at last on a hero her hope could lean
for comfort in terrors. The cup he took,
hardy-in-war, from Wealhtheow’s hand,
and answer uttered the eager-for-combat.
Beowulf spake, bairn of Ecgtheow:—
“This was my thought, when my thanes and I
bent to the ocean and entered our boat,
that I would work the will of your people
fully, or fighting fall in death,
in fiend’s gripe fast. I am firm to do
an earl’s brave deed, or end the days
of this life of mine in the mead-hall here.”
Well these words to the woman seemed,
Beowulf’s battle-boast. — Bright with gold
the stately dame by her spouse sat down.
Again, as erst, began in hall
warriors’ wassail and words of power,
the proud-band’s revel, till presently
the son of Healfdene hastened to seek
rest for the night; he knew there waited
fight for the fiend in that festal hall,
when the sheen of the sun they saw no more,
and dusk of night sank darkling nigh,
and shadowy shapes came striding on,
wan under welkin. The warriors rose.
Man to man, he made harangue,
Hrothgar to Beowulf, bade him hail,
let him wield the wine hall: a word he added:—
“Never to any man erst I trusted,
since I could heave up hand and shield,
this noble Dane-Hall, till now to thee.
Have now and hold this house unpeered;
remember thy glory; thy might declare;
watch for the foe! No wish shall fail thee
if thou bidest the battle with bold-won life.”
THEN Hrothgar went with his hero-train,
defence-of-Scyldings, forth from hall;
fain would the war-lord Wealhtheow seek,
couch of his queen. The King-of-Glory
against this Grendel a guard had set,
so heroes heard, a hall-defender,
who warded the monarch and watched for the monster.
In truth, the Geats’ prince gladly trusted
his mettle, his might, the mercy of God!
Cast off then his corselet of iron,
helmet from head; to his henchman gave, —
choicest of weapons, — the well-chased sword,
bidding him guard the gear of battle.
Spake then his Vaunt the valiant man,
Beowulf Geat, ere the bed be sought:—
“Of force in fight no feebler I count me,
in grim war-deeds, than Grendel deems him.
Not with the sword, then, to sleep of death
his life will I give, though it lie in my power.
No skill is his to strike against me,
my shield to hew though he hardy be,
bold in battle; we both, this night,
shall spurn the sword, if he seek me here,
unweaponed, for war. Let wisest God,
sacred Lord, on which side soever
doom decree as he deemeth right.”
Reclined then the chieftain, and cheek-pillows held
the head of the earl, while all about him
seamen hardy on hall-beds sank.
None of them thought that thence their steps
to the folk and fastness that fostered them,
to the land they loved, would lead them back!
Full well they wist that on warriors many
battle-death seized, in the banquet-hall,
of Danish clan. But comfort and help,
war-weal weaving, to Weder folk
the Master gave, that, by might of one,
over their enemy all prevailed,
by single strength. In sooth ‘tis told
that highest God o’er human kind
hath wielded ever! — Thro’ wan night striding,
came the walker-in-shadow. Warriors slept
whose hest was to guard the gabled hall, —
all save one. ‘Twas widely known
that against God’s will the ghostly ravager
him   could not hurl to haunts of darkness;
wakeful, ready, with warrior’s wrath,
bold he bided the battle’s issue.
THEN from the moorland, by misty crags,
with God’s wrath laden, Grendel came.
The monster was minded of mankind now
sundry to seize in the stately house.
Under welkin he walked, till the wine-palace there,
gold-hall of men, he gladly discerned,
flashing with fretwork. Not first time, this,
that he the home of Hrothgar sought, —
yet ne’er in his life-day, late or early,
such hardy heroes, such hall-thanes, found!
To the house the warrior walked apace,
parted from peace;   the portal opended,
though with forged bolts fast, when his fists had struck it,
and baleful he burst in his blatant rage,
the house’s mouth. All hastily, then,
o’er fair-paved floor the fiend trod on,
ireful he strode; there streamed from his eyes
fearful flashes, like flame to see.
He spied in hall the hero-band,
kin and clansmen clustered asleep,
hardy liegemen. Then laughed his heart;
for the monster was minded, ere morn should dawn,
savage, to sever the soul of each,
life from body, since lusty banquet
waited his will! But Wyrd forbade him
to seize any more of men on earth
after that evening. Eagerly watched
Hygelac’s kinsman his cursed foe,
how he would fare in fell attack.
Not that the monster was minded to pause!
Straightway he seized a sleeping warrior
for the first, and tore him fiercely asunder,
the bone-frame bit, drank blood in streams,
swallowed him piecemeal: swiftly thus
the lifeless corse was clear devoured,
e’en feet and hands. Then farther he hied;
for the hardy hero with hand he grasped,
felt for the foe with fiendish claw,
for the hero reclining, — who clutched it boldly,
prompt to answer, propped on his arm.
Soon then saw that shepherd-of-evils
that never he met in this middle-world,
in the ways of earth, another wight
with heavier hand-gripe; at heart he feared,
sorrowed in soul, — none the sooner escaped!
Fain would he flee, his fastness seek,
the den of devils: no doings now
such as oft he had done in days of old!
Then bethought him the hardy Hygelac-thane
of his boast at evening: up he bounded,
grasped firm his foe, whose fingers cracked.
The fiend made off, but the earl close followed.
The monster meant — if he might at all —
to fling himself free, and far away
fly to the fens, — knew his fingers’ power
in the gripe of the grim one. Gruesome march
to Heorot this monster of harm had made!
Din filled the room; the Danes were bereft,
castle-dwellers and clansmen all,
earls, of their ale. Angry were both
those savage hall-guards: the house resounded.
Wonder it was the wine-hall firm
in the strain of their struggle stood, to earth
the fair house fell not; too fast it was
within and without by its iron bands
craftily clamped; though there crashed from sill
many a mead-bench — men have told me —
gay with gold, where the grim foes wrestled.
So well had weened the wisest Scyldings
that not ever at all might any man
that bone-decked, brave house break asunder,
crush by craft, — unless clasp of fire
in smoke engulfed it. — Again uprose
din redoubled. Danes of the North
with fear and frenzy were filled, each one,
who from the wall that wailing heard,
God’s foe sounding his grisly song,
cry of the conquered, clamorous pain
from captive of hell. Too closely held him
he who of men in might was strongest
in that same day of this our life.
NOT in any wise would the earls’-defence   
suffer that slaughterous stranger to live,
useless deeming his days and years
to men on earth. Now many an earl
of Beowulf brandished blade ancestral,
fain the life of their lord to shield,
their praised prince, if power were theirs;
never they knew, — as they neared the foe,
hardy-hearted heroes of war,
aiming their swords on every side
the accursed to kill, — no keenest blade,
no farest of falchions fashioned on earth,
could harm or hurt that hideous fiend!
He was safe, by his spells, from sword of battle,
from edge of iron. Yet his end and parting
on that same day of this our life
woful should be, and his wandering soul
far off flit to the fiends’ domain.
Soon he found, who in former days,
harmful in heart and hated of God,
on many a man such murder wrought,
that the frame of his body failed him now.
For him the keen-souled kinsman of Hygelac
held in hand; hateful alive
was each to other. The outlaw dire
took mortal hurt; a mighty wound
showed on his shoulder, and sinews cracked,
and the bone-frame burst. To Beowulf now
the glory was given, and Grendel thence
death-sick his den in the dark moor sought,
noisome abode: he knew too well
that here was the last of life, an end
of his days on earth. — To all the Danes
by that bloody battle the boon had come.
From ravage had rescued the roving stranger
Hrothgar’s hall; the hardy and wise one
had purged it anew. His night-work pleased him,
his deed and its honor. To Eastern Danes
had the valiant Geat his vaunt made good,
all their sorrow and ills assuaged,
their bale of battle borne so long,
and all the dole they erst endured
pain a-plenty. — ‘Twas proof of this,
when the hardy-in-fight a hand laid down,
arm and shoulder, — all, indeed,
of Grendel’s gripe, — ‘neath the gabled roof’
MANY at morning, as men have told me,
warriors gathered the gift-hall round,
folk-leaders faring from far and near,
o’er wide-stretched ways, the wonder to view,
trace of the traitor. Not troublous seemed
the enemy’s end to any man
who saw by the gait of the graceless foe
how the weary-hearted, away from thence,
baffled in battle and banned, his steps
death-marked dragged to the devils’ mere.
Bloody the billows were boiling there,
turbid the tide of tumbling waves
horribly seething, with sword-blood hot,
by that doomed one dyed, who in den of the moor
laid forlorn his life adown,
his heathen soul,-and hell received it.
Home then rode the hoary clansmen
from that merry journey, and many a youth,
on horses white, the hardy warriors,
back from the mere. Then Beowulf’s glory
eager they echoed, and all averred
that from sea to sea, or south or north,
there was no other in earth’s domain,
under vault of heaven, more valiant found,
of warriors none more worthy to rule!
(On their lord beloved they laid no slight,
gracious Hrothgar: a good king he!)
From time to time, the tried-in-battle
their gray steeds set to gallop amain,
and ran a race when the road seemed fair.
From time to time, a thane of the king,
who had made many vaunts, and was mindful of verses,
stored with sagas and songs of old,
bound word to word in well-knit rime,
welded his lay; this warrior soon
of Beowulf’s quest right cleverly sang,
and artfully added an excellent tale,
in well-ranged words, of the warlike deeds
he had heard in saga of Sigemund.
Strange the story: he said it all, —
the Waelsing’s wanderings wide, his struggles,
which never were told to tribes of men,
the feuds and the frauds, save to Fitela only,
when of these doings he deigned to speak,
uncle to nephew; as ever the twain
stood side by side in stress of war,
and multitude of the monster kind
they had felled with their swords. Of Sigemund grew,
when he passed from life, no little praise;
for the doughty-in-combat a dragon killed
that herded the hoard:   under hoary rock
the atheling dared the deed alone
fearful quest, nor was Fitela there.
Yet so it befell, his falchion pierced
that wondrous worm, — on the wall it struck,
best blade; the dragon died in its blood.
Thus had the dread-one by daring achieved
over the ring-hoard to rule at will,
himself to pleasure; a sea-boat he loaded,
and bore on its bosom the beaming gold,
son of Waels; the worm was consumed.
He had of all heroes the highest renown
among races of men, this refuge-of-warriors,
for deeds of daring that decked his name
since the hand and heart of Heremod
grew slack in battle. He, swiftly banished
to mingle with monsters at mercy of foes,
to death was betrayed; for torrents of sorrow
had lamed him too long; a load of care
to earls and athelings all he proved.
Oft indeed, in earlier days,
for the warrior’s wayfaring wise men mourned,
who had hoped of him help from harm and bale,
and had thought their sovran’s son would thrive,
follow his father, his folk protect,
the hoard and the stronghold, heroes’ land,
home of Scyldings. — But here, thanes said,
the kinsman of Hygelac kinder seemed
to all: the other   was urged to crime!
And afresh to the race,   the fallow roads
by swift steeds measured! The morning sun
was climbing higher. Clansmen hastened
to the high-built hall, those hardy-minded,
the wonder to witness. Warden of treasure,
crowned with glory, the king himself,
with stately band from the bride-bower strode;
and with him the queen and her crowd of maidens
measured the path to the mead-house fair.
HROTHGAR spake, — to the hall he went,
stood by the steps, the steep roof saw,
garnished with gold, and Grendel’s hand:—
“For the sight I see to the Sovran Ruler
be speedy thanks! A throng of sorrows
I have borne from Grendel; but God still works
wonder on wonder, the Warden-of-Glory.
It was but now that I never more
for woes that weighed on me waited help
long as I lived, when, laved in blood,
stood sword-gore-stained this stateliest house, —
widespread woe for wise men all,
who had no hope to hinder ever
foes infernal and fiendish sprites
from havoc in hall. This hero now,
by the Wielder’s might, a work has done
that not all of us erst could ever do
by wile and wisdom. Lo, well can she say
whoso of women this warrior bore
among sons of men, if still she liveth,
that the God of the ages was good to her
in the birth of her bairn. Now, Beowulf, thee,
of heroes best, I shall heartily love
as mine own, my son; preserve thou ever
this kinship new: thou shalt never lack
wealth of the world that I wield as mine!
Full oft for less have I largess showered,
my precious hoard, on a punier man,
less stout in struggle. Thyself hast now
fulfilled such deeds, that thy fame shall endure
through all the ages. As ever he did,
well may the Wielder reward thee still!”
Beowulf spake, bairn of Ecgtheow:—
“This work of war most willingly
we have fought, this fight, and fearlessly dared
force of the foe. Fain, too, were I
hadst thou but seen himself, what time
the fiend in his trappings tottered to fall!
Swiftly, I thought, in strongest gripe
on his bed of death to bind him down,
that he in the hent of this hand of mine
should breathe his last: but he broke away.
Him I might not — the Maker willed not —
hinder from flight, and firm enough hold
the life-destroyer: too sturdy was he,
the ruthless, in running! For rescue, however,
he left behind him his hand in pledge,
arm and shoulder; nor aught of help
could the cursed one thus procure at all.
None the longer liveth he, loathsome fiend,
sunk in his sins, but sorrow holds him
tightly grasped in gripe of anguish,
in baleful bonds, where bide he must,
evil outlaw, such awful doom
as the Mighty Maker shall mete him out.”
More silent seemed the son of Ecglaf   
in boastful speech of his battle-deeds,
since athelings all, through the earl’s great prowess,
beheld that hand, on the high roof gazing,
foeman’s fingers, — the forepart of each
of the sturdy nails to steel was likest, —
heathen’s “hand-spear,” hostile warrior’s
claw uncanny. ‘Twas clear, they said,
that him no blade of the brave could touch,
how keen soever, or cut away
that battle-hand bloody from baneful foe.
THERE was hurry and hest in Heorot now
for hands to bedeck it, and dense was the throng
of men and women the wine-hall to cleanse,
the guest-room to garnish. Gold-gay shone the hangings
that were wove on the wall, and wonders many
to delight each mortal that looks upon them.
Though braced within by iron bands,
that building bright was broken sorely;   
rent were its hinges; the roof alone
held safe and sound, when, seared with crime,
the fiendish foe his flight essayed,
of life despairing. — No light thing that,
the flight for safety, — essay it who will!
Forced of fate, he shall find his way
to the refuge ready for race of man,
for soul-possessors, and sons of earth;
and there his body on bed of death
shall rest after revel. Arrived was the hour
when to hall proceeded Healfdene’s son:
the king himself would sit to banquet.
Ne’er heard I of host in haughtier throng
more graciously gathered round giver-of-rings!
Bowed then to bench those bearers-of-glory,
fain of the feasting. Featly received
many a mead-cup the mighty-in-spirit,
kinsmen who sat in the sumptuous hall,
Hrothgar and Hrothulf. Heorot now
was filled with friends; the folk of Scyldings
ne’er yet had tried the traitor’s deed.
To Beowulf gave the bairn of Healfdene
a gold-wove banner, guerdon of triumph,
broidered battle-flag, breastplate and helmet;
and a splendid sword was seen of many
borne to the brave one. Beowulf took
cup in hall:   for such costly gifts
he suffered no shame in that soldier throng.
For I heard of few heroes, in heartier mood,
with four such gifts, so fashioned with gold,
on the ale-bench honoring others thus!
O’er the roof of the helmet high, a ridge,
wound with wires, kept ward o’er the head,
lest the relict-of-files   should fierce invade,
sharp in the strife, when that shielded hero
should go to grapple against his foes.
Then the earls’-defence   on the floor   bade lead
coursers eight, with carven head-gear,
adown the hall: one horse was decked
with a saddle all shining and set in jewels;
‘twas the battle-seat of the best of kings,
when to play of swords the son of Healfdene
was fain to fare. Ne’er failed his valor
in the crush of combat when corpses fell.
To Beowulf over them both then gave
the refuge-of-Ingwines right and power,
o’er war-steeds and weapons: wished him joy of them.
Manfully thus the mighty prince,
hoard-guard for heroes, that hard fight repaid
with steeds and treasures contemned by none
who is willing to say the sooth aright.
AND the lord of earls, to each that came
with Beowulf over the briny ways,
an heirloom there at the ale-bench gave,
precious gift; and the price   bade pay
in gold for him whom Grendel erst
murdered, — and fain of them more had killed,
had not wisest God their Wyrd averted,
and the man’s   brave mood. The Maker then
ruled human kind, as here and now.
Therefore is insight always best,
and forethought of mind. How much awaits him
of lief and of loath, who long time here,
through days of warfare this world endures!
Then song and music mingled sounds
in the presence of Healfdene’s head-of-armies   
and harping was heard with the hero-lay
as Hrothgar’s singer the hall-joy woke
along the mead-seats, making his song
of that sudden raid on the sons of Finn.   
Healfdene’s hero, Hnaef the Scylding,
was fated to fall in the Frisian slaughter.   
Hildeburh needed not hold in value
her enemies’ honor!   Innocent both
were the loved ones she lost at the linden-play,
bairn and brother, they bowed to fate,
stricken by spears; ‘twas a sorrowful woman!
None doubted why the daughter of Hoc
bewailed her doom when dawning came,
and under the sky she saw them lying,
kinsmen murdered, where most she had kenned
of the sweets of the world! By war were swept, too,
Finn’s own liegemen, and few were left;
in the parleying-place   he could ply no longer
weapon, nor war could he wage on Hengest,
and rescue his remnant by right of arms
from the prince’s thane. A pact he offered:
another dwelling the Danes should have,
hall and high-seat, and half the power
should fall to them in Frisian land;
and at the fee-gifts, Folcwald’s son
day by day the Danes should honor,
the folk of Hengest favor with rings,
even as truly, with treasure and jewels,
with fretted gold, as his Frisian kin
he meant to honor in ale-hall there.
Pact of peace they plighted further
on both sides firmly. Finn to Hengest
with oath, upon honor, openly promised
that woful remnant, with wise-men’s aid,
nobly to govern, so none of the guests
by word or work should warp the treaty,   
or with malice of mind bemoan themselves
as forced to follow their fee-giver’s slayer,
lordless men, as their lot ordained.
Should Frisian, moreover, with foeman’s taunt,
that murderous hatred to mind recall,
then edge of the sword must seal his doom.
Oaths were given, and ancient gold
heaped from hoard. — The hardy Scylding,
battle-thane best,   on his balefire lay.
All on the pyre were plain to see
the gory sark, the gilded swine-crest,
boar of hard iron, and athelings many
slain by the sword: at the slaughter they fell.
It was Hildeburh’s hest, at Hnaef’s own pyre
the bairn of her body on brands to lay,
his bones to burn, on the balefire placed,
at his uncle’s side. In sorrowful dirges
bewept them the woman: great wailing ascended.
Then wound up to welkin the wildest of death-fires,
roared o’er the hillock:   heads all were melted,
gashes burst, and blood gushed out
from bites   of the body. Balefire devoured,
greediest spirit, those spared not by war
out of either folk: their flower was gone.
THEN hastened those heroes their home to see,
friendless, to find the Frisian land,
houses and high burg. Hengest still
through the death-dyed winter dwelt with Finn,
holding pact, yet of home he minded,
though powerless his ring-decked prow to drive
over the waters, now waves rolled fierce
lashed by the winds, or winter locked them
in icy fetters. Then fared another
year to men’s dwellings, as yet they do,
the sunbright skies, that their season ever
duly await. Far off winter was driven;
fair lay earth’s breast; and fain was the rover,
the guest, to depart, though more gladly he pondered
on wreaking his vengeance than roaming the deep,
and how to hasten the hot encounter
where sons of the Frisians were sure to be.
So he escaped not the common doom,
when Hun with “Lafing,” the light-of-battle,
best of blades, his bosom pierced:
its edge was famed with the Frisian earls.
On fierce-heart Finn there fell likewise,
on himself at home, the horrid sword-death;
for Guthlaf and Oslaf of grim attack
had sorrowing told, from sea-ways landed,
mourning their woes.   Finn’s wavering spirit
bode not in breast. The burg was reddened
with blood of foemen, and Finn was slain,
king amid clansmen; the queen was taken.
To their ship the Scylding warriors bore
all the chattels the chieftain owned,
whatever they found in Finn’s domain
of gems and jewels. The gentle wife
o’er paths of the deep to the Danes they bore,
led to her land. The lay was finished,
the gleeman’s song. Then glad rose the revel;
bench-joy brightened. Bearers draw
from their “wonder-vats” wine. Comes Wealhtheow forth,
under gold-crown goes where the good pair sit,
uncle and nephew, true each to the other one,
kindred in amity. Unferth the spokesman
at the Scylding lord’s feet sat: men had faith in his spirit,
his keenness of courage, though kinsmen had found him
unsure at the sword-play. The Scylding queen spoke:
“Quaff of this cup, my king and lord,
breaker of rings, and blithe be thou,
gold-friend of men; to the Geats here speak
such words of mildness as man should use.
Be glad with thy Geats; of those gifts be mindful,
or near or far, which now thou hast.
Men say to me, as son thou wishest
yon hero to hold. Thy Heorot purged,
jewel-hall brightest, enjoy while thou canst,
with many a largess; and leave to thy kin
folk and realm when forth thou goest
to greet thy doom. For gracious I deem
my Hrothulf,   willing to hold and rule
nobly our youths, if thou yield up first,
prince of Scyldings, thy part in the world.
I ween with good he will well requite
offspring of ours, when all he minds
that for him we did in his helpless days
of gift and grace to gain him honor!”
Then she turned to the seat where her sons were placed,
Hrethric and Hrothmund, with heroes’ bairns,
young men together: the Geat, too, sat there,
Beowulf brave, the brothers between.
A CUP she gave him, with kindly greeting
and winsome words. Of wounden gold,
she offered, to honor him, arm-jewels twain,
corselet and rings, and of collars the noblest
that ever I knew the earth around.
Ne’er heard I so mighty, ‘neath heaven’s dome,
a hoard-gem of heroes, since Hama bore
to his bright-built burg the Brisings’ necklace,
jewel and gem casket. — Jealousy fled he,
Eormenric’s hate: chose help eternal.
Hygelac Geat, grandson of Swerting,
on the last of his raids this ring bore with him,
under his banner the booty defending,
the war-spoil warding; but Wyrd o’erwhelmed him
what time, in his daring, dangers he sought,
feud with Frisians. Fairest of gems
he bore with him over the beaker-of-waves,
sovran strong: under shield he died.
Fell the corpse of the king into keeping of Franks,
gear of the breast, and that gorgeous ring;
weaker warriors won the spoil,
after gripe of battle, from Geatland’s lord,
and held the death-field. Din rose in hall.
Wealhtheow spake amid warriors, and said:—
“This jewel enjoy in thy jocund youth,
Beowulf lov’d, these battle-weeds wear,
a royal treasure, and richly thrive!
Preserve thy strength, and these striplings here
counsel in kindness: requital be mine.
Hast done such deeds, that for days to come
thou art famed among folk both far and near,
so wide as washeth the wave of Ocean
his windy walls. Through the ways of life
prosper, O prince! I pray for thee
rich possessions. To son of mine
be helpful in deed and uphold his joys!
Here every earl to the other is true,
mild of mood, to the master loyal!
Thanes are friendly, the throng obedient,
liegemen are revelling: list and obey!”
Went then to her place. — That was proudest of feasts;
flowed wine for the warriors. Wyrd they knew not,
destiny dire, and the doom to be seen
by many an earl when eve should come,
and Hrothgar homeward hasten away,
royal, to rest. The room was guarded
by an army of earls, as erst was done.
They bared the bench-boards; abroad they spread
beds and bolsters. — One beer-carouser
in danger of doom lay down in the hall. —
At their heads they set their shields of war,
bucklers bright; on the bench were there
over each atheling, easy to see,
the high battle-helmet, the haughty spear,
the corselet of rings. ‘Twas their custom so
ever to be for battle prepared,
at home, or harrying, which it were,
even as oft as evil threatened
their sovran king. — They were clansmen good.
THEN sank they to sleep. With sorrow one bought
his rest of the evening, — as ofttime had happened
when Grendel guarded that golden hall,
evil wrought, till his end drew nigh,
slaughter for sins. ‘Twas seen and told
how an avenger survived the fiend,
as was learned afar. The livelong time
after that grim fight, Grendel’s mother,
monster of women, mourned her woe.
She was doomed to dwell in the dreary waters,
cold sea-courses, since Cain cut down
with edge of the sword his only brother,
his father’s offspring: outlawed he fled,
marked with murder, from men’s delights
warded the wilds. — There woke from him
such fate-sent ghosts as Grendel, who,
war-wolf horrid, at Heorot found
a warrior watching and waiting the fray,
with whom the grisly one grappled amain.
But the man remembered his mighty power,
the glorious gift that God had sent him,
in his Maker’s mercy put his trust
for comfort and help: so he conquered the foe,
felled the fiend, who fled abject,
reft of joy, to the realms of death,
mankind’s foe. And his mother now,
gloomy and grim, would go that quest
of sorrow, the death of her son to avenge.
To Heorot came she, where helmeted Danes
slept in the hall. Too soon came back
old ills of the earls, when in she burst,
the mother of Grendel. Less grim, though, that terror,
e’en as terror of woman in war is less,
might of maid, than of men in arms
when, hammer-forged, the falchion hard,
sword gore-stained, through swine of the helm,
crested, with keen blade carves amain.
Then was in hall the hard-edge drawn,
the swords on the settles,   and shields a-many
firm held in hand: nor helmet minded
nor harness of mail, whom that horror seized.
Haste was hers; she would hie afar
and save her life when the liegemen saw her.
Yet a single atheling up she seized
fast and firm, as she fled to the moor.
He was for Hrothgar of heroes the dearest,
of trusty vassals betwixt the seas,
whom she killed on his couch, a clansman famous,
in battle brave. — Nor was Beowulf there;
another house had been held apart,
after giving of gold, for the Geat renowned. —
Uproar filled Heorot; the hand all had viewed,
blood-flecked, she bore with her; bale was returned,
dole in the dwellings: ‘twas dire exchange
where Dane and Geat were doomed to give
the lives of loved ones. Long-tried king,
the hoary hero, at heart was sad
when he knew his noble no more lived,
and dead indeed was his dearest thane.
To his bower was Beowulf brought in haste,
dauntless victor. As daylight broke,
along with his earls the atheling lord,
with his clansmen, came where the king abode
waiting to see if the Wielder-of-All
would turn this tale of trouble and woe.
Strode o’er floor the famed-in-strife,
with his hand-companions, — the hall resounded, —
wishing to greet the wise old king,
Ingwines’ lord; he asked if the night
had passed in peace to the prince’s mind.
HROTHGAR spake, helmet-of-Scyldings:—
“Ask not of pleasure! Pain is renewed
to Danish folk. Dead is Aeschere,
of Yrmenlaf the elder brother,
my sage adviser and stay in council,
shoulder-comrade in stress of fight
when warriors clashed and we warded our heads,
hewed the helm-boars; hero famed
should be every earl as Aeschere was!
But here in Heorot a hand hath slain him
of wandering death-sprite. I wot not whither,   
proud of the prey, her path she took,
fain of her fill. The feud she avenged
that yesternight, unyieldingly,
Grendel in grimmest grasp thou killedst, —
seeing how long these liegemen mine
he ruined and ravaged. Reft of life,
in arms he fell. Now another comes,
keen and cruel, her kin to avenge,
faring far in feud of blood
so that many a thane shall think, who e’er
sorrows in soul for that sharer of rings,
this is hardest of heart-bales. The hand lies low
that once was willing each wish to please.
Land-dwellers here   and liegemen mine,
who house by those parts, I have heard relate
that such a pair they have sometimes seen,
march-stalkers mighty the moorland haunting,
wandering spirits: one of them seemed,
so far as my folk could fairly judge,
of womankind; and one, accursed,
in man’s guise trod the misery-track
of exile, though huger than human bulk.
Grendel in days long gone they named him,
folk of the land; his father they knew not,
nor any brood that was born to him
of treacherous spirits. Untrod is their home;
by wolf-cliffs haunt they and windy headlands,
fenways fearful, where flows the stream
from mountains gliding to gloom of the rocks,
underground flood. Not far is it hence
in measure of miles that the mere expands,
and o’er it the frost-bound forest hanging,
sturdily rooted, shadows the wave.
By night is a wonder weird to see,
fire on the waters. So wise lived none
of the sons of men, to search those depths!
Nay, though the heath-rover, harried by dogs,
the horn-proud hart, this holt should seek,
long distance driven, his dear life first
on the brink he yields ere he brave the plunge
to hide his head: ‘tis no happy place!
Thence the welter of waters washes up
wan to welkin when winds bestir
evil storms, and air grows dusk,
and the heavens weep. Now is help once more
with thee alone! The land thou knowst not,
place of fear, where thou findest out
that sin-flecked being. Seek if thou dare!
I will reward thee, for waging this fight,
with ancient treasure, as erst I did,
with winding gold, if thou winnest back.”
BEOWULF spake, bairn of Ecgtheow:
“Sorrow not, sage! It beseems us better
friends to avenge than fruitlessly mourn them.
Each of us all must his end abide
in the ways of the world; so win who may
glory ere death! When his days are told,
that is the warrior’s worthiest doom.
Rise, O realm-warder! Ride we anon,
and mark the trail of the mother of Grendel.
No harbor shall hide her — heed my promise! —
enfolding of field or forested mountain
or floor of the flood, let her flee where she will!
But thou this day endure in patience,
as I ween thou wilt, thy woes each one.”
Leaped up the graybeard: God he thanked,
mighty Lord, for the man’s brave words.
For Hrothgar soon a horse was saddled
wave-maned steed. The sovran wise
stately rode on; his shield-armed men
followed in force. The footprints led
along the woodland, widely seen,
a path o’er the plain, where she passed, and trod
the murky moor; of men-at-arms
she bore the bravest and best one, dead,
him who with Hrothgar the homestead ruled.
On then went the atheling-born
o’er stone-cliffs steep and strait defiles,
narrow passes and unknown ways,
headlands sheer, and the haunts of the Nicors.
Foremost he   fared, a few at his side
of the wiser men, the ways to scan,
till he found in a flash the forested hill
hanging over the hoary rock,
a woful wood: the waves below
were dyed in blood. The Danish men
had sorrow of soul, and for Scyldings all,
for many a hero, ‘twas hard to bear,
ill for earls, when Aeschere’s head
they found by the flood on the foreland there.
Waves were welling, the warriors saw,
hot with blood; but the horn sang oft
battle-song bold. The band sat down,
and watched on the water worm-like things,
sea-dragons strange that sounded the deep,
and nicors that lay on the ledge of the ness —
such as oft essay at hour of morn
on the road-of-sails their ruthless quest, —
and sea-snakes and monsters. These started away,
swollen and savage that song to hear,
that war-horn’s blast. The warden of Geats,
with bolt from bow, then balked of life,
of wave-work, one monster, amid its heart
went the keen war-shaft; in water it seemed
less doughty in swimming whom death had seized.
Swift on the billows, with boar-spears well
hooked and barbed, it was hard beset,
done to death and dragged on the headland,
wave-roamer wondrous. Warriors viewed
the grisly guest. Then girt him Beowulf
in martial mail, nor mourned for his life.
His breastplate broad and bright of hues,
woven by hand, should the waters try;
well could it ward the warrior’s body
that battle should break on his breast in vain
nor harm his heart by the hand of a foe.
And the helmet white that his head protected
was destined to dare the deeps of the flood,
through wave-whirl win: ‘twas wound with chains,
decked with gold, as in days of yore
the weapon-smith worked it wondrously,
with swine-forms set it, that swords nowise,
brandished in battle, could bite that helm.
Nor was that the meanest of mighty helps
which Hrothgar’s orator offered at need:
“Hrunting” they named the hilted sword,
of old-time heirlooms easily first;
iron was its edge, all etched with poison,
with battle-blood hardened, nor blenched it at fight
in hero’s hand who held it ever,
on paths of peril prepared to go
to folkstead   of foes. Not first time this
it was destined to do a daring task.
For he bore not in mind, the bairn of Ecglaf
sturdy and strong, that speech he had made,
drunk with wine, now this weapon he lent
to a stouter swordsman. Himself, though, durst not
under welter of waters wager his life
as loyal liegeman. So lost he his glory,
honor of earls. With the other not so,
who girded him now for the grim encounter.
BEOWULF spake, bairn of Ecgtheow:—
“Have mind, thou honored offspring of Healfdene
gold-friend of men, now I go on this quest,
sovran wise, what once was said:
if in thy cause it came that I
should lose my life, thou wouldst loyal bide
to me, though fallen, in father’s place!
Be guardian, thou, to this group of my thanes,
my warrior-friends, if War should seize me;
and the goodly gifts thou gavest me,
Hrothgar beloved, to Hygelac send!
Geatland’s king may ken by the gold,
Hrethel’s son see, when he stares at the treasure,
that I got me a friend for goodness famed,
and joyed while I could in my jewel-bestower.
And let Unferth wield this wondrous sword,
earl far-honored, this heirloom precious,
hard of edge: with Hrunting I
seek doom of glory, or Death shall take me.”
After these words the Weder-Geat lord
boldly hastened, biding never
answer at all: the ocean floods
closed o’er the hero. Long while of the day
fled ere he felt the floor of the sea.
Soon found the fiend who the flood-domain
sword-hungry held these hundred winters,
greedy and grim, that some guest from above,
some man, was raiding her monster-realm.
She grasped out for him with grisly claws,
and the warrior seized; yet scathed she not
his body hale; the breastplate hindered,
as she strove to shatter the sark of war,
the linked harness, with loathsome hand.
Then bore this brine-wolf, when bottom she touched,
the lord of rings to the lair she haunted
whiles vainly he strove, though his valor held,
weapon to wield against wondrous monsters
that sore beset him; sea-beasts many
tried with fierce tusks to tear his mail,
and swarmed on the stranger. But soon he marked
he was now in some hall, he knew not which,
where water never could work him harm,
nor through the roof could reach him ever
fangs of the flood. Firelight he saw,
beams of a blaze that brightly shone.
Then the warrior was ware of that wolf-of-the-deep,
mere-wife monstrous. For mighty stroke
he swung his blade, and the blow withheld not.
Then sang on her head that seemly blade
its war-song wild. But the warrior found
the light-of-battle   was loath to bite,
to harm the heart: its hard edge failed
the noble at need, yet had known of old
strife hand to hand, and had helmets cloven,
doomed men’s fighting-gear. First time, this,
for the gleaming blade that its glory fell.
Firm still stood, nor failed in valor,
heedful of high deeds, Hygelac’s kinsman;
flung away fretted sword, featly jewelled,
the angry earl; on earth it lay
steel-edged and stiff. His strength he trusted,
hand-gripe of might. So man shall do
whenever in war he weens to earn him
lasting fame, nor fears for his life!
Seized then by shoulder, shrank not from combat,
the Geatish war-prince Grendel’s mother.
Flung then the fierce one, filled with wrath,
his deadly foe, that she fell to ground.
Swift on her part she paid him back
with grisly grasp, and grappled with him.
Spent with struggle, stumbled the warrior,
fiercest of fighting-men, fell adown.
On the hall-guest she hurled herself, hent her short sword,
broad and brown-edged,   the bairn to avenge,
the sole-born son. — On his shoulder lay
braided breast-mail, barring death,
withstanding entrance of edge or blade.
Life would have ended for Ecgtheow’s son,
under wide earth for that earl of Geats,
had his armor of war not aided him,
battle-net hard, and holy God
wielded the victory, wisest Maker.
The Lord of Heaven allowed his cause;
and easily rose the earl erect.
‘MID the battle-gear saw he a blade triumphant,
old-sword of Eotens, with edge of proof,
warriors’ heirloom, weapon unmatched,
— save only ‘twas more than other men
to bandy-of-battle could bear at all —
as the giants had wrought it, ready and keen.
Seized then its chain-hilt the Scyldings’ chieftain,
bold and battle-grim, brandished the sword,
reckless of life, and so wrathfully smote
that it gripped her neck and grasped her hard,
her bone-rings breaking: the blade pierced through
that fated-one’s flesh: to floor she sank.
Bloody the blade: he was blithe of his deed.
Then blazed forth light. ‘Twas bright within
as when from the sky there shines unclouded
heaven’s candle. The hall he scanned.
By the wall then went he; his weapon raised
high by its hilts the Hygelac-thane,
angry and eager. That edge was not useless
to the warrior now. He wished with speed
Grendel to guerdon for grim raids many,
for the war he waged on Western-Danes
oftener far than an only time,
when of Hrothgar’s hearth-companions
he slew in slumber, in sleep devoured,
fifteen men of the folk of Danes,
and as many others outward bore,
his horrible prey. Well paid for that
the wrathful prince! For now prone he saw
Grendel stretched there, spent with war,
spoiled of life, so scathed had left him
Heorot’s battle. The body sprang far
when after death it endured the blow,
sword-stroke savage, that severed its head.
Soon,   then, saw the sage companions
who waited with Hrothgar, watching the flood,
that the tossing waters turbid grew,
blood-stained the mere. Old men together,
hoary-haired, of the hero spake;
the warrior would not, they weened, again,
proud of conquest, come to seek
their mighty master. To many it seemed
the wolf-of-the-waves had won his life.
The ninth hour came. The noble Scyldings
left the headland; homeward went
the gold-friend of men.   But the guests sat on,
stared at the surges, sick in heart,
and wished, yet weened not, their winsome lord
again to see. Now that sword began,
from blood of the fight, in battle-droppings,   
war-blade, to wane: ‘twas a wondrous thing
that all of it melted as ice is wont
when frosty fetters the Father loosens,
unwinds the wave-bonds, wielding all
seasons and times: the true God he!
Nor took from that dwelling the duke of the Geats
precious things, though a plenty he saw,
save only the head and that hilt withal
blazoned with jewels: the blade had melted,
burned was the bright sword, her blood was so hot,
so poisoned the hell-sprite who perished within there.
Soon he was swimming who safe saw in combat
downfall of demons; up-dove through the flood.
The clashing waters were cleansed now,
waste of waves, where the wandering fiend
her life-days left and this lapsing world.
Swam then to strand the sailors’-refuge,
sturdy-in-spirit, of sea-booty glad,
of burden brave he bore with him.
Went then to greet him, and God they thanked,
the thane-band choice of their chieftain blithe,
that safe and sound they could see him again.
Soon from the hardy one helmet and armor
deftly they doffed: now drowsed the mere,
water ‘neath welkin, with war-blood stained.
Forth they fared by the footpaths thence,
merry at heart the highways measured,
well-known roads. Courageous men
carried the head from the cliff by the sea,
an arduous task for all the band,
the firm in fight, since four were needed
on the shaft-of-slaughter   strenuously
to bear to the gold-hall Grendel’s head.
So presently to the palace there
foemen fearless, fourteen Geats,
marching came. Their master-of-clan
mighty amid them the meadow-ways trod.
Strode then within the sovran thane
fearless in fight, of fame renowned,
hardy hero, Hrothgar to greet.
And next by the hair into hall was borne
Grendel’s head, where the henchmen were drinking,
an awe to clan and queen alike,
a monster of marvel: the men looked on.
BEOWULF spake, bairn of Ecgtheow:—
“Lo, now, this sea-booty, son of Healfdene,
Lord of Scyldings, we’ve lustily brought thee,
sign of glory; thou seest it here.
Not lightly did I with my life escape!
In war under water this work I essayed
with endless effort; and even so
my strength had been lost had the Lord not shielded me.
Not a whit could I with Hrunting do
in work of war, though the weapon is good;
yet a sword the Sovran of Men vouchsafed me
to spy on the wall there, in splendor hanging,
old, gigantic, — how oft He guides
the friendless wight! — and I fought with that brand,
felling in fight, since fate was with me,
the house’s wardens. That war-sword then
all burned, bright blade, when the blood gushed o’er it,
battle-sweat hot; but the hilt I brought back
from my foes. So avenged I their fiendish deeds
death-fall of Danes, as was due and right.
And this is my hest, that in Heorot now
safe thou canst sleep with thy soldier band,
and every thane of all thy folk
both old and young; no evil fear,
Scyldings’ lord, from that side again,
aught ill for thy earls, as erst thou must!”
Then the golden hilt, for that gray-haired leader,
hoary hero, in hand was laid,
giant-wrought, old. So owned and enjoyed it
after downfall of devils, the Danish lord,
wonder-smiths’ work, since the world was rid
of that grim-souled fiend, the foe of God,
murder-marked, and his mother as well.
Now it passed into power of the people’s king,
best of all that the oceans bound
who have scattered their gold o’er Scandia’s isle.
Hrothgar spake — the hilt he viewed,
heirloom old, where was etched the rise
of that far-off fight when the floods o’erwhelmed,
raging waves, the race of giants
(fearful their fate!), a folk estranged
from God Eternal: whence guerdon due
in that waste of waters the Wielder paid them.
So on the guard of shining gold
in runic staves it was rightly said
for whom the serpent-traced sword was wrought,
best of blades, in bygone days,
and the hilt well wound. — The wise-one spake,
son of Healfdene; silent were all:—
“Lo, so may he say who sooth and right
follows ‘mid folk, of far times mindful,
a land-warden old,   that this earl belongs
to the better breed! So, borne aloft,
thy fame must fly, O friend my Beowulf,
far and wide o’er folksteads many. Firmly thou shalt all maintain,
mighty strength with mood of wisdom. Love of mine will I assure thee,
as, awhile ago, I promised; thou shalt prove a stay in future,
in far-off years, to folk of thine,
to the heroes a help. Was not Heremod thus
to offspring of Ecgwela, Honor-Scyldings,
nor grew for their grace, but for grisly slaughter,
for doom of death to the Danishmen.
He slew, wrath-swollen, his shoulder-comrades,
companions at board! So he passed alone,
chieftain haughty, from human cheer.
Though him the Maker with might endowed,
delights of power, and uplifted high
above all men, yet blood-fierce his mind,
his breast-hoard, grew, no bracelets gave he
to Danes as was due; he endured all joyless
strain of struggle and stress of woe,
long feud with his folk. Here find thy lesson!
Of virtue advise thee! This verse I have said for thee,
wise from lapsed winters. Wondrous seems
how to sons of men Almighty God
in the strength of His spirit sendeth wisdom,
estate, high station: He swayeth all things.
Whiles He letteth right lustily fare
the heart of the hero of high-born race, —
in seat ancestral assigns him bliss,
his folk’s sure fortress in fee to hold,
puts in his power great parts of the earth,
empire so ample, that end of it
this wanter-of-wisdom weeneth none.
So he waxes in wealth, nowise can harm him
illness or age; no evil cares
shadow his spirit; no sword-hate threatens
from ever an enemy: all the world
wends at his will, no worse he knoweth,
till all within him obstinate pride
waxes and wakes while the warden slumbers,
the spirit’s sentry; sleep is too fast
which masters his might, and the murderer nears,
stealthily shooting the shafts from his bow!
“UNDER harness his heart then is hit indeed
by sharpest shafts; and no shelter avails
from foul behest of the hellish fiend.   
Him seems too little what long he possessed.
Greedy and grim, no golden rings
he gives for his pride; the promised future
forgets he and spurns, with all God has sent him,
Wonder-Wielder, of wealth and fame.
Yet in the end it ever comes
that the frame of the body fragile yields,
fated falls; and there follows another
who joyously the jewels divides,
the royal riches, nor recks of his forebear.
Ban, then, such baleful thoughts, Beowulf dearest,
best of men, and the better part choose,
profit eternal; and temper thy pride,
warrior famous! The flower of thy might
lasts now a while: but erelong it shall be
that sickness or sword thy strength shall minish,
or fang of fire, or flooding billow,
or bite of blade, or brandished spear,
or odious age; or the eyes’ clear beam
wax dull and darken: Death even thee
in haste shall o’erwhelm, thou hero of war!
So the Ring-Danes these half-years a hundred I ruled,
wielded ‘neath welkin, and warded them bravely
from mighty-ones many o’er middle-earth,
from spear and sword, till it seemed for me
no foe could be found under fold of the sky.
Lo, sudden the shift! To me seated secure
came grief for joy when Grendel began
to harry my home, the hellish foe;
for those ruthless raids, unresting I suffered
heart-sorrow heavy. Heaven be thanked,
Lord Eternal, for life extended
that I on this head all hewn and bloody,
after long evil, with eyes may gaze!
— Go to the bench now! Be glad at banquet,
warrior worthy! A wealth of treasure
at dawn of day, be dealt between us!”
Glad was the Geats’ lord, going betimes
to seek his seat, as the Sage commanded.
Afresh, as before, for the famed-in-battle,
for the band of the hall, was a banquet dight
nobly anew. The Night-Helm darkened
dusk o’er the drinkers. The doughty ones rose:
for the hoary-headed would hasten to rest,
aged Scylding; and eager the Geat,
shield-fighter sturdy, for sleeping yearned.
Him wander-weary, warrior-guest
from far, a hall-thane heralded forth,
who by custom courtly cared for all
needs of a thane as in those old days
warrior-wanderers wont to have.
So slumbered the stout-heart. Stately the hall
rose gabled and gilt where the guest slept on
till a raven black the rapture-of-heaven   
blithe-heart boded. Bright came flying
shine after shadow. The swordsmen hastened,
athelings all were eager homeward
forth to fare; and far from thence
the great-hearted guest would guide his keel.
Bade then the hardy-one Hrunting be brought
to the son of Ecglaf, the sword bade him take,
excellent iron, and uttered his thanks for it,
quoth that he counted it keen in battle,
“war-friend” winsome: with words he slandered not
edge of the blade: ‘twas a big-hearted man!
Now eager for parting and armed at point
warriors waited, while went to his host
that Darling of Danes. The doughty atheling
to high-seat hastened and Hrothgar greeted.
BEOWULF spake, bairn of Ecgtheow:—
“Lo, we seafarers say our will,
far-come men, that we fain would seek
Hygelac now. We here have found
hosts to our heart: thou hast harbored us well.
If ever on earth I am able to win me
more of thy love, O lord of men,
aught anew, than I now have done,
for work of war I am willing still!
If it come to me ever across the seas
that neighbor foemen annoy and fright thee, —
as they that hate thee erewhile have used, —
thousands then of thanes I shall bring,
heroes to help thee. Of Hygelac I know,
ward of his folk, that, though few his years,
the lord of the Geats will give me aid
by word and by work, that well I may serve thee,
wielding the war-wood to win thy triumph
and lending thee might when thou lackest men.
If thy Hrethric should come to court of Geats,
a sovran’s son, he will surely there
find his friends. A far-off land
each man should visit who vaunts him brave.”
Him then answering, Hrothgar spake:—
“These words of thine the wisest God
sent to thy soul! No sager counsel
from so young in years e’er yet have I heard.
Thou art strong of main and in mind art wary,
art wise in words! I ween indeed
if ever it hap that Hrethel’s heir
by spear be seized, by sword-grim battle,
by illness or iron, thine elder and lord,
people’s leader, — and life be thine, —
no seemlier man will the Sea-Geats find
at all to choose for their chief and king,
for hoard-guard of heroes, if hold thou wilt
thy kinsman’s kingdom! Thy keen mind pleases me
the longer the better, Beowulf loved!
Thou hast brought it about that both our peoples,
sons of the Geat and Spear-Dane folk,
shall have mutual peace, and from murderous strife,
such as once they waged, from war refrain.
Long as I rule this realm so wide,
let our hoards be common, let heroes with gold
each other greet o’er the gannet’s-bath,
and the ringed-prow bear o’er rolling waves
tokens of love. I trow my landfolk
towards friend and foe are firmly joined,
and honor they keep in the olden way.”
To him in the hall, then, Healfdene’s son
gave treasures twelve, and the trust-of-earls
bade him fare with the gifts to his folk beloved,
hale to his home, and in haste return.
Then kissed the king of kin renowned,
Scyldings’ chieftain, that choicest thane,
and fell on his neck. Fast flowed the tears
of the hoary-headed. Heavy with winters,
he had chances twain, but he clung to this,   —
that each should look on the other again,
and hear him in hall. Was this hero so dear to him.
his breast’s wild billows he banned in vain;
safe in his soul a secret longing,
locked in his mind, for that loved man
burned in his blood. Then Beowulf strode,
glad of his gold-gifts, the grass-plot o’er,
warrior blithe. The wave-roamer bode
riding at anchor, its owner awaiting.
As they hastened onward, Hrothgar’s gift
they lauded at length. — ‘Twas a lord unpeered,
every way blameless, till age had broken
it spareth no mortal — his splendid might.
CAME now to ocean the ever-courageous
hardy henchmen, their harness bearing,
woven war-sarks. The warden marked,
trusty as ever, the earl’s return.
From the height of the hill no hostile words
reached the guests as he rode to greet them;
but “Welcome!” he called to that Weder clan
as the sheen-mailed spoilers to ship marched on.
Then on the strand, with steeds and treasure
and armor their roomy and ring-dight ship
was heavily laden: high its mast
rose over Hrothgar’s hoarded gems.
A sword to the boat-guard Beowulf gave,
mounted with gold; on the mead-bench since
he was better esteemed, that blade possessing,
heirloom old. — Their ocean-keel boarding,
they drove through the deep, and Daneland left.
A sea-cloth was set, a sail with ropes,
firm to the mast; the flood-timbers moaned;   
nor did wind over billows that wave-swimmer blow
across from her course. The craft sped on,
foam-necked it floated forth o’er the waves,
keel firm-bound over briny currents,
till they got them sight of the Geatish cliffs,
home-known headlands. High the boat,
stirred by winds, on the strand updrove.
Helpful at haven the harbor-guard stood,
who long already for loved companions
by the water had waited and watched afar.
He bound to the beach the broad-bosomed ship
with anchor-bands, lest ocean-billows
that trusty timber should tear away.
Then Beowulf bade them bear the treasure,
gold and jewels; no journey far
was it thence to go to the giver of rings,
Hygelac Hrethling: at home he dwelt
by the sea-wall close, himself and clan.
Haughty that house, a hero the king,
high the hall, and Hygd   right young,
wise and wary, though winters few
in those fortress walls she had found a home,
Haereth’s daughter. Nor humble her ways,
nor grudged she gifts to the Geatish men,
of precious treasure. Not Thryth’s pride showed she,
folk-queen famed, or that fell deceit.
Was none so daring that durst make bold
(save her lord alone) of the liegemen dear
that lady full in the face to look,
but forged fetters he found his lot,
bonds of death! And brief the respite;
soon as they seized him, his sword-doom was spoken,
and the burnished blade a baleful murder
proclaimed and closed. No queenly way
for woman to practise, though peerless she,
that the weaver-of-peace   from warrior dear
by wrath and lying his life should reave!
But Hemming’s kinsman hindered this. —
For over their ale men also told
that of these folk-horrors fewer she wrought,
onslaughts of evil, after she went,
gold-decked bride, to the brave young prince,
atheling haughty, and Offa’s hall
o’er the fallow flood at her father’s bidding
safely sought, where since she prospered,
royal, throned, rich in goods,
fain of the fair life fate had sent her,
and leal in love to the lord of warriors.
He, of all heroes I heard of ever
from sea to sea, of the sons of earth,
most excellent seemed. Hence Offa was praised
for his fighting and feeing by far-off men,
the spear-bold warrior; wisely he ruled
over his empire. Eomer woke to him,
help of heroes, Hemming’s kinsman,
Grandson of Garmund, grim in war.
HASTENED the hardy one, henchmen with him,
sandy strand of the sea to tread
and widespread ways. The world’s great candle,
sun shone from south. They strode along
with sturdy steps to the spot they knew
where the battle-king young, his burg within,
slayer of Ongentheow, shared the rings,
shelter-of-heroes. To Hygelac
Beowulf’s coming was quickly told, —
that there in the court the clansmen’s refuge,
the shield-companion sound and alive,
hale from the hero-play homeward strode.
With haste in the hall, by highest order,
room for the rovers was readily made.
By his sovran he sat, come safe from battle,
kinsman by kinsman. His kindly lord
he first had greeted in gracious form,
with manly words. The mead dispensing,
came through the high hall Haereth’s daughter,
winsome to warriors, wine-cup bore
to the hands of the heroes. Hygelac then
his comrade fairly with question plied
in the lofty hall, sore longing to know
what manner of sojourn the Sea-Geats made.
“What came of thy quest, my kinsman Beowulf,
when thy yearnings suddenly swept thee yonder
battle to seek o’er the briny sea,
combat in Heorot? Hrothgar couldst thou
aid at all, the honored chief,
in his wide-known woes? With waves of care
my sad heart seethed; I sore mistrusted
my loved one’s venture: long I begged thee
by no means to seek that slaughtering monster,
but suffer the South-Danes to settle their feud
themselves with Grendel. Now God be thanked
that safe and sound I can see thee now!”
Beowulf spake, the bairn of Ecgtheow:—
“‘Tis known and unhidden, Hygelac Lord,
to many men, that meeting of ours,
struggle grim between Grendel and me,
which we fought on the field where full too many
sorrows he wrought for the Scylding-Victors,
evils unending. These all I avenged.
No boast can be from breed of Grendel,
any on earth, for that uproar at dawn,
from the longest-lived of the loathsome race
in fleshly fold! — But first I went
Hrothgar to greet in the hall of gifts,
where Healfdene’s kinsman high-renowned,
soon as my purpose was plain to him,
assigned me a seat by his son and heir.
The liegemen were lusty; my life-days never
such merry men over mead in hall
have I heard under heaven! The high-born queen,
people’s peace-bringer, passed through the hall,
cheered the young clansmen, clasps of gold,
ere she sought her seat, to sundry gave.
Oft to the heroes Hrothgar’s daughter,
to earls in turn, the ale-cup tendered, —
she whom I heard these hall-companions
Freawaru name, when fretted gold
she proffered the warriors. Promised is she,
gold-decked maid, to the glad son of Froda.
Sage this seems to the Scylding’s-friend,
kingdom’s-keeper: he counts it wise
the woman to wed so and ward off feud,
store of slaughter. But seldom ever
when men are slain, does the murder-spear sink
but briefest while, though the bride be fair!   
“Nor haply will like it the Heathobard lord,
and as little each of his liegemen all,
when a thane of the Danes, in that doughty throng,
goes with the lady along their hall,
and on him the old-time heirlooms glisten
hard and ring-decked, Heathobard’s treasure,
weapons that once they wielded fair
until they lost at the linden-play   
liegeman leal and their lives as well.
Then, over the ale, on this heirloom gazing,
some ash-wielder old who has all in mind
that spear-death of men,   — he is stern of mood,
heavy at heart, — in the hero young
tests the temper and tries the soul
and war-hate wakens, with words like these:—
Canst thou not, comrade, ken that sword
which to the fray thy father carried
in his final feud, ‘neath the fighting-mask,
dearest of blades, when the Danish slew him
and wielded the war-place on Withergild’s fall,
after havoc of heroes, those hardy Scyldings?
Now, the son of a certain slaughtering Dane,
proud of his treasure, paces this hall,
joys in the killing, and carries the jewel   
that rightfully ought to be owned by thee!
Thus he urges and eggs him all the time
with keenest words, till occasion offers
that Freawaru’s thane, for his father’s deed,
after bite of brand in his blood must slumber,
losing his life; but that liegeman flies
living away, for the land he kens.
And thus be broken on both their sides
oaths of the earls, when Ingeld’s breast
wells with war-hate, and wife-love now
after the care-billows cooler grows.
“So   I hold not high the Heathobards’ faith
due to the Danes, or their during love
and pact of peace. — But I pass from that,
turning to Grendel, O giver-of-treasure,
and saying in full how the fight resulted,
hand-fray of heroes. When heaven’s jewel
had fled o’er far fields, that fierce sprite came,
night-foe savage, to seek us out
where safe and sound we sentried the hall.
To Hondscio then was that harassing deadly,
his fall there was fated. He first was slain,
girded warrior. Grendel on him
turned murderous mouth, on our mighty kinsman,
and all of the brave man’s body devoured.
Yet none the earlier, empty-handed,
would the bloody-toothed murderer, mindful of bale,
outward go from the gold-decked hall:
but me he attacked in his terror of might,
with greedy hand grasped me. A glove hung by him   
wide and wondrous, wound with bands;
and in artful wise it all was wrought,
by devilish craft, of dragon-skins.
Me therein, an innocent man,
the fiendish foe was fain to thrust
with many another. He might not so,
when I all angrily upright stood.
‘Twere long to relate how that land-destroyer
I paid in kind for his cruel deeds;
yet there, my prince, this people of thine
got fame by my fighting. He fled away,
and a little space his life preserved;
but there staid behind him his stronger hand
left in Heorot; heartsick thence
on the floor of the ocean that outcast fell.
Me for this struggle the Scyldings’-friend
paid in plenty with plates of gold,
with many a treasure, when morn had come
and we all at the banquet-board sat down.
Then was song and glee. The gray-haired Scylding,
much tested, told of the times of yore.
Whiles the hero his harp bestirred,
wood-of-delight; now lays he chanted
of sooth and sadness, or said aright
legends of wonder, the wide-hearted king;
or for years of his youth he would yearn at times,
for strength of old struggles, now stricken with age,
hoary hero: his heart surged full
when, wise with winters, he wailed their flight.
Thus in the hall the whole of that day
at ease we feasted, till fell o’er earth
another night. Anon full ready
in greed of vengeance, Grendel’s mother
set forth all doleful. Dead was her son
through war-hate of Weders; now, woman monstrous
with fury fell a foeman she slew,
avenged her offspring. From Aeschere old,
loyal councillor, life was gone;
nor might they e’en, when morning broke,
those Danish people, their death-done comrade
burn with brands, on balefire lay
the man they mourned. Under mountain stream
she had carried the corpse with cruel hands.
For Hrothgar that was the heaviest sorrow
of all that had laden the lord of his folk.
The leader then, by thy life, besought me
(sad was his soul) in the sea-waves’ coil
to play the hero and hazard my being
for glory of prowess: my guerdon he pledged.
I then in the waters — ‘tis widely known —
that sea-floor-guardian savage found.
Hand-to-hand there a while we struggled;
billows welled blood; in the briny hall
her head I hewed with a hardy blade
from Grendel’s mother, — and gained my life,
though not without danger. My doom was not yet.
Then the haven-of-heroes, Healfdene’s son,
gave me in guerdon great gifts of price.
“So held this king to the customs old,
that I wanted for nought in the wage I gained,
the meed of my might; he made me gifts,
Healfdene’s heir, for my own disposal.
Now to thee, my prince, I proffer them all,
gladly give them. Thy grace alone
can find me favor. Few indeed
have I of kinsmen, save, Hygelac, thee!”
Then he bade them bear him the boar-head standard,
the battle-helm high, and breastplate gray,
the splendid sword; then spake in form:—
“Me this war-gear the wise old prince,
Hrothgar, gave, and his hest he added,
that its story be straightway said to thee. —
A while it was held by Heorogar king,
for long time lord of the land of Scyldings;
yet not to his son the sovran left it,
to daring Heoroweard, — dear as he was to him,
his harness of battle. — Well hold thou it all!”
And I heard that soon passed o’er the path of this treasure,
all apple-fallow, four good steeds,
each like the others, arms and horses
he gave to the king. So should kinsmen be,
not weave one another the net of wiles,
or with deep-hid treachery death contrive
for neighbor and comrade. His nephew was ever
by hardy Hygelac held full dear,
and each kept watch o’er the other’s weal.
I heard, too, the necklace to Hygd he presented,
wonder-wrought treasure, which Wealhtheow gave him
sovran’s daughter: three steeds he added,
slender and saddle-gay. Since such gift
the gem gleamed bright on the breast of the queen. 
Thus showed his strain the son of Ecgtheow
as a man remarked for mighty deeds
and acts of honor. At ale he slew not
comrade or kin; nor cruel his mood,
though of sons of earth his strength was greatest,
a glorious gift that God had sent
the splendid leader. Long was he spurned,
and worthless by Geatish warriors held;
him at mead the master-of-clans
failed full oft to favor at all.
Slack and shiftless the strong men deemed him,
profitless prince; but payment came,
to the warrior honored, for all his woes. —
Then the bulwark-of-earls   bade bring within,
hardy chieftain, Hrethel’s heirloom
garnished with gold: no Geat e’er knew
in shape of a sword a statelier prize.
The brand he laid in Beowulf’s lap;
and of hides assigned him seven thousand,   
with house and high-seat. They held in common
land alike by their line of birth,
inheritance, home: but higher the king
because of his rule o’er the realm itself.
Now further it fell with the flight of years,
with harryings horrid, that Hygelac perished,   
and Heardred, too, by hewing of swords
under the shield-wall slaughtered lay,
when him at the van of his victor-folk
sought hardy heroes, Heatho-Scilfings,
in arms o’erwhelming Hereric’s nephew.
Then Beowulf came as king this broad
realm to wield; and he ruled it well
fifty winters,   a wise old prince,
warding his land, until One began
in the dark of night, a Dragon, to rage.
In the grave on the hill a hoard it guarded,
in the stone-barrow steep. A strait path reached it,
unknown to mortals. Some man, however,
came by chance that cave within
to the heathen hoard.   In hand he took
a golden goblet, nor gave he it back,
stole with it away, while the watcher slept,
by thievish wiles: for the warden’s wrath
prince and people must pay betimes!
THAT way he went with no will of his own,
in danger of life, to the dragon’s hoard,
but for pressure of peril, some prince’s thane.
He fled in fear the fatal scourge,
seeking shelter, a sinful man,
and entered in. At the awful sight
tottered that guest, and terror seized him;
yet the wretched fugitive rallied anon
from fright and fear ere he fled away,
and took the cup from that treasure-hoard.
Of such besides there was store enough,
heirlooms old, the earth below,
which some earl forgotten, in ancient years,
left the last of his lofty race,
heedfully there had hidden away,
dearest treasure. For death of yore
had hurried all hence; and he alone
left to live, the last of the clan,
weeping his friends, yet wished to bide
warding the treasure, his one delight,
though brief his respite. The barrow, new-ready,
to strand and sea-waves stood anear,
hard by the headland, hidden and closed;
there laid within it his lordly heirlooms
and heaped hoard of heavy gold
that warden of rings. Few words he spake:
“Now hold thou, earth, since heroes may not,
what earls have owned! Lo, erst from thee
brave men brought it! But battle-death seized
and cruel killing my clansmen all,
robbed them of life and a liegeman’s joys.
None have I left to lift the sword,
or to cleanse the carven cup of price,
beaker bright. My brave are gone.
And the helmet hard, all haughty with gold,
shall part from its plating. Polishers sleep
who could brighten and burnish the battle-mask;
and those weeds of war that were wont to brave
over bicker of shields the bite of steel
rust with their bearer. The ringed mail
fares not far with famous chieftain,
at side of hero! No harp’s delight,
no glee-wood’s gladness! No good hawk now
flies through the hall! Nor horses fleet
stamp in the burgstead! Battle and death
the flower of my race have reft away.”
Mournful of mood, thus he moaned his woe,
alone, for them all, and unblithe wept
by day and by night, till death’s fell wave
o’erwhelmed his heart. His hoard-of-bliss
that old ill-doer open found,
who, blazing at twilight the barrows haunteth,
naked foe-dragon flying by night
folded in fire: the folk of earth
dread him sore. ‘Tis his doom to seek
hoard in the graves, and heathen gold
to watch, many-wintered: nor wins he thereby!
Powerful this plague-of-the-people thus
held the house of the hoard in earth
three hundred winters; till One aroused
wrath in his breast, to the ruler bearing
that costly cup, and the king implored
for bond of peace. So the barrow was plundered,
borne off was booty. His boon was granted
that wretched man; and his ruler saw
first time what was fashioned in far-off days.
When the dragon awoke, new woe was kindled.
O’er the stone he snuffed. The stark-heart found
footprint of foe who so far had gone
in his hidden craft by the creature’s head. —
So may the undoomed easily flee
evils and exile, if only he gain
the grace of The Wielder! — That warden of gold
o’er the ground went seeking, greedy to find
the man who wrought him such wrong in sleep.
Savage and burning, the barrow he circled
all without; nor was any there,
none in the waste.... Yet war he desired,
was eager for battle. The barrow he entered,
sought the cup, and discovered soon
that some one of mortals had searched his treasure,
his lordly gold. The guardian waited
ill-enduring till evening came;
boiling with wrath was the barrow’s keeper,
and fain with flame the foe to pay
for the dear cup’s loss. — Now day was fled
as the worm had wished. By its wall no more
was it glad to bide, but burning flew
folded in flame: a fearful beginning
for sons of the soil; and soon it came,
in the doom of their lord, to a dreadful end.
THEN the baleful fiend its fire belched out,
and bright homes burned. The blaze stood high
all landsfolk frighting. No living thing
would that loathly one leave as aloft it flew.
Wide was the dragon’s warring seen,
its fiendish fury far and near,
as the grim destroyer those Geatish people
hated and hounded. To hidden lair,
to its hoard it hastened at hint of dawn.
Folk of the land it had lapped in flame,
with bale and brand. In its barrow it trusted,
its battling and bulwarks: that boast was vain!
To Beowulf then the bale was told
quickly and truly: the king’s own home,
of buildings the best, in brand-waves melted,
that gift-throne of Geats. To the good old man
sad in heart, ‘twas heaviest sorrow.
The sage assumed that his sovran God
he had angered, breaking ancient law,
and embittered the Lord. His breast within
with black thoughts welled, as his wont was never.
The folk’s own fastness that fiery dragon
with flame had destroyed, and the stronghold all
washed by waves; but the warlike king,
prince of the Weders, plotted vengeance.
Warriors’-bulwark, he bade them work
all of iron — the earl’s commander —
a war-shield wondrous: well he knew
that forest-wood against fire were worthless,
linden could aid not. — Atheling brave,
he was fated to finish this fleeting life,   
his days on earth, and the dragon with him,
though long it had watched o’er the wealth of the hoard! —
Shame he reckoned it, sharer-of-rings,
to follow the flyer-afar with a host,
a broad-flung band; nor the battle feared he,
nor deemed he dreadful the dragon’s warring,
its vigor and valor: ventures desperate
he had passed a-plenty, and perils of war,
contest-crash, since, conqueror proud,
Hrothgar’s hall he had wholly purged,
and in grapple had killed the kin of Grendel,
loathsome breed! Not least was that
of hand-to-hand fights where Hygelac fell,
when the ruler of Geats in rush of battle,
lord of his folk, in the Frisian land,
son of Hrethel, by sword-draughts died,
by brands down-beaten. Thence Beowulf fled
through strength of himself and his swimming power,
though alone, and his arms were laden with thirty
coats of mail, when he came to the sea!
Nor yet might Hetwaras   haughtily boast
their craft of contest, who carried against him
shields to the fight: but few escaped
from strife with the hero to seek their homes!
Then swam over ocean Ecgtheow’s son
lonely and sorrowful, seeking his land,
where Hygd made him offer of hoard and realm,
rings and royal-seat, reckoning naught
the strength of her son to save their kingdom
from hostile hordes, after Hygelac’s death.
No sooner for this could the stricken ones
in any wise move that atheling’s mind
over young Heardred’s head as lord
and ruler of all the realm to be:
yet the hero upheld him with helpful words,
aided in honor, till, older grown,
he wielded the Weder-Geats. — Wandering exiles
sought him o’er seas, the sons of Ohtere,
who had spurned the sway of the Scylfings’-helmet,
the bravest and best that broke the rings,
in Swedish land, of the sea-kings’ line,
haughty hero.   Hence Heardred’s end.
For shelter he gave them, sword-death came,
the blade’s fell blow, to bairn of Hygelac;
but the son of Ongentheow sought again
house and home when Heardred fell,
leaving Beowulf lord of Geats
and gift-seat’s master. — A good king he!
THE fall of his lord he was fain to requite
in after days; and to Eadgils he proved
friend to the friendless, and forces sent
over the sea to the son of Ohtere,
weapons and warriors: well repaid he
those care-paths cold when the king he slew.   
Thus safe through struggles the son of Ecgtheow
had passed a plenty, through perils dire,
with daring deeds, till this day was come
that doomed him now with the dragon to strive.
With comrades eleven the lord of Geats
swollen in rage went seeking the dragon.
He had heard whence all the harm arose
and the killing of clansmen; that cup of price
on the lap of the lord had been laid by the finder.
In the throng was this one thirteenth man,
starter of all the strife and ill,
care-laden captive; cringing thence
forced and reluctant, he led them on
till he came in ken of that cavern-hall,
the barrow delved near billowy surges,
flood of ocean. Within ‘twas full
of wire-gold and jewels; a jealous warden,
warrior trusty, the treasures held,
lurked in his lair. Not light the task
of entrance for any of earth-born men!
Sat on the headland the hero king,
spake words of hail to his hearth-companions,
gold-friend of Geats. All gloomy his soul,
wavering, death-bound. Wyrd full nigh
stood ready to greet the gray-haired man,
to seize his soul-hoard, sunder apart
life and body. Not long would be
the warrior’s spirit enwound with flesh.
Beowulf spake, the bairn of Ecgtheow:—
“Through store of struggles I strove in youth,
mighty feuds; I mind them all.
I was seven years old when the sovran of rings,
friend-of-his-folk, from my father took me,
had me, and held me, Hrethel the king,
with food and fee, faithful in kinship.
Ne’er, while I lived there, he loathlier found me,
bairn in the burg, than his birthright sons,
Herebeald and Haethcyn and Hygelac mine.
For the eldest of these, by unmeet chance,
by kinsman’s deed, was the death-bed strewn,
when Haethcyn killed him with horny bow,
his own dear liege laid low with an arrow,
missed the mark and his mate shot down,
one brother the other, with bloody shaft.
A feeless fight,   and a fearful sin,
horror to Hrethel; yet, hard as it was,
unavenged must the atheling die!
Too awful it is for an aged man
to bide and bear, that his bairn so young
rides on the gallows. A rime he makes,
sorrow-song for his son there hanging
as rapture of ravens; no rescue now
can come from the old, disabled man!
Still is he minded, as morning breaks,
of the heir gone elsewhere;   another he hopes not
he will bide to see his burg within
as ward for his wealth, now the one has found
doom of death that the deed incurred.
Forlorn he looks on the lodge of his son,
wine-hall waste and wind-swept chambers
reft of revel. The rider sleepeth,
the hero, far-hidden;   no harp resounds,
in the courts no wassail, as once was heard.
“THEN he goes to his chamber, a grief-song chants
alone for his lost. Too large all seems,
homestead and house. So the helmet-of-Weders
hid in his heart for Herebeald
waves of woe. No way could he take
to avenge on the slayer slaughter so foul;
nor e’en could he harass that hero at all
with loathing deed, though he loved him not.
And so for the sorrow his soul endured,
men’s gladness he gave up and God’s light chose.
Lands and cities he left his sons
(as the wealthy do) when he went from earth.
There was strife and struggle ‘twixt Swede and Geat
o’er the width of waters; war arose,
hard battle-horror, when Hrethel died,
and Ongentheow’s offspring grew
strife-keen, bold, nor brooked o’er the seas
pact of peace, but pushed their hosts
to harass in hatred by Hreosnabeorh.
Men of my folk for that feud had vengeance,
for woful war (‘tis widely known),
though one of them bought it with blood of his heart,
a bargain hard: for Haethcyn proved
fatal that fray, for the first-of-Geats.
At morn, I heard, was the murderer killed
by kinsman for kinsman,   with clash of sword,
when Ongentheow met Eofor there.
Wide split the war-helm: wan he fell,
hoary Scylfing; the hand that smote him
of feud was mindful, nor flinched from the death-blow.
— “For all that he   gave me, my gleaming sword
repaid him at war, — such power I wielded, —
for lordly treasure: with land he entrusted me,
homestead and house. He had no need
from Swedish realm, or from Spear-Dane folk,
or from men of the Gifths, to get him help, —
some warrior worse for wage to buy!
Ever I fought in the front of all,
sole to the fore; and so shall I fight
while I bide in life and this blade shall last
that early and late hath loyal proved
since for my doughtiness Daeghrefn fell,
slain by my hand, the Hugas’ champion.
Nor fared he thence to the Frisian king
with the booty back, and breast-adornments;
but, slain in struggle, that standard-bearer
fell, atheling brave. Not with blade was he slain,
but his bones were broken by brawny gripe,
his heart-waves stilled. — The sword-edge now,
hard blade and my hand, for the hoard shall strive.”
Beowulf spake, and a battle-vow made
his last of all: “I have lived through many
wars in my youth; now once again,
old folk-defender, feud will I seek,
do doughty deeds, if the dark destroyer
forth from his cavern come to fight me!”
Then hailed he the helmeted heroes all,
for the last time greeting his liegemen dear,
comrades of war: “I should carry no weapon,
no sword to the serpent, if sure I knew
how, with such enemy, else my vows
I could gain as I did in Grendel’s day.
But fire in this fight I must fear me now,
and poisonous breath; so I bring with me
breastplate and board.   From the barrow’s keeper
no footbreadth flee I. One fight shall end
our war by the wall, as Wyrd allots,
all mankind’s master. My mood is bold
but forbears to boast o’er this battling-flyer.
— Now abide by the barrow, ye breastplate-mailed,
ye heroes in harness, which of us twain
better from battle-rush bear his wounds.
Wait ye the finish. The fight is not yours,
nor meet for any but me alone
to measure might with this monster here
and play the hero. Hardily I
shall win that wealth, or war shall seize,
cruel killing, your king and lord!”
Up stood then with shield the sturdy champion,
stayed by the strength of his single manhood,
and hardy ‘neath helmet his harness bore
under cleft of the cliffs: no coward’s path!
Soon spied by the wall that warrior chief,
survivor of many a victory-field
where foemen fought with furious clashings,
an arch of stone; and within, a stream
that broke from the barrow. The brooklet’s wave
was hot with fire. The hoard that way
he never could hope unharmed to near,
or endure those deeps,   for the dragon’s flame.
Then let from his breast, for he burst with rage,
the Weder-Geat prince a word outgo;
stormed the stark-heart; stern went ringing
and clear his cry ‘neath the cliff-rocks gray.
The hoard-guard heard a human voice;
his rage was enkindled. No respite now
for pact of peace! The poison-breath
of that foul worm first came forth from the cave,
hot reek-of-fight: the rocks resounded.
Stout by the stone-way his shield he raised,
lord of the Geats, against the loathed-one;
while with courage keen that coiled foe
came seeking strife. The sturdy king
had drawn his sword, not dull of edge,
heirloom old; and each of the two
felt fear of his foe, though fierce their mood.
Stoutly stood with his shield high-raised
the warrior king, as the worm now coiled
together amain: the mailed-one waited.
Now, spire by spire, fast sped and glided
that blazing serpent. The shield protected,
soul and body a shorter while
for the hero-king than his heart desired,
could his will have wielded the welcome respite
but once in his life! But Wyrd denied it,
and victory’s honors. — His arm he lifted
lord of the Geats, the grim foe smote
with atheling’s heirloom. Its edge was turned
brown blade, on the bone, and bit more feebly
than its noble master had need of then
in his baleful stress. — Then the barrow’s keeper
waxed full wild for that weighty blow,
cast deadly flames; wide drove and far
those vicious fires. No victor’s glory
the Geats’ lord boasted; his brand had failed,
naked in battle, as never it should,
excellent iron! — ‘Twas no easy path
that Ecgtheow’s honored heir must tread
over the plain to the place of the foe;
for against his will he must win a home
elsewhere far, as must all men, leaving
this lapsing life! — Not long it was
ere those champions grimly closed again.
The hoard-guard was heartened; high heaved his breast
once more; and by peril was pressed again,
enfolded in flames, the folk-commander!
Nor yet about him his band of comrades,
sons of athelings, armed stood
with warlike front: to the woods they bent them,
their lives to save. But the soul of one
with care was cumbered. Kinship true
can never be marred in a noble mind!
WIGLAF his name was, Weohstan’s son,
linden-thane loved, the lord of Scylfings,
Aelfhere’s kinsman. His king he now saw
with heat under helmet hard oppressed.
He minded the prizes his prince had given him,
wealthy seat of the Waegmunding line,
and folk-rights that his father owned
Not long he lingered. The linden yellow,
his shield, he seized; the old sword he drew: —
as heirloom of Eanmund earth-dwellers knew it,
who was slain by the sword-edge, son of Ohtere,
friendless exile, erst in fray
killed by Weohstan, who won for his kin
brown-bright helmet, breastplate ringed,
old sword of Eotens, Onela’s gift,
weeds of war of the warrior-thane,
battle-gear brave: though a brother’s child
had been felled, the feud was unfelt by Onela.   
For winters this war-gear Weohstan kept,
breastplate and board, till his bairn had grown
earlship to earn as the old sire did:
then he gave him, mid Geats, the gear of battle,
portion huge, when he passed from life,
fared aged forth. For the first time now
with his leader-lord the liegeman young
was bidden to share the shock of battle.
Neither softened his soul, nor the sire’s bequest
weakened in war.   So the worm found out
when once in fight the foes had met!
Wiglaf spake, — and his words were sage;
sad in spirit, he said to his comrades:—
“I remember the time, when mead we took,
what promise we made to this prince of ours
in the banquet-hall, to our breaker-of-rings,
for gear of combat to give him requital,
for hard-sword and helmet, if hap should bring
stress of this sort! Himself who chose us
from all his army to aid him now,
urged us to glory, and gave these treasures,
because he counted us keen with the spear
and hardy ‘neath helm, though this hero-work
our leader hoped unhelped and alone
to finish for us, — folk-defender
who hath got him glory greater than all men
for daring deeds! Now the day is come
that our noble master has need of the might
of warriors stout. Let us stride along
the hero to help while the heat is about him
glowing and grim! For God is my witness
I am far more fain the fire should seize
along with my lord these limbs of mine!   
Unsuiting it seems our shields to bear
homeward hence, save here we essay
to fell the foe and defend the life
of the Weders’ lord. I wot ‘twere shame
on the law of our land if alone the king
out of Geatish warriors woe endured
and sank in the struggle! My sword and helmet,
breastplate and board, for us both shall serve!”
Through slaughter-reek strode he to succor his chieftain,
his battle-helm bore, and brief words spake:—
“Beowulf dearest, do all bravely,
as in youthful days of yore thou vowedst
that while life should last thou wouldst let no wise
thy glory droop! Now, great in deeds,
atheling steadfast, with all thy strength
shield thy life! I will stand to help thee.”
At the words the worm came once again,
murderous monster mad with rage,
with fire-billows flaming, its foes to seek,
the hated men. In heat-waves burned
that board   to the boss, and the breastplate failed
to shelter at all the spear-thane young.
Yet quickly under his kinsman’s shield
went eager the earl, since his own was now
all burned by the blaze. The bold king again
had mind of his glory: with might his glaive
was driven into the dragon’s head, —
blow nerved by hate. But Naegling   was shivered,
broken in battle was Beowulf’s sword,
old and gray. ‘Twas granted him not
that ever the edge of iron at all
could help him at strife: too strong was his hand,
so the tale is told, and he tried too far
with strength of stroke all swords he wielded,
though sturdy their steel: they steaded him nought.
Then for the third time thought on its feud
that folk-destroyer, fire-dread dragon,
and rushed on the hero, where room allowed,
battle-grim, burning; its bitter teeth
closed on his neck, and covered him
with waves of blood from his breast that welled.
‘TWAS now, men say, in his sovran’s need
that the earl made known his noble strain,
craft and keenness and courage enduring.
Heedless of harm, though his hand was burned,
hardy-hearted, he helped his kinsman.
A little lower the loathsome beast
he smote with sword; his steel drove in
bright and burnished; that blaze began
to lose and lessen. At last the king
wielded his wits again, war-knife drew,
a biting blade by his breastplate hanging,
and the Weders’-helm smote that worm asunder,
felled the foe, flung forth its life.
So had they killed it, kinsmen both,
athelings twain: thus an earl should be
in danger’s day! — Of deeds of valor
this conqueror’s-hour of the king was last,
of his work in the world. The wound began,
which that dragon-of-earth had erst inflicted,
to swell and smart; and soon he found
in his breast was boiling, baleful and deep,
pain of poison. The prince walked on,
wise in his thought, to the wall of rock;
then sat, and stared at the structure of giants,
where arch of stone and steadfast column
upheld forever that hall in earth.
Yet here must the hand of the henchman peerless
lave with water his winsome lord,
the king and conqueror covered with blood,
with struggle spent, and unspan his helmet.
Beowulf spake in spite of his hurt,
his mortal wound; full well he knew
his portion now was past and gone
of earthly bliss, and all had fled
of his file of days, and death was near:
“I would fain bestow on son of mine
this gear of war, were given me now
that any heir should after me come
of my proper blood. This people I ruled
fifty winters. No folk-king was there,
none at all, of the neighboring clans
who war would wage me with ‘warriors’-friends’   
and threat me with horrors. At home I bided
what fate might come, and I cared for mine own;
feuds I sought not, nor falsely swore
ever on oath. For all these things,
though fatally wounded, fain am I!
From the Ruler-of-Man no wrath shall seize me,
when life from my frame must flee away,
for killing of kinsmen! Now quickly go
and gaze on that hoard ‘neath the hoary rock,
Wiglaf loved, now the worm lies low,
sleeps, heart-sore, of his spoil bereaved.
And fare in haste. I would fain behold
the gorgeous heirlooms, golden store,
have joy in the jewels and gems, lay down
softlier for sight of this splendid hoard
my life and the lordship I long have held.”
I HAVE heard that swiftly the son of Weohstan
at wish and word of his wounded king, —
war-sick warrior, — woven mail-coat,
battle-sark, bore ‘neath the barrow’s roof.
Then the clansman keen, of conquest proud,
passing the seat,   saw store of jewels
and glistening gold the ground along;
by the wall were marvels, and many a vessel
in the den of the dragon, the dawn-flier old:
unburnished bowls of bygone men
reft of richness; rusty helms
of the olden age; and arm-rings many
wondrously woven. — Such wealth of gold,
booty from barrow, can burden with pride
each human wight: let him hide it who will! —
His glance too fell on a gold-wove banner
high o’er the hoard, of handiwork noblest,
brilliantly broidered; so bright its gleam,
all the earth-floor he easily saw
and viewed all these vessels. No vestige now
was seen of the serpent: the sword had ta’en him.
Then, I heard, the hill of its hoard was reft,
old work of giants, by one alone;
he burdened his bosom with beakers and plate
at his own good will, and the ensign took,
brightest of beacons. — The blade of his lord
— its edge was iron — had injured deep
one that guarded the golden hoard
many a year and its murder-fire
spread hot round the barrow in horror-billows
at midnight hour, till it met its doom.
Hasted the herald, the hoard so spurred him
his track to retrace; he was troubled by doubt,
high-souled hero, if haply he’d find
alive, where he left him, the lord of Weders,
weakening fast by the wall of the cave.
So he carried the load. His lord and king
he found all bleeding, famous chief
at the lapse of life. The liegeman again
plashed him with water, till point of word
broke through the breast-hoard. Beowulf spake,
sage and sad, as he stared at the gold. —
“For the gold and treasure, to God my thanks,
to the Wielder-of-Wonders, with words I say,
for what I behold, to Heaven’s Lord,
for the grace that I give such gifts to my folk
or ever the day of my death be run!
Now I’ve bartered here for booty of treasure
the last of my life, so look ye well
to the needs of my land! No longer I tarry.
A barrow bid ye the battle-fanned raise
for my ashes. ‘Twill shine by the shore of the flood,
to folk of mine memorial fair
on Hrones Headland high uplifted,
that ocean-wanderers oft may hail
Beowulf’s Barrow, as back from far
they drive their keels o’er the darkling wave.”
From his neck he unclasped the collar of gold,
valorous king, to his vassal gave it
with bright-gold helmet, breastplate, and ring,
to the youthful thane: bade him use them in joy.
“Thou art end and remnant of all our race
the Waegmunding name. For Wyrd hath swept them,
all my line, to the land of doom,
earls in their glory: I after them go.”
This word was the last which the wise old man
harbored in heart ere hot death-waves
of balefire he chose. From his bosom fled
his soul to seek the saints’ reward.
IT was heavy hap for that hero young
on his lord beloved to look and find him
lying on earth with life at end,
sorrowful sight. But the slayer too,
awful earth-dragon, empty of breath,
lay felled in fight, nor, fain of its treasure,
could the writhing monster rule it more.
For edges of iron had ended its days,
hard and battle-sharp, hammers’ leaving;   
and that flier-afar had fallen to ground
hushed by its hurt, its hoard all near,
no longer lusty aloft to whirl
at midnight, making its merriment seen,
proud of its prizes: prone it sank
by the handiwork of the hero-king.
Forsooth among folk but few achieve,
— though sturdy and strong, as stories tell me,
and never so daring in deed of valor, —
the perilous breath of a poison-foe
to brave, and to rush on the ring-board hall,
whenever his watch the warden keeps
bold in the barrow. Beowulf paid
the price of death for that precious hoard;
and each of the foes had found the end
of this fleeting life. Befell erelong
that the laggards in war the wood had left,
trothbreakers, cowards, ten together,
fearing before to flourish a spear
in the sore distress of their sovran lord.
Now in their shame their shields they carried,
armor of fight, where the old man lay;
and they gazed on Wiglaf. Wearied he sat
at his sovran’s shoulder, shieldsman good,
to wake him with water.   Nowise it availed.
Though well he wished it, in world no more
could he barrier life for that leader-of-battles
nor baffle the will of all-wielding God.
Doom of the Lord was law o’er the deeds
of every man, as it is to-day.
Grim was the answer, easy to get,
from the youth for those that had yielded to fear!
Wiglaf spake, the son of Weohstan, —
mournful he looked on those men unloved:—
“Who sooth will speak, can say indeed
that the ruler who gave you golden rings
and the harness of war in which ye stand
— for he at ale-bench often-times
bestowed on hall-folk helm and breastplate,
lord to liegemen, the likeliest gear
which near of far he could find to give, —
threw away and wasted these weeds of battle,
on men who failed when the foemen came!
Not at all could the king of his comrades-in-arms
venture to vaunt, though the Victory-Wielder,
God, gave him grace that he got revenge
sole with his sword in stress and need.
To rescue his life, ‘twas little that I
could serve him in struggle; yet shift I made
(hopeless it seemed) to help my kinsman.
Its strength ever waned, when with weapon I struck
that fatal foe, and the fire less strongly
flowed from its head. — Too few the heroes
in throe of contest that thronged to our king!
Now gift of treasure and girding of sword,
joy of the house and home-delight
shall fail your folk; his freehold-land
every clansman within your kin
shall lose and leave, when lords highborn
hear afar of that flight of yours,
a fameless deed. Yea, death is better
for liegemen all than a life of shame!”
THAT battle-toil bade he at burg to announce,
at the fort on the cliff, where, full of sorrow,
all the morning earls had sat,
daring shieldsmen, in doubt of twain:
would they wail as dead, or welcome home,
their lord beloved? Little   kept back
of the tidings new, but told them all,
the herald that up the headland rode. —
“Now the willing-giver to Weder folk
in death-bed lies; the Lord of Geats
on the slaughter-bed sleeps by the serpent’s deed!
And beside him is stretched that slayer-of-men
with knife-wounds sick:   no sword availed
on the awesome thing in any wise
to work a wound. There Wiglaf sitteth,
Weohstan’s bairn, by Beowulf’s side,
the living earl by the other dead,
and heavy of heart a head-watch   keeps
o’er friend and foe. — Now our folk may look
for waging of war when once unhidden
to Frisian and Frank the fall of the king
is spread afar. — The strife began
when hot on the Hugas   Hygelac fell
and fared with his fleet to the Frisian land.
Him there the Hetwaras humbled in war,
plied with such prowess their power o’erwhelming
that the bold-in-battle bowed beneath it
and fell in fight. To his friends no wise
could that earl give treasure! And ever since
the Merowings’ favor has failed us wholly.
Nor aught expect I of peace and faith
from Swedish folk. ‘Twas spread afar
how Ongentheow reft at Ravenswood
Haethcyn Hrethling of hope and life,
when the folk of Geats for the first time sought
in wanton pride the Warlike-Scylfings.
Soon the sage old sire   of Ohtere,
ancient and awful, gave answering blow;
the sea-king   he slew, and his spouse redeemed,
his good wife rescued, though robbed of her gold,
mother of Ohtere and Onela.
Then he followed his foes, who fled before him
sore beset and stole their way,
bereft of a ruler, to Ravenswood.
With his host he besieged there what swords had left,
the weary and wounded; woes he threatened
the whole night through to that hard-pressed throng:
some with the morrow his sword should kill,
some should go to the gallows-tree
for rapture of ravens. But rescue came
with dawn of day for those desperate men
when they heard the horn of Hygelac sound,
tones of his trumpet; the trusty king
had followed their trail with faithful band.
THE bloody swath of Swedes and Geats
and the storm of their strife, were seen afar,
how folk against folk the fight had wakened.
The ancient king with his atheling band
sought his citadel, sorrowing much:
Ongentheow earl went up to his burg.
He had tested Hygelac’s hardihood,
the proud one’s prowess, would prove it no longer,
defied no more those fighting-wanderers
nor hoped from the seamen to save his hoard,
his bairn and his bride: so he bent him again,
old, to his earth-walls. Yet after him came
with slaughter for Swedes the standards of Hygelac
o’er peaceful plains in pride advancing,
till Hrethelings fought in the fenced town.   
Then Ongentheow with edge of sword,
the hoary-bearded, was held at bay,
and the folk-king there was forced to suffer
Eofor’s anger. In ire, at the king
Wulf Wonreding with weapon struck;
and the chieftain’s blood, for that blow, in streams
flowed ‘neath his hair. No fear felt he,
stout old Scylfing, but straightway repaid
in better bargain that bitter stroke
and faced his foe with fell intent.
Nor swift enough was the son of Wonred
answer to render the aged chief;
too soon on his head the helm was cloven;
blood-bedecked he bowed to earth,
and fell adown; not doomed was he yet,
and well he waxed, though the wound was sore.
Then the hardy Hygelac-thane,   
when his brother fell, with broad brand smote,
giants’ sword crashing through giants’-helm
across the shield-wall: sank the king,
his folk’s old herdsman, fatally hurt.
There were many to bind the brother’s wounds
and lift him, fast as fate allowed
his people to wield the place-of-war.
But Eofor took from Ongentheow,
earl from other, the iron-breastplate,
hard sword hilted, and helmet too,
and the hoar-chief’s harness to Hygelac carried,
who took the trappings, and truly promised
rich fee ‘mid folk, — and fulfilled it so.
For that grim strife gave the Geatish lord,
Hrethel’s offspring, when home he came,
to Eofor and Wulf a wealth of treasure,
Each of them had a hundred thousand   
in land and linked rings; nor at less price reckoned
mid-earth men such mighty deeds!
And to Eofor he gave his only daughter
in pledge of grace, the pride of his home.
“Such is the feud, the foeman’s rage,
death-hate of men: so I deem it sure
that the Swedish folk will seek us home
for this fall of their friends, the fighting-Scylfings,
when once they learn that our warrior leader
lifeless lies, who land and hoard
ever defended from all his foes,
furthered his folk’s weal, finished his course
a hardy hero. — Now haste is best,
that we go to gaze on our Geatish lord,
and bear the bountiful breaker-of-rings
to the funeral pyre. No fragments merely
shall burn with the warrior. Wealth of jewels,
gold untold and gained in terror,
treasure at last with his life obtained,
all of that booty the brands shall take,
fire shall eat it. No earl must carry
memorial jewel. No maiden fair
shall wreathe her neck with noble ring:
nay, sad in spirit and shorn of her gold,
oft shall she pass o’er paths of exile
now our lord all laughter has laid aside,
all mirth and revel. Many a spear
morning-cold shall be clasped amain,
lifted aloft; nor shall lilt of harp
those warriors wake; but the wan-hued raven,
fain o’er the fallen, his feast shall praise
and boast to the eagle how bravely he ate
when he and the wolf were wasting the slain.”
So he told his sorrowful tidings,
and little   he lied, the loyal man
of word or of work. The warriors rose;
sad, they climbed to the Cliff-of-Eagles,
went, welling with tears, the wonder to view.
Found on the sand there, stretched at rest,
their lifeless lord, who had lavished rings
of old upon them. Ending-day
had dawned on the doughty-one; death had seized
in woful slaughter the Weders’ king.
There saw they, besides, the strangest being,
loathsome, lying their leader near,
prone on the field. The fiery dragon,
fearful fiend, with flame was scorched.
Reckoned by feet, it was fifty measures
in length as it lay. Aloft erewhile
it had revelled by night, and anon come back,
seeking its den; now in death’s sure clutch
it had come to the end of its earth-hall joys.
By it there stood the stoups and jars;
dishes lay there, and dear-decked swords
eaten with rust, as, on earth’s lap resting,
a thousand winters they waited there.
For all that heritage huge, that gold
of bygone men, was bound by a spell,   
so the treasure-hall could be touched by none
of human kind, — save that Heaven’s King,
God himself, might give whom he would,
Helper of Heroes, the hoard to open, —
even such a man as seemed to him meet.
A PERILOUS path, it proved, he   trod
who heinously hid, that hall within,
wealth under wall! Its watcher had killed
one of a few,   and the feud was avenged
in woful fashion. Wondrous seems it,
what manner a man of might and valor
oft ends his life, when the earl no longer
in mead-hall may live with loving friends.
So Beowulf, when that barrow’s warden
he sought, and the struggle; himself knew not
in what wise he should wend from the world at last.
For   princes potent, who placed the gold,
with a curse to doomsday covered it deep,
so that marked with sin the man should be,
hedged with horrors, in hell-bonds fast,
racked with plagues, who should rob their hoard.
Yet no greed for gold, but the grace of heaven,
ever the king had kept in view.   
Wiglaf spake, the son of Weohstan:—
“At the mandate of one, oft warriors many
sorrow must suffer; and so must we.
The people’s-shepherd showed not aught
of care for our counsel, king beloved!
That guardian of gold he should grapple not, urged we,
but let him lie where he long had been
in his earth-hall waiting the end of the world,
the hest of heaven. — This hoard is ours
but grievously gotten; too grim the fate
which thither carried our king and lord.
I was within there, and all I viewed,
the chambered treasure, when chance allowed me
(and my path was made in no pleasant wise)
under the earth-wall. Eager, I seized
such heap from the hoard as hands could bear
and hurriedly carried it hither back
to my liege and lord. Alive was he still,
still wielding his wits. The wise old man
spake much in his sorrow, and sent you greetings
and bade that ye build, when he breathed no more,
on the place of his balefire a barrow high,
memorial mighty. Of men was he
worthiest warrior wide earth o’er
the while he had joy of his jewels and burg.
Let us set out in haste now, the second time
to see and search this store of treasure,
these wall-hid wonders, — the way I show you, —
where, gathered near, ye may gaze your fill
at broad-gold and rings. Let the bier, soon made,
be all in order when out we come,
our king and captain to carry thither
— man beloved — where long he shall bide
safe in the shelter of sovran God.”
Then the bairn of Weohstan bade command,
hardy chief, to heroes many
that owned their homesteads, hither to bring
firewood from far — o’er the folk they ruled —
for the famed-one’s funeral. “ Fire shall devour
and wan flames feed on the fearless warrior
who oft stood stout in the iron-shower,
when, sped from the string, a storm of arrows
shot o’er the shield-wall: the shaft held firm,
featly feathered, followed the barb.”
And now the sage young son of Weohstan
seven chose of the chieftain’s thanes,
the best he found that band within,
and went with these warriors, one of eight,
under hostile roof. In hand one bore
a lighted torch and led the way.
No lots they cast for keeping the hoard
when once the warriors saw it in hall,
altogether without a guardian,
lying there lost. And little they mourned
when they had hastily haled it out,
dear-bought treasure! The dragon they cast,
the worm, o’er the wall for the wave to take,
and surges swallowed that shepherd of gems.
Then the woven gold on a wain was laden —
countless quite! — and the king was borne,
hoary hero, to Hrones-Ness.
THEN fashioned for him the folk of Geats
firm on the earth a funeral-pile,
and hung it with helmets and harness of war
and breastplates bright, as the boon he asked;
and they laid amid it the mighty chieftain,
heroes mourning their master dear.
Then on the hill that hugest of balefires
the warriors wakened. Wood-smoke rose
black over blaze, and blent was the roar
of flame with weeping (the wind was still),
till the fire had broken the frame of bones,
hot at the heart. In heavy mood
their misery moaned they, their master’s death.
Wailing her woe, the widow   old,
her hair upbound, for Beowulf’s death
sung in her sorrow, and said full oft
she dreaded the doleful days to come,
deaths enow, and doom of battle,
and shame. — The smoke by the sky was devoured.
The folk of the Weders fashioned there
on the headland a barrow broad and high,
by ocean-farers far descried:
in ten days’ time their toil had raised it,
the battle-brave’s beacon. Round brands of the pyre
a wall they built, the worthiest ever
that wit could prompt in their wisest men.
They placed in the barrow that precious booty,
the rounds and the rings they had reft erewhile,
hardy heroes, from hoard in cave, —
trusting the ground with treasure of earls,
gold in the earth, where ever it lies
useless to men as of yore it was.
Then about that barrow the battle-keen rode,
atheling-born, a band of twelve,
lament to make, to mourn their king,
chant their dirge, and their chieftain honor.
They praised his earlship, his acts of prowess
worthily witnessed: and well it is
that men their master-friend mightily laud,
heartily love, when hence he goes
from life in the body forlorn away.
Thus made their mourning the men of Geatland,
for their hero’s passing his hearth-companions:
quoth that of all the kings of earth,
of men he was mildest and most beloved,
to his kin the kindest, keenest for praise.


^^EOP^^

Here bounds the gaudy, gilded chair, 
 Bedecked with fringe and tassels gay; The melancholy mourner there 
 Pursues her sad and painful way.
Here, guarded by a motley train,
 The pampered Countess glares along;There, wrung by poverty and pain, 
 Pale Misery mingles with the throng.
Here, as the blazoned chariot rolls,
 And prancing horses scare the crowd,Great names, adorning little souls,
 Announce the empty, vain and proud.
Here four tall lackeys slow precede
 A painted dame in rich array; There, the sad, shivering child of need
 Steals barefoot o’er the flinty way.
‘Room, room! stand back!’ they loudly cry,
 The wretched poor are driven around;On every side they scattered fly, 
 And shrink before the threatening sound.
Here, amidst jewels, feathers, flowers, 
 The senseless Duchess sits demure,Heedless of all the anxious hours
 The sons of modest worth endure.
All silvered and embroidered o’er, 
 She neither knows nor pities pain; The beggar freezing at her door 
 She overlooks with nice disdain.
The wretch whom poverty subdues
 Scarce dares to raise his tearful eye;Or if by chance the throng he views,
 His loudest murmur is a sigh!
The poor wan mother, at whose breast
 The pining infant craves relief, In one thin tattered garment dressed,
 Creeps forth to pour the plaint of grief.
But ah! how little heeded here 
 The faltering tongue reveals its woe;For high-born fools, with frown austere, 
 Condemn the pangs they never know.
‘Take physic, Pomp!’ let Reason say:
 ‘What can avail thy trappings rare? The tomb shall close thy glittering day,
 The beggar prove thy equal there!’


^^EOP^^

Now, when he and I meet, after all these years,
I say to the bitch inside me, don’t start growling.
He isn’t a trespasser anymore,
Just an old acquaintance tipping his hat.
My voice says, “Nice to see you,”
As the bitch starts to bark hysterically.
He isn’t an enemy now,
Where are your manners, I say, as I say,
“How are the children? They must be growing up.”
At a kind word from him, a look like the old days,
The bitch changes her tone; she begins to whimper.
She wants to snuggle up to him, to cringe.
Down, girl! Keep your distance
Or I’ll give you a taste of the choke-chain.
“Fine, I’m just fine,” I tell him.
She slobbers and grovels.
After all, I am her mistress. She is basically loyal.
It’s just that she remembers how she came running
Each evening, when she heard his step;
How she lay at his feet and looked up adoringly
Though he was absorbed in his paper;
Or, bored with her devotion, ordered her to the kitchen
Until he was ready to play.
But the small careless kindnesses
When he’d had a good day, or a couple of drinks,
Come back to her now, seem more important
Than the casual cruelties, the ultimate dismissal.
“It’s nice to know you are doing so well,” I say.
He couldn’t have taken you with him;
You were too demonstrative, too clumsy,
Not like the well-groomed pets of his new friends.
“Give my regards to your wife,” I say. You gag
As I drag you off by the scruff,
Saying, “Goodbye! Goodbye! Nice to have seen you again.”


^^EOP^^




THEL'S MOTTO Does the Eagle know what is in the pit? Or wilt thou go ask the Mole: Can Wisdom be put in a silver rod? Or Love in a golden bowl?



I The daughters of Mne Seraphim led round their sunny flocks.All but the youngest; she in paleness sought the secret air. To fade away like morning beauty from her mortal day: Down by the river of Adona her soft voice is heard: And thus her gentle lamentation falls like morning dew.  O life of this our spring! why fades the lotus of the water? Why fade these children of the spring? born but to smile & fall. Ah! Thel is like a watry bow. and like a parting cloud. Like a reflection in a glass. like shadows in the water. Like dreams of infants. like a smile upon an infants face, Like the doves voice, like transient day, like music in the air; Ah! gentle may I lay me down, and gentle rest my head, And gentle sleep the sleep of death. and gentle hear the voice Of him that walketh in the garden in the evening time. The Lilly of the valley breathing in the humble grass Answer'd the lovely maid and said: I am a watry weed, And I am very small, and love to dwell in lowly vales; So weak, the gilded butterfly scarce perches on my head. Yet I am visited from heaven and he that smiles on all. Walks in the valley. and each morn over me spreads his hand Saying, rejoice thou humble grass, thou new-born lilly flower, Thou gentle maid of silent valleys. and of modest brooks; For thou shalt be clothed in light, and fed with morning manna: Till summers heat melts thee beside the fountains and the springs To flourish in eternal vales: then why should Thel complain,  Why should the mistress of the vales of Har, utter a sigh.  She ceasd & smild in tears, then sat down in her silver shrine.  Thel answered. O thou little virgin of the peaceful valley. Giving to those that cannot crave, the voiceless, the o'ertired. Thy breath doth nourish the innocent lamb, he smells thy milky garments, He crops thy flowers. while thou sittest smiling in his face, Wiping his mild and meekin mouth from all contagious taints. Thy wine doth purify the golden honey, thy perfume, Which thou dost scatter on every little blade of grass that springs, Revives the milked cow, & tames the fire-breathing steed. But Thel is like a faint cloud kindled at the rising sun: I vanish from my pearly throne, and who shall find my place?"  "Queen of the vales," the Lily answered, "ask the tender cloud, And it shall tell thee why it glitters in the morning sky, And why it scatters its bright beauty thro' the humid air. Descend, O little cloud, & hover before the eyes of Thel."  The Cloud descended, and the Lily bowd her modest head, And went to mind her numerous charge among the verdant grass.  II "O little Cloud," the virgin said, "I charge thee tell to me, Why thou complainest not when in one hour thou fade away: Then we shall seek thee but not find; ah, Thel is like to Thee. I pass away, yet I complain, and no one hears my voice."  The Cloud then shew'd his golden head & his bright form emerg'd, Hovering and glittering on the air before the face of Thel.  "O virgin, know'st thou not our steeds drink of the golden springs Where Luvah doth renew his horses? Look'st thou on my youth, And fearest thou because I vanish and am seen no more, Nothing remains? O maid, I tell thee, when I pass away, It is to tenfold life, to love, to peace, and raptures holy: Unseen descending, weigh my light wings upon balmy flowers, And court the fair eyed dew, to take me to her shining tent: The weeping virgin trembling kneels before the risen sun, Till we arise link'd in a golden band, and never part, But walk united, bearing food to all our tender flowers."  "Dost thou O little Cloud? I fear that I am not like thee; For I walk through the vales of Har and smell the sweetest flowers, But I feed not the little flowers; I hear the warbling birds, But I feed not the warbling birds; they fly and seek their food; But Thel delights in these no more, because I fade away, And all shall say, 'Without a use this shining woman liv'd, Or did she only live to be at death the food of worms?'"  The Cloud reclind upon his airy throne and answer'd thus:  "Then if thou art the food of worms, O virgin of the skies, How great thy use, how great thy blessing! Every thing that lives Lives not alone, nor for itself; fear not, and I will call The weak worm from its lowly bed, and thou shalt hear its voice. Come forth, worm of the silent valley, to thy pensive queen."  The helpless worm arose, and sat upon the Lily's leaf, And the bright Cloud saild on, to find his partner in the vale.  III Then Thel astonish'd view'd the Worm upon its dewy bed.  "Art thou a Worm? Image of weakness, art thou but a Worm? I see thee like an infant wrapped in the Lily's leaf; Ah, weep not, little voice, thou can'st not speak, but thou can'st weep. Is this a Worm? I see thee lay helpless & naked, weeping, And none to answer, none to cherish thee with mother's smiles."  The Clod of Clay heard the Worm's voice, & raisd her pitying head; She bow'd over the weeping infant, and her life exhal'd In milky fondness; then on Thel she fix'd her humble eyes.  "O beauty of the vales of Har! we live not for ourselves; Thou seest me the meanest thing, and so I am indeed; My bosom of itself is cold, and of itself is dark,  But he that loves the lowly, pours his oil upon my head, And kisses me, and binds his nuptial bands around my breast, And says: 'Thou mother of my children, I have loved thee And I have given thee a crown that none can take away.' But how this is, sweet maid, I know not, and I cannot know; I ponder, and I cannot ponder; yet I live and love."  The daughter of beauty wip'd her pitying tears with her white veil, And said: "Alas! I knew not this, and therefore did I weep. That God would love a Worm, I knew, and punish the evil foot That, wilful, bruis'd its helpless form; but that he cherish'd it With milk and oil I never knew; and therefore did I weep, And I complaind in the mild air, because I fade away, And lay me down in thy cold bed, and leave my shining lot."  "Queen of the vales," the matron Clay answered, "I heard thy sighs, And all thy moans flew o'er my roof, but I have call'd them down. Wilt thou, O Queen, enter my house? 'tis given thee to enter And to return: fear nothing, enter with thy virgin feet."  IV The eternal gates' terrific porter lifted the northern bar: Thel enter'd in & saw the secrets of the land unknown. She saw the couches of the dead, & where the fibrous roots Of every heart on earth infixes deep its restless twists: A land of sorrows & of tears where never smile was seen.  She wanderd in the land of clouds thro' valleys dark, listning Dolours & lamentations; waiting oft beside a dewy grave, She stood in silence, listning to the voices of the ground, Till to her own grave plot she came, & there she sat down, And heard this voice of sorrow breathed from the hollow pit:  "Why cannot the Ear be closed to its own destruction? Or the glistning Eye to the poison of a smile? Why are Eyelids stord with arrows ready drawn, Where a thousand fighting men in ambush lie? Or an Eye of gifts & graces, show'ring fruits and coined gold? Why a Tongue impress'd with honey from every wind? Why an Ear, a whirlpool fierce to draw creations in? Why a Nostril wide inhaling terror, trembling, and affright? Why a tender curb upon the youthful burning boy? Why a little curtain of flesh on the bed of our desire?"  The Virgin started from her seat, & with a shriek Fled back unhinderd till she came into the vales of Har.


^^EOP^^

Born like the pines to sing,
   The harp and song in m’ breast,
Though far and near,
There’s none to hear,
I’ll sing as th’ winds request. 
To tell the trend of m’ lay,
   Is not for th’ harp or me;
I’m only to know,
From the winds that blow,
What th’ theme of m’ song shall be. 
Born like the pines to sing,
   The harp and th’ song in m’ breast,
As th’ winds sweep by,
I’ll laugh or cry,
In th’ winds I cannot rest.
 


^^EOP^^

A dinner party, coffee, tea,
Sandwich, or supper, all may be
In their way pleasant. But to me
Not one of these deserves the praise
That welcomer of new-born days, A breakfast, merits; ever giving
Cheerful notice we are living
Another day refreshed by sleep,
When its festival we keep.
Now although I would not slight
Those kindly words we use ‘Good night’,
Yet parting words are words of sorrow,
And may not vie with sweet ‘Good Morrow’,
With which again our friends we greet,
When in the breakfast-room we meet,
At the social table round,
Listening to the lively sound
Of those notes which never tire,
Of urn, or kettle on the fire.
Sleepy Robert never hears
Or urn, or kettle; he appears
When all have finished, one by one
Dropping off, and breakfast done.
Yet has he too his own pleasure,
His breakfast hour’s his hour of leisure;
And, left alone, he reads or muses,
Or else in idle mood he uses
To sit and watch the venturous fly,
Where the sugar’s piled high,
Clambering o’er the lumps so white,
Rocky cliffs of sweet delight.


^^EOP^^




The bridge barely curved that connects the terrible with the tender.
—Rilke



1

The children play at the Luxembourg fountain.
Their small ships catch wind and sail out and come round again.


2

Sometime between 250 and 200 B.C.
fishermen and boatmen of the tribe Parisii
discovered and built their huts on the largest island   
in the River Seine. Celtic Lutetia, “Town surround-
ed by water,”
                     thus was born there.
The island is shaped like a boat—
and this figure became a part
of the capital’s coat-of-arms. So this was the start   
of the City first named for its engulfing water   
(on whose economy it depended), then after
the people themselves: members of the tribe of Paris.   
We listen to these water folk and know they hear us,   
for we are born out of boats and out of water.   
The first sound we hear is the heart
knocking quiet as a boat docks:
and we all dissolve to island, earth and tears later.


3

And into air and fire! Once in the Latin Quarter
in a space formed for him by waves of bright loiterers
near the shortest street named for the Cat Who Catches Fish—
or who (with slight inflection) “sins”—
I watched a dark young man, naked to his thin waist, push
long plumes of flame into the air
above our awed faces raised there.
From the sharp heat inside and out,
his head and chest glowed in the night
with an aura of oil or sweat.
Thirsting, he drank again from a sponge of kerosene
and breathed out long strings of fire and smoke into the Street   
of the Harp.
                   Dark ash dropped back upon his face and cap,   
which lay open on the cobbled road waiting for coins   
from all who guessed at the mystery in what he’d done.   
He built a vast pillar of fire as if to guide us,
then suddenly stopped, walked across
the space, and kissed a reaching child
(to bless and heal that amazed head),
waved gratefully to us who now filled his cap with alms,
and, smiling and burned (I saw scars beneath his raised arm),   
he sailed up that narrowing street in a wildly bal-
looning white shirt we had watched him casually don   
to cover his vestment of skin.


4

For centuries that old City
ended its west boundary
in a small archipelago
separated from the main island by the Seine’s two
arms. It was on one of these small islets that Philip
the Fair about the year 1314 had raised up
a stake for the grand master, Order of Templars, whom
he condemned, then from the palace window watched him burn.   
These little islands, quickened with their ghost victim’s screams,   
were joined in the sixteenth century by the decree
of Henry Third (and by a great engineering feat
Faust could envy) to the main island of the City.
This new western tip was given the name of a park,
“Vert Galant,” nickname of Henry Fourth: “The Gay old Spark.”
Near there I watched in a loud street
a white-haired man stand with one foot
on the curb, the other in the cobbled street, and play   
an old mandolin. He was dressed in a black and frayed   
tuxedo and played with intense passion, sadly, but   
this desperate, dignified man, transformed by his art   
and by poverty (his case kept open for money),
could not play the mandolin. —He
just strummed the same chord again
                                                    and again and again ...


5

It was also Philip the Fair
who created an aristocratic prison air
by building the blocks-long Gothic Conciergerie.
The best view is from the Right Bank: The Slaughter House Quay   
(which now is a market for pets).
You can see the four recently cleaned towers reflect-
ed in the Seine. (At the Seine in fall, beneath the red   
and gold leaves, you see the rust, mahogany and beige   
boats gently jostle together at the shore and wait.)   
On the right: the crenelated Bonbec Tower stays.   
Bonbec means “babbler,” for this place
was used through the centuries as a torture chamber.   
The right one of the twin towers, Argent, held treasure.   
Still the gorgeous Horloge Tower on the left corner
of the ancient building across from the Bridge of Change   
houses the giant clock which gave its name to that quay:   
in its field of blue the many great gold fleurs-de-lys   
and the two life-sized mythical
women, one with a fascicle
of wheat, one with a balanced scale raised high in the clock,   
whose silver chime used to toll the hours for the monarch.   
(This was melted down in those days when Terror struck.)   
In this turreted place we have shaved the graceful neck   
and head of Marie Antoinette, ripped her white, ruffled   
collar wide and wrapped the cuff of
rope about her hands behind her back. We made her face
the casual knitting women and men making fists   
sitting on steps in the “May Court”
(where a fresh tree was placed each spring by the lawyers’ clerks!)   
on her way to the guillotine. Its blade was heavy   
as primeval stone: she, the chemist Lavoisier,   
Charlotte Corday, poet and brother André Chénier,   
Madame du Barry—all 2600 who died,
having said their last farewells in the Women‘s Courtyard,   
twelve per day underneath the blade!
and some were disemboweled beside.
Was there sometimes an image of beauty in their minds   
at the last? Perhaps on white sands
beside the blue-black sea a matched pair of roan horses   
galloping together in the bright spume, riderless.   
Or a nude young man and woman lying together   
touching in a field of flowers?


6

Nearby on this Island the gargoyles of Notre Dame
gawk in ancient horror and some
forever gnaw on stone rabbits in the parapets
or wail in winged, formal misery outside the set
limits of the orthodox Church—
all glory happening within the walls where they squat:
so hunched, so beaked, so horrorstruck.


7

A wing of the May Courtyard where the condemned waited   
“Monsieur de Paris” as executioners were named   
now adjoins the building of glass and light, with no walls,   
it seems, jewel of Sainte Chapelle,
its windows of rose and blue, gold, green, yellow, purple,   
rising fifty feet:
                            its spire piercing the foliate,
layered, many-colored egg of the vault of heaven,   
showering all the primal hues and shadows given—
bright as the truth reflected in a drop of fresh blood   
or the colors of the body’s inner organs hid-
den before the sure explosion of light that hits them   
at the moment of violent death. —This is a time
like that of the sun that once a year, just at the dawn   
of winter solstice, lights up an ancient Celtic stone   
grave, striking the bones spread on shelves
with all the colors of the flesh.


8

Who can stand these juxtapositions of person and place and time? I walk across the Bridge of Change where I have so often watched by the towers of the Conciergerie. Now, water laves a little higher up the stair from the River to the Quay, hiding some of the steps from me. Boats nudge at the edge. I walk along the Boulevard past the great gold and blue corner clock, the ornate wrought-iron gate and fence of the Place of Justice (its name changed from the time of kings), past the shadow and spire of Sainte Chapelle. I cross the Bridge of Saint Michel into the Latin Quarter. But I do not look for the Street of the Cat Who Fishes or the Street of the Harp. I turn right, wandering a bit, and suddenly, as if by chance, find myself at this street, and here I will wait, for it is our street, Rue Gît le Coeur: Here Lies the Heart.

               for Roger Aplon—1975


^^EOP^^




(being a conversation in eight poems between an aged Lucifer and God, though only Lucifer is heard. The time is long after.)



1
invitation 
come coil with me
here in creation’s bed
among the twigs and ribbons
of the past. i have grown old
remembering the garden,
the hum of the great cats
moving into language, the sweet
fume of the man’s rib
as it rose up and began to walk.
it was all glory then,
the winged creatures leaping
like angels, the oceans claiming
their own. let us rest here a time
like two old brothers
who watched it happen and wondered
what it meant. 
2
how great Thou art 
listen. You are beyond
even Your own understanding.
that rib and rain and clay
in all its pride,
its unsteady dominion,
is not what you believed
You were,
but it is what You are;
in your own image as some
lexicographer supposed.
the face, both he and she,
the odd ambition, the desire
to reach beyond the stars
is You. all You, all You
the loneliness, the perfect
imperfection. 
3
as for myself 
less snake than angel
less angel than man
how come i to this
serpent’s understanding?
watching creation from
a hood of leaves
i have foreseen the evening
of the world.
as sure as she
the breast of Yourself
separated out and made to bear,
as sure as her returning,
i too am blessed with
the one gift You cherish;
to feel the living move in me
and to be unafraid. 
4
in my own defense 
what could I choose
but to slide along behind them,
they whose only sin
was being their father’s children?
as they stood with their backs
to the garden,
a new and terrible luster
burning their eyes,
only You could have called
their ineffable names,
only in their fever
could they have failed to hear. 
5
the road led from delight 
into delight. into the sharp
edge of seasons, into the sweet
puff of bread baking, the warm
vale of sheet and sweat after love,
the tinny newborn cry of calf
and cormorant and humankind.
and pain, of course,
always there was some bleeding,
but forbid me not
my meditation on the outer world
before the rest of it, before
the bruising of his heel, my head,
and so forth. 
6
“the silence of God is God.”
—Carolyn Forche 
tell me, tell us why
in the confusion of a mountain
of babies stacked like cordwood,
of limbs walking away from each other,
of tongues bitten through
by the language of assault,
tell me, tell us why
You neither raised your hand
Nor turned away, tell us why
You watched the excommunication of
That world and You said nothing. 
7
still there is mercy, there is grace 
how otherwise
could I have come to this
marble spinning in space
propelled by the great
thumb of the universe?
how otherwise
could the two roads
of this tongue
converge into a single
certitude?
how otherwise
could I, a sleek old
traveler,
curl one day safe and still
beside YOU
at Your feet, perhaps,
but, amen, Yours. 
8
“.........is God.” 
so.
having no need to speak
You sent Your tongue
splintered into angels.
even i,
with my little piece of it
have said too much.
to ask You to explain
is to deny You.
before the word
You were.
You kiss my brother mouth.
the rest is silence.


^^EOP^^

Everyone comes back here to die
as I will soon. The place feels right
since it’s half dead to begin with.
Even on a rare morning of rain,
like this morning, with the low sky
hoarding its riches except for
a few mock tears, the hard ground
accepts nothing. Six years ago
I buried my mother’s ashes
beside a young lilac that’s now
taller than I, and stuck the stub
of a rosebush into her dirt,
where like everything else not
human it thrives. The small blossoms
never unfurl; whatever they know
they keep to themselves until
a morning rain or a night wind
pares the petals down to nothing.
Even the neighbor cat who shits
daily on the paths and then hides
deep in the jungle of the weeds
refuses to purr. Whatever’s here
is just here, and nowhere else,
so it’s right to end up beside
the woman who bore me, to shovel
into the dirt whatever’s left
and leave only a name for some-
one who wants it. Think of it,
my name, no longer a portion
of me, no longer inflated
or bruised, no longer stewing
in a rich compost of memory
or the simpler one of bone shards,
dirt, kitty litter, wood ashes,
the roots of the eucalyptus
I planted in ’73,
a tiny me taking nothing,
giving nothing, and free at last.


^^EOP^^

High at the window in her cage         The old canary flits and sings, Nor sees across the curtain pass    The shadow of a swallow’s wings.  A poor deceit and copy, this,    Of larger lives that mark their span, Unreckoning of wider worlds    Or gifts that Heaven keeps for man.  She gathers piteous bits and shreds,    This solitary, mateless thing, To patient build again the nest    So rudely scattered spring by spring;  And sings her brief, unlisted songs,    Her dreams of bird life wild and free, Yet never beats her prison bars    At sound of song from bush or tree.  But in my busiest hours I pause,    Held by a sense of urgent speech, Bewildered by that spark-like soul,    Able my very soul to reach.  She will be heard; she chirps me loud,    When I forget those gravest cares, Her small provision to supply,    Clear water or her seedsman’s wares.  She begs me now for that chief joy    The round great world is made to grow,— Her wisp of greenness. Hear her chide,    Because my answering thought is slow!  What can my life seem like to her?    A dull, unpunctual service mine; Stupid before her eager call,    Her flitting steps, her insight fine.  To open wide thy prison door,    Poor friend, would give thee to thy foes; And yet a plaintive note I hear,    As if to tell how slowly goes  The time of thy long prisoning.    Bird! does some promise keep thee sane? Will there be better days for thee?    Will thy soul too know life again?  Ah, none of us have more than this:    If one true friend green leaves can reach From out some fairer, wider place,    And understand our wistful speech!


^^EOP^^

                    
                    
                    Sprinting across the freeway just ahead of them having set his left foot down   
directly onto the pavement from the ledge of the cement divide and edging his
other leg forward deliberately—caught the way sports pages show an athlete with
muscles condensed in the effort of crossing through a particular space—and then
she sees the cars coming towards him giving off that early morning shine across
their hoods almost colorless but precipitous in the four-lane parallel rush of metal
and cannot tell if any driver straining into the distance further ahead has seen him
or possibly has caught that glint off the long black flashlight he appears to carry
with its up-beam turned on full and faintly visible due to the angle of early sun
falling over the midwestern plains fanning out in every direction away from the   
sudden view of the airport hub’s acclaimed architectural design.

She sees the brief alignment of his body methodically finding its way across the
freeway lanes blue baseball cap fit snugly over his head to just above the hairline
where now dusky skin of his neck breaks into the picture.  He’s made it halfway,
she thinks, but she can’t stop the cars rushing towards him even as he scans with
concentration the worn lanes for the thing he’s lost as if he’s walking through the
dark and shining his flashlight wherever the object might have landed, his right
knee   still lifting purposefully upward and forward.
                                                                                                      — for C.W.
                

^^EOP^^




Highlight Actions
Enable or disable annotations




I    
He would drink by himself   
And raise a weathered thumb   
Towards the high shelf,   
Calling another rum   
And blackcurrant, without   
Having to raise his voice,   
Or order a quick stout   
By a lifting of the eyes   
And a discreet dumb-show   
Of pulling off the top;   
At closing time would go   
In waders and peaked cap   
Into the showery dark,   
A dole-kept breadwinnerdole-kept breadwinner A person who brings in money through "dole": financial help or welfare from the state.   
But a natural for work.   
I loved his whole manner,   
Sure-footed but too sly,   
His deadpan sidlingsidling Not calling attention to one’s self, unobtrusive tact,   
His fisherman’s quick eye   
And turned observant back.    
Incomprehensible   
To him, my other life.   
Sometimes, on the high stool,   
Too busy with his knife   
At a tobacco plugtobacco plug “Tobacco pressed into a flat oblong cake or stick” (OED), which needs to be cut up and separated before smoking   
And not meeting my eye,   
In the pause after a slug   
He mentioned poetry.   
We would be on our own   
And, always politic   
And shy of condescension,   
I would manage by some trick   
To switch the talk to eels   
Or lore of the horse and cart   
Or the ProvisionalsProvisionals In 1969 the IRA (Irish Republican Army) split into two groups: the “provisionals” and the “officials”: “At the Army Convention of 1969 the militarists broke away over the issue of abstention and formed the provisional IRA, which became the dominant grouping, while the remainder became known as the officials” .    
But my tentative art   
His turned back watches too:   
He was blown to bits   
Out drinking in a curfew   
Others obeyed, three nights   
After they shot dead   
The thirteen men in Derry.    PARAS THIRTEEN, the walls saidPARAS THIRTEEN, the walls said, / BOGSIDE NIL “Paras” is short for “Parachute Regiment.” According to A New Dictionary of Irish History from 1800, “On 30 January 1972 thirteen people were shot dead and seventeen injured within thirty minutes by British soldiers of the Parachute Regiment in the Bogside area of Derry”,    BOGSIDE NIL PARAS THIRTEEN, the walls said, / BOGSIDE NIL “Paras” is short for “Parachute Regiment.” According to A New Dictionary of Irish History from 1800, “On 30 January 1972 thirteen people were shot dead and seventeen injured within thirty minutes by British soldiers of the Parachute Regiment in the Bogside area of Derry”. That Wednesday   
Everyone held   
His breath and trembled.     
                   II    
It was a day of cold   
Raw silence, wind-blown    surplice and soutanesurplice and soutane A priest’s garments, the loose vestment (surplice) over the close-fitting one (soutane); by association, a priest:   
Rained-on, flower-laden   
Coffin after coffin   
Seemed to float from the door   
Of the packed cathedral   
Like blossoms on slow water.   
The common funeral   
Unrolled its swaddling band,   
Lapping, tightening   
Till we were braced and bound   
Like brothers in a ring.    
But he would not be held   
At home by his own crowd   
Whatever threats were phoned,   
Whatever black flags waved.   
I see him as he turned   
In that bombed offending place,   
Remorse fused with terror   
In his still knowable face,   
His cornered outfaced stare   
Blinding in the flash.    
He had gone miles away   
For he drank like a fish   
Nightly, naturally   
Swimming towards the lure   
Of warm lit-up places,   
The blurred mesh and murmur   
Drifting among glasses   
In the gregarious smoke.   
How culpable was he   
That last night when he broke   
Our tribe’s complicity?   
‘Now, you’re supposed to be   
An educated man,’   
I hear him say. ‘Puzzle me   
The right answer to that one.’  
                   III    
I missed his funeral,   
Those quiet walkers   
And sideways talkers    ShoalingShoaling Crowding and moving together as a group, like schools of fish out of his lane   
To the respectable   
Purring of the hearse...   
They move in equal pace   
With the habitual   
Slow consolation   
Of a dawdling engine,   
The line lifted, hand   
Over fist, cold sunshine   
On the water, the land   
Banked under fog: that morning   
I was taken in his boat,   
The Screw purlingScrew purling “Screw” is short for “screw propeller;” “purling” describes the motion of the propeller and swirling water , turning   
Indolent fathoms white,   
I tasted freedom with him.   
To get out early, haul   
Steadily off the bottom,    DispraiseDispraise Opposite of praise, disparage, make little of  the catch, and smile   
As you find a rhythm   
Working you, slow mile by mile,   
Into your proper haunt   
Somewhere, well out, beyond...    
Dawn-sniffing revenantrevenant In Stepping Stones: Interviews with Seamus Heaney, Heaney described a fishing trip with Louis O’Neill and another person using this word: “The shine of morning light on the lough had an otherworldly quality, it reminded me of the dawn scene in Hamlet, when the ghost fades on the crowing of the cock – so in ‘Casualty’ Louis then turns into a ‘dawn-sniffing revenant’” ,    PlodderPlodder “One who works slowly and laboriously; a persevering toiler, a drudge” (Century Dictionary) through midnight rain,   
Question me again.


^^EOP^^

And this is what is left of youth! . . .There were two boys, who were bred up together,Shared the same bed, and fed at the same board;Each tried the other’s sport, from their first chase,Young hunters of the butterfly and bee,To when they followed the fleet hare, and triedThe swiftness of the bird. They lay besideThe silver trout stream, watching as the sunPlayed on the bubbles: shared each in the storeOf either’s garden: and together readOf him, the master of the desert isle,Till a low hut, a gun, and a canoe,Bounded their wishes. Or if ever cameA thought of future days, ’twas but to sayThat they would share each other’s lot, and doWonders, no doubt. But this was vain: they partedWith promises of long remembrance, wordsWhose kindness was the heart’s, and those warm tears,Hidden like shame by the young eyes which shed them,But which are thought upon in after-yearsAs what we would give worlds to shed once more.
  They met again, — but different from themselves,At least what each remembered of themselves:The one proud as a soldier of his rank,And of his many battles: and the otherProud of his Indian wealth, and of the skillAnd toil which gathered it; each with a browAnd heart alike darkened by years and care.They met with cold words, and yet colder looks:Each was changed in himself, and yet each thoughtThe other only changed, himself the same.And coldness bred dislike, and rivalryCame like the pestilence o’er some sweet thoughtsThat lingered yet, healthy and beautiful,Amid dark and unkindly ones. And they,Whose boyhood had not known one jarring word,Were strangers in their age: if their eyes met,’Twas but to look contempt, and when they spoke,Their speech was wormwood! . . . . . . And this, this is life!


^^EOP^^




On seeing some pictures of the interior of his house, Washington, D.C.



Only the casket left, the jewel gone
Whose noble presence filled these stately rooms,
And made this spot a shrine where pilgrims came—
Stranger and friend—to bend in reverence
Before the great, pure soul that knew no guile;
To listen to the wise and gracious words
That fell from lips whose rare, exquisite smile
Gave tender beauty to the grand, grave face. 
Upon these pictured walls we see thy peers,—
Poet, and saint, and sage, painter, and king,—
A glorious band;—they shine upon us still;
Still gleam in marble the enchanting forms
Whereupon thy artist eye delighted dwelt;
Thy favorite Psyche droops her matchless face,
Listening, methinks, for the beloved voice
Which nevermore on earth shall sound her praise. 
All these remain,—the beautiful, the brave,
The gifted, silent ones; but thou art gone!
Fair is the world that smiles upon us now;
Blue are the skies of June, balmy the air
That soothes with touches soft the weary brow;
And perfect days glide into perfect nights,—
Moonlit and calm; but still our grateful hearts
Are sad, and faint with fear,— for thou art gone! 
Oh friend beloved, with longing, tear-filled eyes
We look up, up to the unclouded blue,
And seek in vain some answering sign from thee.
Look down upon us, guide and cheer us still
From the serene height where thou dwellest now;
Dark is the way without the beacon light
Which long and steadfastly thy hand upheld.
Oh, nerve with courage new the stricken hearts
Whose dearest hopes seem lost in losing thee.


^^EOP^^

                                    I  Immense, august, like some Titanic bloom,    The mighty choir unfolds its lithic core, Petalled with panes of azure, gules and or,    Splendidly lambent in the Gothic gloom, And stamened with keen flamelets that illume    The pale high-altar. On the prayer-worn floor, By worshippers innumerous thronged of yore,    A few brown crones, familiars of the tomb, The stranded driftwood of Faith’s ebbing sea—    For these alone the finials fret the skies, The topmost bosses shake their blossoms free,    While from the triple portals, with grave eyes, Tranquil, and fixed upon eternity,    The cloud of witnesses still testifies.                                      II  The crimson panes like blood-drops stigmatise    The western floor. The aisles are mute and cold. A rigid fetich in her robe of gold,    The Virgin of the Pillar, with blank eyes, Enthroned beneath her votive canopies,    Gathers a meagre remnant to her fold. The rest is solitude; the church, grown old,    Stands stark and grey beneath the burning skies. Well-nigh again its mighty framework grows    To be a part of nature’s self, withdrawn From hot humanity’s impatient woes;    The floor is ridged like some rude mountain lawn, And in the east one giant window shows    The roseate coldness of an Alp at dawn.


^^EOP^^

Trying to find my roost   one lidded, late afternoon,   the consolation of color   worked up like neediness,   like craving chocolate,   I’m at Art Institute favorites:   Velasquez’s “Servant,”   her bashful attention fixed   to place things just right,   Beckmann’s “Self-Portrait,”   whose fishy fingers seem   never to do a day’s work,   the great stone lions outside   monumentally pissed   by jumbo wreaths and ribbons   municipal good cheer   yoked around their heads.   Mealy mist. Furred air.   I walk north across   the river, Christmas lights   crushed on skyscraper glass,   bling stringing Michigan Ave.,   sunlight’s last-gasp sighing   through the artless fog.   Vague fatigued promise hangs   in the low darkened sky   when bunched scrawny starlings rattle up from trees,   switchback and snag like tossed rags dressing   the bare wintering branches,   black-on-black shining,   and I’m in a moment   more like a fore-moment:   from the sidewalk, watching them   poised without purpose,   I feel lifted inside the common   hazards and orders of things   when from their stillness,   the formal, aimless, not-waiting birds   erupt again, clap, elated weather- making wing-clouds changing,   smithereened back and forth,   now already gone to follow   the river’s running course.


^^EOP^^

A Creole boy from the West Indies brought,To be in European learning taught,Some years before to Westminster he went,To a Preparatory school was sent.When from his artless tale the mistress foundThe child had not one friend on English ground,She ev’n as if she his own mother were,Made the dark Indian her particular care.Oft on her favourite’s future lot she thought;To know the bent of his young mind she sought,For much the kind preceptress wished to findTo what profession he was most inclined,That where his genius led they might him train;For nature’s kindly bent she held not vain.But vain her efforts to explore his will;The frequent question he evaded still;Till on a day at length he to her came,Joy sparkling in his eyes; and said, the sameTrade he would be those boys of colour were,Who danced so happy in the open air.It was a troop of chimney-sweeping boys,With wooden music and obstreperous noise,In tarnish’d finery and grotesque array,Were dancing in the streets the first of May.


^^EOP^^

Oh, dear! The Christian virtues will disappear! Nowhere on land or sea Will be room for charity! Nowhere, in field or city, A person to help or pity! Better for them, no doubt, Not to need helping out Of their old miry ditch. But, alas for us, the rich! For we shall lose, you see, Our boasted charity!—  Lose all the pride and joy Of giving the poor employ, And money, and food, and love (And making stock thereof!). Our Christian virtues are gone, With nothing to practise on!  It don’t hurt them a bit, For they can’t practise it; But it’s our great joy and pride—  What virtue have we beside? We believe, as sure as we live, That it is more blessed to give Than to want, and waste, and grieve, And occasionally receive! And here are the people pressing  To rob us of our pet blessing! No chance to endow or bedizen A hospital, school or prison, And leave our own proud name To Gratitude and Fame! No chance to do one good deed, To give what we do not need, To leave what we cannot use To those whom we deign to choose! When none want broken meat, How shall our cake be sweet? When none want flannels and coals, How shall we save our souls? Oh, dear! Oh, dear! The Christian virtues will disappear!  The poor have their virtues rude,— Meekness and gratitude, Endurance, and respect For us, the world’s elect; Economy, self-denial, Patience in every trial, Self-sacrifice, self-restraint,— Virtues enough for a saint! Virtues enough to bear All this life’s sorrow and care! Virtues by which to rise To a front seat in the skies! How can they turn from this  To common earthly bliss,— Mere clothes, and food, and drink, And leisure to read and think, And art, and beauty, and ease,— There is no crown for these! True, if their gratitude  Were not for fire and food, They might still learn to bless The Lord for their happiness! And, instead of respect for wealth, Might learn from beauty, and health, And freedom in power and pelf, Each man to respect himself! And, instead of scraping and saving, Might learn from using and having That man’s life should be spent In a grand development! But this is petty and small; These are not virtues at all; They do not look as they should; They don’t do us any good! Oh, dear! Oh, dear! Oh, dear! The Christian virtues will disappear!


^^EOP^^




(...after my Mother’s death)



Here not long enough after the hospital happened   
I find her closet lying empty and stop my play   
And go in and crane up at three blackwire hangers   
Which quiver, airy, released. They appear to enjoy 
Their new distance, cognizance born of the absence   
Of anything else. The closet has been cleaned out   
Full-flush as surgeries where the hangers could be   
Amiable scalpels though they just as well would be 
Themselves, in basements, glovelessly scraping uteri   
But, here, pure, transfigured heavenward, they’re
Birds, whose wingspans expand by excluding me. Their   
Range is enlarged by loss. They’d leave buzzards 
Measly as moths: and the hatshelf is even higher!—
As the sky over a prairie, an undotted desert where   
Nothing can swoop sudden, crumple in secret. I’ve fled   
At ambush, tag, age: six, must I face this, can 
I have my hide-and-seek hole back now please, the   
Clothes, the thicket of shoes, where is it? Only   
The hangers are at home here. Come heir to this   
Rare element, fluent, their skeletal grace sings 
Of the ease with which they let go the dress, slip,   
Housecoat or blouse, so absolvingly. Free, they fly
Trim, triangular, augurs leapt ahead from some geometric   
God who soars stripped (of flesh, it is said): catnip 
To a brat placated by model airplane kits kids
My size lack motorskills for, I wind up glue-scabbed,   
Pawing goo-goo fingernails, glaze skins fun to peer in as
Frost-i-glass doors ... But the closet has no windows, 
Opaque or sheer: I must shut my eyes, shrink within   
To peep into this wall. Soliciting sleep I’ll dream   
Mother spilled and cold, unpillowed, the operating-
Table cracked to goad delivery: its stirrups slack, 
Its forceps closed: by it I’ll see mobs of obstetrical   
Personnel kneel proud, congratulatory, cooing
And oohing and hold the dead infant up to the dead   
Woman’s face as if for approval, the prompted 
Beholding, tears, a zoomshot kiss. White-masked   
Doctors and nurses patting each other on the back,   
Which is how in the Old West a hangman, if
He was good, could gauge the heft of his intended ... 
Awake, the hangers are sharper, knife-’n’-slice, I jump   
Helplessly to catch them to twist them clear,   
Mis-shape them whole, sail them across the small air   
Space of the closet. I shall find room enough here 
By excluding myself; by excluding myself, I’ll grow.


^^EOP^^

O zummer clote! when the brook’s a-glidèn    So slow an’ smooth down his zedgy bed, Upon thy broad leaves so seäfe a-ridèn    The water’s top wi’ thy yollow head,           By alder sheädes, O,           An’ bulrush beds, O, Thou then dost float, goolden zummer clote!  The grey-bough’d withy’s a leänèn lowly    Above the water thy leaves do hide; The bènden bulrush, a-swaÿèn slowly,    Do skirt in zummer thy river’s zide;           An’ perch in shoals, O,           Do vill the holes, O, Where thou dost float, goolden zummer clote!  Oh! when thy brook-drinkèn flow’r’s a-blowèn,    The burnèn zummer’s a-zettèn in; The time o’ greenness, the time o’ mowèn,    When in the häy-vield, wi’ zunburnt skin,           The vo’k do drink, O,           Upon the brink, O, Where thou dost float, goolden zummer clote!  Wi’ eärms a-spreadèn, an’ cheäks a-blowèn,    How proud wer I when I vu’st could swim Athirt the deep pleäce where thou bist growèn,    Wi’ thy long more vrom the bottom dim;           While cows, knee-high, O,           In brook, wer nigh, O, Where thou dost float, goolden zummer clote!  Ov all the brooks drough the meäds a-windèn,    Ov all the meäds by a river’s brim, There’s nwone so feäir o’ my own heart’s vindèn    As where the maïdens do zee thee zwim,           An’ stan’ to teäke, O,           Wi’ long-stemm’d reäke, O, Thy flow’r afloat, goolden zummer clote!  


^^EOP^^

Sent in after new ground was taken,
my father ducked from ditch to shell-hole,
unwinding the telephone cable behind him,
a pfc. cast as Mercury, connecting   
the gods with the lesser gods. 
Funny to think of him trailing
the complex filament of speech,
that man, neither shy nor sullen,
who answered only “Yes,” “No,” “Maybe,”
and never volunteered a private thought. 
Standing off with his hands in his pockets
or cupping a cigarette, he seemed to be waiting
with the great rural patience of fields
for whatever might rise pure and nameless
or fall from the sky beyond explanation. 
If anyone asked what he was thinking,
he said, “Nothing,” and when he died
he rushed out leaving everything unsaid,
uncoiling a dark line into darkness
down which a familiar silence roars.


^^EOP^^

Night the First By Nature's law, what may be, may be now; There's no prerogative in human hours: In human hearts what bolder thought can rise, Than man's presumption on tomorrow's dawn? Where is tomorrow? In another world. For numbers this is certain; the reverse Is sure to none; and yet on this perhaps, This peradventure, infamous for lies, As on a rock of adamant we build Our mountain hopes; spin out eternal schemes, As we the fatal sisters would outspin, And, big with life's futurities, expire.    Not even Philander had bespoke his shroud; Nor had he cause, a warning was denied; How many fall as sudden, not as safe? As sudden, though for years admonished home: Of human ills the last extreme beware, Beware, Lorenzo! a slow-sudden death. How dreadful that deliberate surprise? Be wise today, 'tis madness to defer; Next day the fatal precedent will plead; Thus on, till wisdom is pushed out of life: Procrastination is the thief of time, Year after year it steals, till all are fled, And to the mercies of a moment leaves The vast concerns of an eternal scene. If not so frequent, would not this be strange? That 'tis so frequent, this is stranger still.    Of man's miraculous mistakes, this bears The palm, "That all men are about to live," For ever on the brink of being born: All pay themselves the compliment to think They, one day, shall not drivel; and their pride On this reversion takes up ready praise; At least, their own; their future selves applauds; How excellent that life they ne'er will lead? Time lodged in their own hands is folly's vails; That lodged in Fate's, to wisdom they consign; The thing they can't but purpose, they postpone; 'Tis not in folly, not to scorn a fool; And scarce in human wisdom to do more: All promise is poor dilatory man, And that through every stage: when young, indeed, In full content, we sometimes nobly rest, Unanxious for ourselves; and only wish, As duteous sons, our fathers were more wise: At thirty man suspects himself a fool; Knows it at forty, and reforms his plan; At fifty chides his infamous delay, Pushes his prudent purpose to resolve; In all the magnanimity of thought Resolves, and re-resolves:then dies the same. 


^^EOP^^




(to JK)



Those scars rooted me. Stigmata stalagmite
I sat at a drive-in and watched the stars
Through a straw while the Coke in my lap went
Waterier and waterier. For days on end or 
Nights no end I crawled on all fours or in
My case no fours to worship you: Amoeba Behemoth.
—Then you explained your DNA calls for
Meaner genes than mine and since you are merely 
So to speak its external expression etcet
Ergo among your lovers I’ll never be ...
Ah that movie was so faraway the stars melting 
Made my thighs icy. I see: it’s not you
Who is not requiting me, it’s something in you
Over which you have no say says no to me.


^^EOP^^

                    
                    
                    Everyone was happier. But where did the sadness go? People wanted to know. They didn’t want it collecting in their elbows or knees then popping up later. The girl who thought of the ponies made a lot of money. Now a month’s supply of pills came in a hard blue case with a handle. You opened it & found the usual vial plus six tiny ponies of assorted shapes & sizes, softly breathing in the Styrofoam. Often they had to be pried out & would wobble a little when first put on the ground. In the beginning the children tried to play with them, but the sharp hooves nicked their fingers & the ponies refused to jump over pencil hurdles. The children stopped feeding them sugarwater & the ponies were left to break their legs on the gardens’ gravel paths or drown in the gutters. On the first day of the month, rats gathered on doorsteps & spat out only the bitter manes. Many a pony’s last sight was a bounding squirrel with its tail hovering over its head like a halo. Behind the movie theatre the hardier ponies gathered in packs amongst the cigarette butts, getting their hooves stuck in wads of gum. They lined the hills at funerals, huddled under folding chairs at weddings. It became a matter of pride if one of your ponies proved unusually sturdy. People would smile & say, “This would have been an awful month for me,” pointing to the glossy palomino trotting energetically around their ankles. Eventually, the ponies were no longer needed. People had learned to imagine their sadness trotting away. & when they wanted something more tangible, they could always go to the racetrack & study the larger horses’ faces. Gloom, #341, with those big black eyes, was almost sure to win.
                

^^EOP^^

Here, on fine long legs springy as steel,
a life rides, sealed in a small brown pill
that skims along over the basement floor
wrapped up in a simple obsession.
Eight legs reach out like the master ribs
of a web in which some thought is caught
dead center in its own small world,
a thought so far from the touch of things
that we can only guess at it. If mine,
it would be the secret dream
of walking alone across the floor of my life
with an easy grace, and with love enough
to live on at the center of myself.


^^EOP^^

O the days gone by! O the days gone by! The apples in the orchard, and the pathway through the rye; The chirrup of the robin, and the whistle of the quail As he piped across the meadows sweet as any nightingale; When the bloom was on the clover, and the blue was in the sky, And my happy heart brimmed over in the days gone by.  In the days gone by, when my naked feet were tripped By the honey-suckle’s tangles where the water-lilies dipped, And the ripples of the river lipped the moss along the brink Where the placid-eyed and lazy-footed cattle came to drink, And the tilting snipe stood fearless of the truant’s wayward cry And the splashing of the swimmer, in the days gone by.  O the days gone by! O the days gone by! The music of the laughing lip, the luster of the eye; The childish faith in fairies, and Aladdin’s magic ring— The simple, soul-reposing, glad belief in everything,— When life was like a story, holding neither sob nor sigh, In the golden olden glory of the days gone by.


^^EOP^^

Going to sleep, I cross my hands on my chest.   
They will place my hands like this.   
It will look as though I am flying into myself.


^^EOP^^

When the beautiful young man drowned—
accidentally, swimming at dawn
in a current too swift for him,
or obedient to some cult
of total immersion that promised
the bather would come up divine, 
mortality rinsed from him—
Hadrian placed his image everywhere,
a marble Antinoüs staring across
the public squares where a few dogs
always scuffled, planted
in every squalid little crossroads 
at the furthest corners of the Empire.
What do we want in any body
but the world? And if the lover’s
inimitable form was nowhere,
then he would find it everywhere,
though the boy became simply more dead 
as the sculptors embodied him.
Wherever Hadrian might travel,
the beloved figure would be there
first: the turn of his shoulders,
the exact marble nipples,
the drowned face not really lost 
to the Nile—which has no appetite,
merely takes in anything
without judgment or expectation—
but lost into its own multiplication,
an artifice rubbed with oils and acid
so that the skin might shine.  Which of these did I love?
Here is his hair, here his hair
again. Here the chiseled liquid waist
I hold because I cannot hold it.
If only one of you

^^EOP^^

Sweet Auburn, loveliest village of the plain,Where health and plenty cheared the labouring swain,Where smiling spring its earliest visit paid,And parting summer's lingering blooms delayed,Dear lovely bowers of innocence and ease,Seats of my youth, when every sport could please,How often have I loitered o'er thy green,Where humble happiness endeared each scene!How often have I paused on every charm,The sheltered cot, the cultivated farm,The never-failing brook, the busy mill,The decent church that topt the neighbouring hill,The hawthorn bush, with seats beneath the shade,For talking age and whispering lovers made!How often have I blest the coming day,When toil remitting lent its turn to play,And all the village train, from labour free,Led up their sports beneath the spreading tree,While many a pastime circled in the shade,The young contending as the old surveyed;And many a gambol frolicked o'er the ground,And slights of art and feats of strength went round;And still as each repeated pleasure tired,Succeeding sports the mirthful band inspired;The dancing pair that simply sought renownBy holding out to tire each other down;The swain mistrustless of his smutted face,While secret laughter tittered round the place;The bashful virgin's side-long looks of love,The matron's glance that would those looks reprove!These were thy charms, sweet village; sports like these,With sweet succession, taught even toil to please;These round thy bowers their chearful influence shed,These were thy charms—But all these charms are fled.
 Sweet smiling village, loveliest of the lawn,Thy sports are fled, and all thy charms withdrawn;Amidst thy bowers the tyrant's hand is seen,And desolation saddens all thy green:One only master grasps the whole domain,And half a tillage stints thy smiling plain;No more thy glassy brook reflects the day,But, choaked with sedges, works its weedy way;Along thy glades, a solitary guest,The hollow-sounding bittern guards its nest;Amidst thy desert walks the lapwing flies,And tires their echoes with unvaried cries.Sunk are thy bowers, in shapeless ruin all,And the long grass o'ertops the mouldering wall;And, trembling, shrinking from the spoiler's hand,Far, far away, thy children leave the land.
 Ill fares the land, to hastening ills a prey,Where wealth accumulates, and men decay:Princes and lords may flourish, or may fade;A breath can make them, as a breath has made;But a bold peasantry, their country's pride,When once destroyed, can never be supplied.
 A time there was, ere England's griefs began,When every rood of ground maintained its man;For him light labour spread her wholesome store,Just gave what life required, but gave no more:His best companions, innocence and health;And his best riches, ignorance of wealth.
 But times are altered; trade's unfeeling trainUsurp the land and dispossess the swain;Along the lawn, where scattered hamlets rose,Unwieldy wealth and cumbrous pomp repose;And every want to oppulence allied,And every pang that folly pays to pride.Those gentle hours that plenty bade to bloom,Those calm desires that asked but little room,Those healthful sports that graced the peaceful scene,Lived in each look, and brightened all the green;These, far departing seek a kinder shore,And rural mirth and manners are no more.
 Sweet Auburn! parent of the blissful hour,Thy glades forlorn confess the tyrant's power.Here as I take my solitary rounds,Amidst thy tangling walks, and ruined grounds,And, many a year elapsed, return to viewWhere once the cottage stood, the hawthorn grew,Remembrance wakes with all her busy train,Swells at my breast, and turns the past to pain.
 In all my wanderings round this world of care,In all my griefs—and God has given my share—I still had hopes, my latest hours to crown,Amidst these humble bowers to lay me down;To husband out life's taper at the close,And keep the flame from wasting by repose.I still had hopes, for pride attends us still,Amidst the swains to shew my book-learned skill,Around my fire an evening groupe to draw,And tell of all I felt, and all I saw;And, as an hare whom hounds and horns pursue,Pants to the place from whence at first she flew,I still had hopes, my long vexations past,Here to return—and die at home at last.
 O blest retirement, friend to life's decline,Retreats from care that never must be mine,How happy he who crowns, in shades like theseA youth of labour with an age of ease;Who quits a world where strong temptations try,And, since 'tis hard to combat, learns to fly!For him no wretches, born to work and weep,Explore the mine, or tempt the dangerous deep;No surly porter stands in guilty stateTo spurn imploring famine from the gate,But on he moves to meet his latter end,Angels around befriending virtue's friend;Bends to the grave with unperceived decay,While resignation gently slopes the way;And, all his prospects brightening to the last,His Heaven commences ere the world be past!
 Sweet was the sound, when oft at evening's close,Up yonder hill the village murmur rose;There, as I past with careless steps and slow,The mingling notes came soften'd from below;The swain responsive as the milk-maid sung,The sober herd that lowed to meet their young,The noisy geese that gabbled o'er the pool,The playful children just let loose from school,The watch-dog's voice that bayed the whispering wind,And the loud laugh that spoke the vacant mind,These all in sweet confusion sought the shade,And filled each pause the nightingale had made.But now the sounds of population fail,No cheerful murmurs fluctuate in the gale,No busy steps the grass-grown foot-way tread,For all the bloomy flush of life is fled.All but yon widowed, solitary thingThat feebly bends beside the plashy spring;She, wretched matron, forced in age, for bread,To strip the brook with mantling cresses spread,To pick her wintry faggot from the thorn,To seek her nightly shed, and weep till morn;She only left of all the harmless train,The sad historian of the pensive plain.
 Near yonder copse, where once the garden smiled,And still where many a garden-flower grows wild;There, where a few torn shrubs the place disclose,The village preacher's modest mansion rose.A man he was, to all the country dear,And passing rich with forty pounds a year;Remote from towns he ran his godly race,Nor e'er had changed, nor wished to change his place;Unpractised he to fawn, or seek for power,By doctrines fashioned to the varying hour;Far other aims his heart had learned to prize,More skilled to raise the wretched than to rise.His house was known to all the vagrant train,He chid their wanderings but relieved their pain;The long-remembered beggar was his guest,Whose beard descending swept his aged breast;The ruined spendthrift, now no longer proud,Claim'd kindred there, and had his claims allowed;The broken soldier, kindly bade to stay,Sate by his fire, and talked the night away;Wept o'er his wounds, or, tales of sorrow done,Shouldered his crutch, and shewed how fields were won.Pleased with his guests, the good man learned to glow,And quite forgot their vices in their woe;Careless their merits, or their faults to scan,His pity gave ere charity began.
 Thus to relieve the wretched was his pride,And even his failings leaned to Virtue's side;But in his duty prompt at every call,He watched and wept, he prayed and felt, for all.And, as a bird each fond endearment tries,To tempt its new-fledged offspring to the skies;He tried each art, reproved each dull delay,Allured to brighter worlds, and led the way.
 Beside the bed where parting life was layed,And sorrow, guilt, and pain, by turns, dismayedThe reverend champion stood. At his controlDespair and anguish fled the struggling soul;Comfort came down the trembling wretch to raise,And his last faltering accents whispered praise.
 At church, with meek and unaffected grace,His looks adorned the venerable place;Truth from his lips prevailed with double sway,And fools, who came to scoff, remained to pray.The service past, around the pious man,With steady zeal, each honest rustic ran;Even children followed, with endearing wile,And plucked his gown, to share the good man's smile.His ready smile a parent's warmth exprest,Their welfare pleased him, and their cares distrest:To them his heart, his love, his griefs were given,But all his serious thoughts had rest in Heaven.As some tall cliff that lifts its awful form,Swells from the vale, and midway leaves the storm,Tho' round its breast the rolling clouds are spread,Eternal sunshine settles on its head.
 Beside yon straggling fence that skirts the way,With blossomed furze unprofitably gay,There, in his noisy mansion, skill'd to rule,The village master taught his little school;A man severe he was, and stern to view,I knew him well, and every truant knew;Well had the boding tremblers learned to traceThe day's disasters in his morning face;Full well they laughed, with counterfeited glee,At all his jokes, for many a joke had he:Full well the busy whisper circling round,Conveyed the dismal tidings when he frowned;Yet he was kind, or if severe in aught,The love he bore to learning was in fault;The village all declared how much he knew;'Twas certain he could write, and cypher too;Lands he could measure, terms and tides presage,And ev'n the story ran that he could gauge.In arguing too, the parson owned his skill,For even tho' vanquished, he could argue still;While words of learned length and thundering sound,Amazed the gazing rustics ranged around;And still they gazed, and still the wonder grew,That one small head could carry all he knew.
 But past is all his fame. The very spotWhere many a time he triumphed, is forgot.Near yonder thorn, that lifts its head on high,Where once the sign-post caught the passing eye,Low lies that house where nut-brown draughts inspired,Where grey-beard mirth and smiling toil retired,Where village statesmen talked with looks profound,And news much older than their ale went round.Imagination fondly stoops to traceThe parlour splendours of that festive place;The white-washed wall, the nicely sanded floor,The varnished clock that clicked behind the door;The chest contrived a double debt to pay,A bed by night, a chest of drawers by day;The pictures placed for ornament and use,The twelve good rules, the royal game of goose;The hearth, except when winter chill'd the day,With aspen boughs, and flowers, and fennel gay;While broken tea-cups, wisely kept for shew,Ranged o'er the chimney, glistened in a row.
 Vain transitory splendours! Could not allReprieve the tottering mansion from its fall!Obscure it sinks, nor shall it more impartAn hour's importance to the poor man's heart;Thither no more the peasant shall repairTo sweet oblivion of his daily care;No more the farmer's news, the barber's tale,No more the woodman's ballad shall prevail;No more the smith his dusky brow shall clear,Relax his ponderous strength, and lean to hear;The host himself no longer shall be foundCareful to see the mantling bliss go round;Nor the coy maid, half willing to be prest,Shall kiss the cup to pass it to the rest.
 Yes! let the rich deride, the proud disdain,These simple blessings of the lowly train;To me more dear, congenial to my heart,One native charm, than all the gloss of art;Spontaneous joys, where Nature has its play,The soul adopts, and owns their first-born sway;Lightly they frolic o'er the vacant mind,Unenvied, unmolested, unconfined.But the long pomp, the midnight masquerade,With all the freaks of wanton wealth arrayed,In these, ere triflers half their wish obtain,The toiling pleasure sickens into pain;And, even while fashion's brightest arts decoy,The heart distrusting asks, if this be joy.
 Ye friends to truth, ye statesmen who surveyThe rich man's joys encrease, the poor's decay,'Tis yours to judge, how wide the limits standBetween a splendid and a happy land.Proud swells the tide with loads of freighted ore,And shouting Folly hails them from her shore;Hoards even beyond the miser's wish abound,And rich men flock from all the world around.Yet count our gains. This wealth is but a nameThat leaves our useful products still the same.Not so the loss. The man of wealth and prideTakes up a space that many poor supplied;Space for his lake, his park's extended bounds,Space for his horses, equipage, and hounds:The robe that wraps his limbs in silken sloth,Has robbed the neighbouring fields of half their growth;His seat, where solitary sports are seen,Indignant spurns the cottage from the green:Around the world each needful product flies,For all the luxuries the world supplies.While thus the land adorned for pleasure, allIn barren splendour feebly waits the fall.
 As some fair female unadorned and plain,Secure to please while youth confirms her reign,Slights every borrowed charm that dress supplies,Nor shares with art the triumph of her eyes.But when those charms are past, for charms are frail,When time advances, and when lovers fail,She then shines forth, solicitous to bless,In all the glaring impotence of dress.Thus fares the land, by luxury betrayed:In nature's simplest charms at first arrayed;But verging to decline, its splendours rise,Its vistas strike, its palaces surprize;While, scourged by famine from the smiling land,The mournful peasant leads his humble band;And while he sinks, without one arm to save,The country blooms—a garden, and a grave.
 Where then, ah where, shall poverty reside,To scape the pressure of contiguous pride?If to some common's fenceless limits strayed,He drives his flock to pick the scanty blade,Those fenceless fields the sons of wealth divide,And ev'n the bare-worn common is denied.
 If to the city sped—What waits him there?To see profusion that he must not share;To see ten thousand baneful arts combinedTo pamper luxury, and thin mankind;To see those joys the sons of pleasure know,Extorted from his fellow-creature's woe.Here while the courtier glitters in brocade,There the pale artist plies the sickly trade;Here while the proud their long-drawn pomps display,There the black gibbet glooms beside the way.The dome where Pleasure holds her midnight reign,Here, richly deckt, admits the gorgeous train;Tumultuous grandeur crowds the blazing square,The rattling chariots clash, the torches glare.Sure scenes like these no troubles e'er annoy!Sure these denote one universal joy!Are these thy serious thoughts?—Ah, turn thine eyesWhere the poor houseless shivering female lies.She once, perhaps, in village plenty blest,Has wept at tales of innocence distrest;Her modest looks the cottage might adornSweet as the primrose peeps beneath the thorn:Now lost to all; her friends, her virtue fled,Near her betrayer's door she lays her head,And, pinch'd with cold, and shrinking from the shower,With heavy heart deplores that luckless hourWhen idly first, ambitious of the town,She left her wheel and robes of country brown.
 Do thine, sweet Auburn, thine, the loveliest train,Do thy fair tribes participate her pain?Even now, perhaps, by cold and hunger led,At proud men's doors they ask a little bread!
 Ah, no. To distant climes, a dreary scene,Where half the convex world intrudes between,Through torrid tracts with fainting steps they go,Where wild Altama murmurs to their woe.Far different there from all that charm'd before,The various terrors of that horrid shore;Those blazing suns that dart a downward ray,And fiercely shed intolerable day;Those matted woods where birds forget to sing,But silent bats in drowsy clusters cling;Those poisonous fields with rank luxuriance crowned,Where the dark scorpion gathers death around;Where at each step the stranger fears to wakeThe rattling terrors of the vengeful snake;Where crouching tigers wait their hapless prey,And savage men, more murderous still than they;While oft in whirls the mad tornado flies,Mingling the ravaged landscape with the skies.Far different these from every former scene,The cooling brook, the grassy vested green,The breezy covert of the warbling grove,That only shelter'd thefts of harmless love.
 Good Heaven! what sorrows gloom'd that parting day,That called them from their native walks away;When the poor exiles, every pleasure past,Hung round their bowers, and fondly looked their last,And took a long farewell, and wished in vainFor seats like these beyond the western main;And shuddering still to face the distant deep,Returned and wept, and still returned to weep.The good old sire the first prepared to goTo new found worlds, and wept for others woe.But for himself, in conscious virtue brave,He only wished for worlds beyond the grave.His lovely daughter, lovelier in her tears,The fond companion of his helpless years,Silent went next, neglectful of her charms,And left a lover's for a father's arms.With louder plaints the mother spoke her woes,And blessed the cot where every pleasure rose;And kist her thoughtless babes with many a tear,And claspt them close, in sorrow doubly dear;Whilst her fond husband strove to lend reliefIn all the silent manliness of grief.
 O luxury! thou curst by Heaven's decree,How ill exchanged are things like these for thee!How do thy potions, with insidious joy,Diffuse their pleasures only to destroy!Kingdoms, by thee, to sickly greatness grown,Boast of a florid vigour not their own;At every draught more large and large they grow,A bloated mass of rank unwieldy woe;Till sapped their strength, and every part unsound,Down, down they sink, and spread a ruin round.
 Even now the devastation is begun,And half the business of destruction done;Even now, methinks, as pondering here I stand,I see the rural virtues leave the land:Down where yon anchoring vessel spreads the sail,That idly waiting flaps with every gale,Downward they move, a melancholy band,Pass from the shore, and darken all the strand.Contented toil, and hospitable care,And kind connubial tenderness, are there;And piety with wishes placed above,And steady loyalty, and faithful love.And thou, sweet Poetry, thou loveliest maid,Still first to fly where sensual joys invade;Unfit in these degenerate times of shame,To catch the heart, or strike for honest fame;Dear charming nymph, neglected and decried,My shame in crowds, my solitary pride;Thou source of all my bliss, and all my woe,That found'st me poor at first, and keep'st me so;Thou guide by which the nobler arts excell,Thou nurse of every virtue, fare thee well!Farewell, and O where'er thy voice be tried,On Torno's cliffs, or Pambamarca's side,Whether were equinoctial fervours glow,Or winter wraps the polar world in snow,Still let thy voice, prevailing over time,Redress the rigours of the inclement clime;Aid slighted truth with thy persuasive strain,Teach erring man to spurn the rage of gain;Teach him, that states of native strength possest,Tho' very poor, may still be very blest;That trade's proud empire hastes to swift decay,As ocean sweeps the labour'd mole away;While self-dependent power can time defy,As rocks resist the billows and the sky.


^^EOP^^

On village green whose smooth and well-worn sod, Cross pathed, with many a gossip’s foot is trod; By cottage door where playful children run, And cats and curs sit basking in the sun; Where o’er an earthen seat the thorn is bent, Cross-armed and back to wall poor William leant His bonnet all awry, his gathered brow, His hanging lip and lengthened visage show A mind but ill at ease. With motions strange His listless limbs their wayward postures change; While many a crooked line and curious maze With clouted shoon he on the sand portrays. At length the half-chewed straw fell from his mouth, And to himself low spoke the moody youth.     ‘How simple is the lad and reft of skill, Who thinks with love to fix a woman’s will: Who every Sunday morn, to please her sight, Knots up his neckcloth gay and hosen white; Who for her pleasure keeps his pockets bare, And half his wages spends on pedlar’s ware; When every niggard clown or dotard old, Who hides in secret nooks his oft-told gold, Whose field or orchard tempts, with all her pride, At little cost may win her for his bride! While all the meed her silly lover gains, Is but the neighbours’ jeering for his pains. On Sunday last, when Susan’s banns were read, And I astonished sat with hanging head, Cold grew my shrinking frame, and loose my knee, While every neighbour’s eye was fixed on me. Ah Sue! when last we worked at Hodge’s hay, And still at me you mocked in wanton play — When last at fair, well pleased by chapman’s stand, You took the new-bought fairing from my hand — When at old Hobb’s you sung that song so gay, ‘Sweet William,’ still the burthen of the lay, — I little thought, alas! the lots were cast, That thou shouldst be another’s bride at last; And had, when last we tripped it on the green, And laughed at stiff-backed Rob, small thought I ween, Ere yet another scanty month was flown To see thee wedded to the hateful clown. Ay, lucky churl! more gold thy pockets line, But did these shapely limbs resemble thine, I’d stay at home and tend the household gear, Nor on the green with other lads appear. Ay, lucky churl! no store thy cottage lacks, And round thy barn thick stand the sheltered stacks. But did such features coarse my visage grace, I’d never budge the bonnet from my face. Yet let it be; it shall not break my ease, He best deserves who doth the maiden please. Such silly cause no more shall give me pain, Nor ever maiden cross my rest again. Such grizzled suitors with their taste agree, And the black fiend may take them all for me!’  Now through the village rose confused sounds, Hoarse lads, and children shrill, and yelping hounds. Straight every housewife at her door is seen, And pausing hedgers on their mattocks lean. At every narrow lane and alley’s mouth Loud-laughing lasses stand, and joking youth. A bridal band tricked out in colours gay, With minstrels blithe before to cheer the way, From clouds of curling dust that onward fly, In rural splendour break upon the eye. As in their way they hold so gaily on, Caps, beads, and buttons, glancing in the sun, Each village wag with eye of roguish cast, Some maiden jogs and vents the ready jest; While village toasts the passing belles deride, And sober matrons marvel at their pride. But William, head erect, with settled brow, In sullen silence viewed the passing show; And oft he scratched his pate with careless grace, And scorned to pull the bonnet o’er his face; But did with steady look unaltered wait, Till hindmost man had passed the churchyard gate, Then turned him to his cot with visage flat, Where honest Lightfoot on the threshold sat. Up leaped the kindly beast his hand to lick, And for his pains received an angry kick. Loud shuts the door with harsh and thundering din; The echoes round their circling course begin, From cot to cot, church tower, and rocky dell, It grows amain with wide progressive swell, And Lightfoot joins the coil with long and piteous yell.


^^EOP^^

6:48 a.m., and leaden
    little jokes about what heroes
   we are for getting up at this hour.
Quiet. The surf and sandpipers running.
T minus ten and counting, the sun
    mounting over Canaveral
a swollen coral, a color
bright as camera lights. We’re blind-
   sided by a flash: 
      shot from the unseen
    launching pad, and so from nowhere,
   a flame-tipped arrow—no, an airborne
pen on fire, its ink a plume
of smoke which, even while zooming
    upward, stays as oddly solid
as the braided tail of a tornado,
and lingers there as lightning would
   if it could steal its own thunder. 
      —Which, when it rumbles in, leaves
    under or within it a million
   firecrackers going off, a thrill
of distant pops and rips in delayed
reaction, hitting the beach in fading
    waves as the last glint of shuttle
receives our hands’ eye-shade salute:
the giant point of all the fuss soon
   smaller than a star. 
      Only now does a steady, low
    sputter above us, a lawn mower
   cutting a corner of the sky,
grow audible. Look, it’s a biplane!—
some pilot’s long-planned, funny tribute
    to wonder’s always-dated orbit
and the itch of afterthought. I swat
my ankle, bitten by a sand gnat:
   what the locals call no-see-’ums.


^^EOP^^

They sing their dearest songs—        He, she, all of them—yea,        Treble and tenor and bass,             And one to play;       With the candles mooning each face. . . .             Ah, no; the years O! How the sick leaves reel down in throngs!         They clear the creeping moss—        Elders and juniors—aye,        Making the pathways neat             And the garden gay;        And they build a shady seat. . . .             Ah, no; the years, the years, See, the white storm-birds wing across.         They are blithely breakfasting all—        Men and maidens—yea,        Under the summer tree,             With a glimpse of the bay,        While pet fowl come to the knee. . . .             Ah, no; the years O! And the rotten rose is ript from the wall.         They change to a high new house,        He, she, all of them—aye,        Clocks and carpets and chairs           On the lawn all day,        And brightest things that are theirs. . . .           Ah, no; the years, the years; Down their carved names the rain-drop ploughs.


^^EOP^^




scene, the desert.time, mid-day.  



In silent horror o’er the desert-wasteThe driver  Hassan with his camels past.One cruse of water on his back he bore,And his light scrip contained a scanty store:A fan of painted feathers in his hand,To guard his shaded face from scorching sand.The sultry sun had gained the middle sky,And not a tree, and not an herb was nigh.The beasts, with pain, their dusty way pursue,Shrill roared the winds, and dreary was the view!With desperate sorrow wild, th’ affrighted manThrice sighted, thrice struck his breast, and thus began:
Sad was the hour, and luckless was the day,
  When first from Schiraz’ walls I bent my way.

^^EOP^^

Where is my boy, my boy—
In what far part of the world?
The boy I loved best of all in the school?—
I, the teacher, the old maid, the virgin heart,
Who made them all my children.
Did I know my boy aright,
Thinking of him as spirit aflame,
Active, ever aspiring?
Oh, boy, boy, for whom I prayed and prayed
In many a watchful hour at night,
Do you remember the letter I wrote you
Of the beautiful love of Christ?
And whether you ever took it or not,
My boy, wherever you are,
Work for your soul’s sake,
That all the clay of you, all the dross of you,
May yield to the fire of you,
Till the fire is nothing but light! . . .
Nothing but light!


^^EOP^^

This rose-tree is not made to bear The violet blue, nor lily fair,    Nor the sweet mignionet: And if this tree were discontent, Or wished to change its natural bent,    It all in vain would fret.  And should it fret, you would suppose It ne’er had seen its own red rose,    Nor after gentle shower Had ever smelled its rose’s scent, Or it could ne’er be discontent    With its own pretty flower.  Like such a blind and senseless tree As I’ve imagined this to be,    All envious persons are: With care and culture all may find Some pretty flower in their own mind,    Some talent that is rare.


^^EOP^^




composed at clevedon, somersetshire



My pensive Sara! thy soft cheek reclined Thus on mine arm, most soothing sweet it is To sit beside our Cot, our Cot o’ergrown With white-flowered Jasmin, and the broad-leaved Myrtle, (Meet emblems they of Innocence and Love!) And watch the clouds, that late were rich with light, Slow saddening round, and mark the star of eve Serenely brilliant (such would Wisdom be) Shine opposite! How exquisite the scents Snatched from yon bean-field! and the world so hushed! The stilly murmur of the distant Sea Tells us of silence.                              And that simplest Lute, Placed length-ways in the clasping casement, hark! How by the desultory breeze caressed, Like some coy maid half yielding to her lover, It pours such sweet upbraiding, as must needs Tempt to repeat the wrong! And now, its strings Boldlier swept, the long sequacious notes Over delicious surges sink and rise, Such a soft floating witchery of sound As twilight Elfins make, when they at eve Voyage on gentle gales from Fairy-Land, Where Melodies round honey-dropping flowers, Footless and wild, like birds of Paradise, Nor pause, nor perch, hovering on untamed wing! O! the one Life within us and abroad, Which meets all motion and becomes its soul, A light in sound, a sound-like power in light, Rhythm in all thought, and joyance everywhere— Methinks, it should have been impossible Not to love all things in a world so filled; Where the breeze warbles, and the mute still air Is Music slumbering on her instrument.      And thus, my Love! as on the midway slope Of yonder hill I stretch my limbs at noon, Whilst through my half-closed eyelids I behold The sunbeams dance, like diamonds, on the main, And tranquil muse upon tranquility: Full many a thought uncalled and undetained, And many idle flitting phantasies, Traverse my indolent and passive brain, As wild and various as the random gales That swell and flutter on this subject Lute!      And what if all of animated nature Be but organic Harps diversely framed, That tremble into thought, as o’er them sweeps Plastic and vast, one intellectual breeze, At once the Soul of each, and God of all?      But thy more serious eye a mild reproof Darts, O beloved Woman! nor such thoughts Dim and unhallowed dost thou not reject, And biddest me walk humbly with my God. Meek Daughter in the family of Christ! Well hast thou said and holily dispraised These shapings of the unregenerate mind; Bubbles that glitter as they rise and break On vain Philosophy’s aye-babbling spring. For never guiltless may I speak of him, The Incomprehensible! save when with awe I praise him, and with Faith that inly feels; Who with his saving mercies healèd me, A sinful and most miserable man, Wildered and dark, and gave me to possess Peace, and this Cot, and thee, heart-honored Maid!  


^^EOP^^

Stop, Christian passer-by!—Stop, child of God,And read with gentle breast. Beneath this sodA poet lies, or that which once seemed he.O, lift one thought in prayer for S. T. C.;That he who many a year with toil of breathFound death in life, may here find life in death!Mercy for praise—to be forgiven for fameHe asked, and hoped, through Christ. Do thou the same!



^^EOP^^

From plane of light to plane, wings dipping throughGeometries and orchids that the sunset builds,Out of the peak's black angularity of shadow, ridingThe last tumultuous avalanche ofLight above pines and the guttural gorge,The hawk comes.
                   His wingScythes down another day, his motion Is that of the honed steel-edge, we hearThe crashless fall of stalks of Time.
The head of each stalk is heavy with the gold of our error.
Look!  Look!  he is climbing the last lightWho knows neither Time nor error, and underWhose eye, unforgiving, the world, unforgiven, swingsInto shadow.
              Long now,The last thrush is still, the last batNow cruises in his sharp hieroglyphics. His wisdomIs ancient, too, and immense.  The starIs steady, like Plato, over the mountain.
If there were no wind we might, we think, hearThe earth grind on its axis, or historyDrip in darkness like a leaking pipe in the cellar.


^^EOP^^

Spirit that breathest through my lattice, thou
 That cool’st the twilight of the sultry day, Gratefully flows thy freshness round my brow:
 Thou hast been out upon the deep at play,Riding all day the wild blue waves till now,
 Roughening their crests, and scattering high their sprayAnd swelling the white sail. I welcome theeTo the scorched land, thou wanderer of the sea!
Nor I alone—a thousand blossoms round
 Inhale thee in the fulness of delight;And languid forms rise up, and pulses bound
 Livelier, at coming of the wind of night;And, languishing to hear thy grateful sound, 
 Lies the vast inland stretched beyond the sight.Go forth into the gathering shade; go forth,God’s blessing breathed upon the fainting earth!
Go, rock the little wood-bird in his nest,
 Curl the still waters, bright with stars, and rouseThe wide old wood from his majestic rest, 
 Summoning from the innumerable boughsThe strange, deep harmonies that haunt his breast:
 Pleasant shall be thy way where meekly bows.The shutting flower, and darkling waters pass,And where the o’ershadowing branches sweep the grass.
The faint old man shall lean his silver head
 To feel thee; thou shalt kiss the child asleep,And dry the moistened curls that overspread
 His temples, while his breathing grows more deep:And they who stand about the sick man’s bed,
 Shall joy to listen to thy distant sweep,And softly part his curtains to allowThy visit, grateful to his burning brow.
Go—but the circle of eternal change,
 Which is the life of nature, shall restore,With sounds and scents from all thy mighty range
 Thee to thy birthplace of the deep once more;Sweet odours in the sea-air, sweet and strange,
 Shall tell the home-sick mariner of the shore;And, listening to thy murmur, he shall deemHe hears the rustling leaf and running stream.


^^EOP^^

I  Like Crusoe with the bootless gold we stand Upon the desert verge of death, and say: “What shall avail the woes of yesterday To buy to-morrow’s wisdom, in the land Whose currency is strange unto our hand? In life’s small market they had served to pay Some late-found rapture, could we but delay Till Time hath matched our means to our demand.”  But otherwise Fate wills it, for, behold, Our gathered strength of individual pain, When Time’s long alchemy hath made it gold, Dies with us—hoarded all these years in vain, Since those that might be heir to it the mould Renew, and coin themselves new griefs again.                                      II  O Death, we come full-handed to thy gate, Rich with strange burden of the mingled years, Gains and renunciations, mirth and tears, And love’s oblivion, and remembering hate, Nor know we what compulsion laid such freight Upon our souls—and shall our hopes and fears Buy nothing of thee, Death? Behold our wares, And sell us the one joy for which we wait. Had we lived longer, like had such for sale, With the last coin of sorrow purchased cheap, But now we stand before thy shadowy pale, And all our longings lie within thy keep— Death, can it be the years shall naught avail?  “Not so,” Death answered, “they shall purchase sleep.”


^^EOP^^

Here, where precipitate Spring with one light boundInto hot Summer’s lusty arms expires;And where go forth at morn, at eve, at night,Soft airs, that want the lute to play with them,And softer sighs, that know not what they want;Under a wall, beneath an orange-treeWhose tallest flowers could tell the lowlier onesOf sights in Fiesole right up above,While I was gazing a few paces offAt what they seemed to show me with their nods,Their frequent whispers and their pointing shoots,A gentle maid came down the garden-stepsAnd gathered the pure treasure in her lap.I heard the branches rustle, and stept forthTo drive the ox away, or mule, or goat,(Such I believed it must be); for sweet scentsAre the swift vehicles of still sweeter thoughts,And nurse and pillow the dull memoryThat would let drop without them her best stores.They bring me tales of youth and tones of love,And ’tis and ever was my wish and wayTo let all flowers live freely, and all die,Whene’er their Genius bids their souls depart,Among their kindred in their native place.I never pluck the rose; the violet’s headHath shaken with my breath upon its bankAnd not reproacht me; the ever-sacred cupOf the pure lily hath between my handsFelt safe, unsoil’d, nor lost one grain of gold.I saw the light that made the glossy leavesMore glossy; the fair arm, the fairer cheekWarmed by the eye intent on its pursuit;I saw the foot, that, altho half-erectFrom its grey slipper, could not lift her upTo what she wanted: I held down a branchAnd gather’d her some blossoms, since their hourWas come, and bees had wounded them, and fliesOf harder wing were working their way throAnd scattering them in fragments under foot.So crisp were some, they rattled unevolved,Others, ere broken off, fell into shells,For such appear the petals when detacht,Unbending, brittle, lucid, white like snow,And like snow not seen thro, by eye or sun:Yet every one her gown received from meWas fairer than the first . . I thought not so,But so she praised them to reward my care.I said: you find the largest.   This indeed, Cried she, is large and sweet.                                    She held one forth,Whether for me to look at or to takeShe knew not, nor did I; but taking itWould best have solved (and this she felt) her doubts.I dared not touch it; for it seemed a partOf her own self; fresh, full, the most matureOf blossoms, yet a blossom; with a touchTo fall, and yet unfallen.
                           She drew backThe boon she tendered, and then, finding notThe ribbon at her waist to fix it in,Dropt it, as loth to drop it, on the rest.


^^EOP^^

Fall, leaves, fall; die, flowers, away;
Lengthen night and shorten day;
Every leaf speaks bliss to me
Fluttering from the autumn tree.
I shall smile when wreaths of snow
Blossom where the rose should grow;
I shall sing when night’s decay
Ushers in a drearier day.


^^EOP^^

The length o’ days ageän do shrink    An’ flowers be thin in meäd, among    The eegrass a-sheenèn bright, along Brook upon brook, an’ brink by brink.     Noo starlèns do rise in vlock on wing—    Noo goocoo in nest-green leaves do sound—    Noo swallows be now a-wheelèn round— Dip after dip, an’ swing by swing.     The wheat that did leätely rustle thick    Is now up in mows that still be new,    An’ yollow bevore the sky o’ blue— Tip after tip, an’ rick by rick.     While now I can walk a dusty mile    I’ll teäke me a day, while days be clear,    To vind a vew friends that still be dear, Feäce after feäce, an’ smile by smile.  


^^EOP^^

Muzzle and jowl and beastly brow,
bilious glaring eyes, tufted ears,
recidivous criminality in the slouch,
—This is not the latest absconding bankrupt
but a ‘beautiful’ tiger imported at great expense from   
Kuala Lumpur. 
7 photographers, 4 black-and-white artists and an R.A.   
are taking his profitable likeness;   
28 reporters and an essayist
are writing him up.
Sundry ladies think he is a darling   
especially at mealtimes, observing
that a firm near the docks advertises replicas
fullgrown on approval for easy cash payments. 
♂Felis Tigris (Straits Settlements) (Bobo) takes exercise   
up and down his cage before feeding
in a stench of excrements of great cats
indifferent to beauty or brutality.
He is said to have eaten several persons
but of course you can never be quite sure of these things.
 


^^EOP^^

A FORM, as any taper, fine ;
    A head like half-pint bason ;Where golden cords, and bands entwine,
    As rich as fleece of JASON.
A pair of shoulders strong and wide,
    Like country clown enlisting ;Bare arms long dangling by the side,
    And shoes of ragged listing !
Cravats like towels, thick and broad,
    Long tippets made of bear-skin,Muffs that a RUSSIAN might applaud,
    And rouge to spoil a fair skin.
Long petticoats to hide the feet,
    Silk hose with clocks of scarlet ;A load of perfume, sick'ning sweet,
    Bought of PARISIAN VARLET.
A bush of hair, the brow to shade,
    Sometimes the eyes to cover ;A necklace that might be display'd
    By OTAHEITEAN lover !
A bowl of straw to deck the head,
    Like porringer unmeaning ;A bunch of POPPIES flaming red,
    With motly ribands streaming.
Bare ears on either side the head,
    Like wood-wild savage SATYR ;Tinted with deep vermilion red,
    To shame the blush of nature.
Red elbows, gauzy gloves, that add
    An icy cov'ring merely ;A wadded coat, the shape to pad,
    Like Dutch-women — or nearly.
Such is CAPRICE ! but, lovely kind !
    Oh ! let each mental featureProclaim the labour of the mind,
    And leave your charms to NATURE.


^^EOP^^

Four buskers almost balkanized, tonight,
August 4th, the Place de la Contrescarpe. 
Every one of them in wind and limb complete,
The accordionist all but a hunchback-- 
After the first melodious flourishes were done,
The clarinet began to take his instrument apart, 
Blowing shorter tunes, to show the way it worked;
But on a keyboard hanging from his neck 
The carpenter pianist banged out routine chords
And the violin a beanpole man was fingering 
Sliced through the edges of catalpa leaves
With long shrieks, rat trills, and all in fun. 
Cars now orbiting the quadrangle of trees
Turned into tubes filled with human meat, 
Notes took the scent of carnage from their lager
(Even so, the buzz of talk, no way to stop it) 
And cherry red the track suit of its rider, 
The sliced leaves, iron chains that link
Old mooring posts around the beds of flowers. 
Fogged the eye with fright, and meaning trouble
Identical white camper caravans  
Rolled into view, the one behind the other,
For things to jump from, us to be flung into.  Rohmahniyah! he shouts, shaking his money pot,
The clarinettist, Ceausescu, fini! Whereupon, 
Classic features, stepping light and fresh
From reeds that told secrets of a beauty parlour. 
A nice Missouri girl, in gree, with pearls
To plug each earlobe, pushed her wicker chair aside; 
Showing a dainty midriff, on steady legs
She strolled across the street, as if to depollute 
With every breath, every stride, the air
Our music for a moment had iunhabited. 
Then the white, lost caravans came back again,
Carnation milk inside, stringbags of potatoes, 
Family snug inside, in each a Belgian grandpa,
Peering every which way, at the wheel.


^^EOP^^

more the idea of the flame than the flame,
as in: the flame 
of the rose petal, the flame of the thorn
the sun is a flame, the dog’s teeth 
flames 
~ 
to be clear: with the body, 
captain, we can do as we wish, we can do
as we wish with the body 
but we cannot leave marks—capt’n I’m
trying to get this right 
~ 
the world’s so small, the sky’s so high
we pray for rain it rains, we pray for sun it suns 
we pray on our knees, we move our lips
we pray in our minds, we clasp our hands 
our hands look tied before us 
~ 
I remember, capt’n, something, it didn’t happen, not
to me—this guy, I knew him by 
face, I don’t remember his
name, one night
he’s walking home from a party, a car it 
clipped him, for hours he
wandered, dazed, his family, his
neighbors, with flashlights they 
searched, all night, the woods, calling out
his name 
~ 
here’s the part, capt’n, where I try to tell a story
as if it were a confession: once, 
in elementary school, I was hiding out
on damon rock, lighting
matches & letting them drop to the leaves 
below—little flare- 
ups, flash fires—a girl wandered
down the path, she just 
stood there, watching the matches fall from my hand— 
~ 
capt’n, I’m trying to be precise: hot 
day, a cage in the sun, a room without
air, the mind-bending heat, the music 
a flame—hey
metallica hey britanny hey airless hey fuse, I 
don’t know how it happened, I was perched far
above, I offered her a match 
to pull down her pants—one match, her
hairless body, hey 
little girl, I dropped it unlit.    
I didn’t know what it was I was looking at. 
~ 
hey capt’n I don’t know if I’m allowed
hey capt’n years ago I’m walking 
down a road one drunk night, even now I
wonder—sometimes still I 
imagine—was I hit by a bus, am I stumbling am I    
dazed, this 
dream this confession, hey
little girl is yr daddy home, hey capt’n hey 
sir am I making any sense? 
~ 
the boy stood on the burning deck, stammering
elocution, wait—
the boy stood in the burning cage, stammering
electrocution, no—the boy stood in the hot-hot room
stammering I did stammering I did stammering I
did stammering I did stammering everything you say I did
I did. 
~ 
hey metallica hey britanny hey airless hey fuse
hey phonograph hey hades hey thoughtless hey 
~ 
capt’n this room is on fire
capt’n, this body will not stop burning
capt’n oh my captain this burning has become a body
capt’n oh my captain this child is ash
capt’n oh my captain my hands pass right through her
capt’n oh my captain I don’t know what it is I’m looking at 
~ 
it’s important to be precise, to say what
I know— 
the sun is fire, the center of the earth
is fire, yr mother’s cunt is 
fire, an airless flame, still, still, I don’t know why
she pushed me out, this cold-cold furnace, we all 
were pushed, a rim of light around our heads, she
gave a kick, sent us crawling 
out, toward the flame, toward the pit, the flaming
pit, yr lover’s
cunt, the flame her tongue, the flame 
a thorn 
~ 
everyday, capt’n, sir, captain, I was
left, a child, after school, I was alone, I found 
a match, under the sink I found a can, a spray
can, ly-sol dis-infectant, it made a 
torch, I was careful the flame didn’t
enter the can, I knew it 
would explode, somehow I knew, I’m
trying to be clear sir—the flame 
shot across the room, then it was gone


^^EOP^^

The Lumieres’ first movies were of ordinary life:
workers leaving their father’s factory;
parents at the table while the baby eats.
The brothers found the man’s hands at work building a wall
just as beautiful when played backwards,
the man leaping into the water
and equal delight when he rose again into the air.
It’s strange the brothers gave up so quickly on film, but they did. People would grow bored, they said, could see the same thing on the street.
A novelty,

^^EOP^^

Because you’ll find how hard it can be to tell which part of your body sings,you never should dally with any young man who does any one of the following things:
tries to beat all the yellow lights; says, “Big deal!” or “So what?” more than seven times a day; ignores yellow lines in a parking lot;
carries a radar detector;asks what you did with another date; has more than seven bumper stickers; drinks beer early and whiskey late;
talks on a cellular phone at lunch; tunes to radio talk shows;doesn’t fasten his seat belt;knows more than God knows;
wants you to change how you do your hair; spits in a polystyrene cup;doesn’t use his turn signal;wants you to change your makeup;
calls your parents their given names; doesn’t know why you don’t smoke; has dirt under his fingernails;makes a threat and calls it a joke;
pushes to get you to have one more;seems to have trouble staying awake;says “dago” and “wop” and words like that; swerves a car to hit a snake; sits at a table wearing a hat; has a boneless handshake.
You’re going to know soon enough the ones who fail this little test. Mark them off your list at once and be very careful of all the rest.


^^EOP^^

I hate your hills white with dogwood
or pink with redbud in spring
as if you invented hope, as if
in the middle of red clay,
limestone outcroppings,
and oak trees dead with fungus
something slight and beautiful
should make us smile. 
I hate the way honeysuckle drapes
fences, blooms in the ditch   
where everyone dumps garbage;
the evening air sweet with cedar
and fields of burley;
the way irises and buttercups
mark the old dimensions of a house
destroyed a hundred years ago;
how a span of Queen Anne’s lace
rocks the whole moon, and the sumac
runs dark against the hill. 
I hate the drawl, the lazy voice
saying I’ve been away so long
I sound like I’m from nowhere;
the old hand gathering snowballs or peonies
or forking up an extra dish of greens,
bitter, just the way I like them.


^^EOP^^






^^EOP^^

After the fierce midsummer all ablaze     Has burned itself to ashes, and expires     In the intensity of its own fires, There come the mellow, mild, St. Martin days Crowned with the calm of peace, but sad with haze.     So after Love has led us, till he tires     Of his own throes, and torments, and desires, Comes large-eyed friendship: with a restful gaze, He beckons us to follow, and across     Cool verdant vales we wander free from care.     Is it a touch of frost lies in the air? Why are we haunted with a sense of loss? We do not wish the pain back, or the heat; And yet, and yet, these days are incomplete.


^^EOP^^




(Detroit, 1950)



Because the jobs were there
and a man could get rich
working on the line, the South
retreated North to Michigan,
whole families eating crackers and baloney
by the side of the road,
changing drivers to keep
moving through corn fields
and foreign towns,
sundown and darkness,
the moon a prophecy of chrome,
the stars 10 million headlights
of the cars they would build. 
Ahead lay a city bright with steel;
behind, the dark fields folded
over everything they knew;
and when they dozed
on cramped back seats, they dreamed
such dreams as the road can make,
of drifting on a lake or stream
or lying down in hay to dream of traveling,
so that when they woke to a bump,
a couch, a voice saying, “It’s your turn,”
they were lost to themselves
and took a few moments
to remember their names. 
Mostly behind their backs,
the locals called them
rednecks, crackers, goddamned rebs.
Strange to be strange,
in their new neighborhoods,
to be ethnic with a thick accent
and a taste for food the grocers didn’t stock—
hog jowl and blackeyes, turnip greens,
roasting ears, souse-meat—
the butcher shrugging,
the produce man shaking his head.
Sometimes their own voices
took them by surprise,
sounding odd and out of place
in the din of a city bus, ringing
lost in the evening air when
they called their children in for supper. 
At work they touched
parts of tomorrow,
next year’s models always
taking shape and vanishing,
the present obsolete, the past
merely a rumor,
all hours blurring
into one continuous moment
of finishing a fragment,
each piece the same piece,
movements identical,
endless, like a punishment in hell. 
No way out but back
to their old lives, a future
they already knew by heart,
a few on the road each month
in cars they may have helped assemble,
tokens of their failed success,
legacies for boys to find
years later rusting on some lot,
banged up but still a dream
and fast enough when overhauled
to make them feel they could blast
straight into tomorrow,
as they raced their engines at each stoplight
and cruised their towns in circles.


^^EOP^^

I feel myself in need
   Of the inspiring strains of ancient lore,
My heart to lift, my empty mind to feed,
   And all the world explore. 
I know that I am old
   And never can recover what is past,
But for the future may some light unfold
   And soar from ages blast. 
I feel resolved to try,
   My wish to prove, my calling to pursue,
Or mount up from the earth into the sky,
   To show what Heaven can do. 
My genius from a boy,
   Has fluttered like a bird within my heart;
But could not thus confined her powers employ,
   Impatient to depart. 
She like a restless bird,
   Would spread her wing, her power to be unfurl’d,
And let her songs be loudly heard,
   And dart from world to world.


^^EOP^^

is thought to be a confession, won by endless
torture, but which our interrogators must
hate to record—all those old code names, dates,
the standard narrative of sandpaper
throats, even its remorse, fall ignored. Far 
away, a late (not lost) messenger stares,
struck by window bargains or is it the gift
of a sudden solicitude: is she going to
lift up her shadow’s weight, shift hers
onto it? She knows who bears whom. In 
that momentary museum where memory occurs
more accrue of those torturers’ pincers than
lessened fingernails, eyes teased to a pulp,
we beg for closeups. Ormolus, objets d’art! 
A satyr drains an hourglass with one gulp.


^^EOP^^

So there’s a cabbie in Cairo named Deif.So he found 5,000 bucks in the back seat.So meanwhile his daughter was very sick.So he needed the money for medicine bad.So never mind.So he looked for the fare and gave it back.So then the kid died.So they fired him for doing good deeds on company time. So the President heard it on the radio.So he gave him a locally built Fiat.So I read it in the papers.So you read it here.
A poor man has less than weight, has negative gravity, his life a slow explosion. Barely he makes the days meet. Like doors they burst open. Money, job, daughter fly away from him. Irony, injustice, bits of horror come close, cohere.
They are with us, the poor, like the inner life which is wantless too; our souls’ white globes float somehow in the blue, levitating and bobbing gently at middle height over the bubbling fleshpots.
Our effort to remake the found world as the lost reverie is desire.So, little Yasmin was sick, sick to the point of dying. She was like a garden coughing and drying.And suddenly her salvation was there, a sheepskin, yes, a satchel of money meekly baaing from the rear. A miracle in the offing?That famous retired philanthropist named God was back in business? was starting to take a hand? directing things maybe from the back seat?Maybe.
Restored to its rich owner (he tipped a fig and a fart, a raspberry of plump nil), lying safely on his lap, the money was mute again, was superfluity, and root and sum and symbol, both lettuce and lump, of all evil.She too approaching that state,Yasmin, a flower, meantime, dying.
For the locally assembled daughter a locally assembled Fiat.
Too wantless to imagine the money his?Spurned the miracle and thwarted the grace?So loved the law he gave it his only begotten daughter? Effed and offed his own kid?Saint and monster, poor man and fool,slowly exploding, Deif all this.Yes, one melts at his meekness,scoffs at the folly, tremblesfor his stupor of bliss of obedience,gasps at his pride, weepsfor his wantlessness,grunts when irony that twists the mouth jabs the gut. Then horror—the dark miracle—roaring, leapsinto the front seat, grabs the wheel and runs you down in the street—while you sit on a café terrace innocently reading the paperor, bent above a radio, feel the news waves break against your teeth.
Deif in grief. Deif in mourning. Deif bereaved. Deif in the driver’s seat. Deif without a beef.
And daily in four editions and every hour on the hour, the media heap your dish with images of sorrows and suffering, cruelty, maiming, death. (Our real griefs in their imaginary jargons.) And you cannot touch a single sufferer, comfort one victim, or stay any murderous hand. Consumer of woes, the news confirms you in guilt, your guilt becomes complicity, your complicity paralysis, paralysisyour guilt; elsewhere always, your life becomes an alibi, your best innocence a shrug, your shrug an unacknowledged rage, your rage is for reality, nothing less. Yes,you feel, murder would be better than hanging around;if only your fist could penetrate the print, you too might enter the reality of news .... You switch the radio on, hungrily turn the page of sorrows and suffering, cruelty, maiming, death.
Pasha, President, playboy swing masterfullyabove our heads—what style! what heroes!—fling themselves over the headlines into the empyreanbeyond our lowly weather—ah, there all the newsis blue and blank, those soarings, those mock descents are them writing their own tickets in heaven.Fortune, true, is spiteful and fickle, and glamouritself must stalk them—but cannot shoot so highas impotence dreams, as resentment wishes.Gorgeous, limber, and free, like our consciences,a law unto themselves, a darker law to us—in their suntans our shadow.
And where they fly, the lines of force accompany, the patterns of deference continue to comfort, a maggotism distracting irony.Their rods flatten others, their staffs flatter them

^^EOP^^

What is it to grow old? Is it to lose the glory of the form, The luster of the eye? Is it for beauty to forego her wreath? —Yes, but not this alone.  Is it to feel our strength— Not our bloom only, but our strength—decay? Is it to feel each limb Grow stiffer, every function less exact, Each nerve more loosely strung?  Yes, this, and more; but not Ah, ’tis not what in youth we dreamed ’twould be! ’Tis not to have our life Mellowed and softened as with sunset glow, A golden day’s decline.  ’Tis not to see the world As from a height, with rapt prophetic eyes, And heart profoundly stirred; And weep, and feel the fullness of the past, The years that are no more.  It is to spend long days And not once feel that we were ever young; It is to add, immured In the hot prison of the present, month To month with weary pain.  It is to suffer this, And feel but half, and feebly, what we feel. Deep in our hidden heart Festers the dull remembrance of a change, But no emotion—none.  It is—last stage of all— When we are frozen up within, and quite The phantom of ourselves, To hear the world applaud the hollow ghost Which blamed the living man.  


^^EOP^^

I am a bold Coachman, and drive a good hack, With a coat of five capes that quite covers my back; And my wife keeps a sausage-shop, not many miles From the narrowest alley in all Broad St Giles.  Though poor, we are honest and very content, We pay as we go for meat, drink, and for rent; To work all the week I am able and willing, I never get drunk, and I waste not a shilling.  And while at a tavern my gentleman tarries, The coachman grows richer than he whom he carries; And I’d rather (said I), since it saves me from sin, Be the driver without, than the toper within.  Yet though dram-shops I hate, and the dram-drinking friend, I’m not quite so good but I wish I may mend; I repent of my sins, since we all are depraved, For a coachman, I hold, has a soul to be saved.  When a riotous multitude fills up a street, And the greater part know not, boys, wherefore they meet; If I see there is mischief, I never go there, Let others get tipsy so I get my fare.  Now to church, if I take some good lady to pray, It grieves me full sore to be kept quite away; So I step within side, though the sermon’s begun, For a slice of the service is better than none.  Then my glasses are whole, and my coach is so neat, I am always the first to be called in the street; And I’m known by the name (’tis a name rather rare) Of the coachman that never asks more than his fare.  Though my beasts should be dull, yet I don’t use them ill; Though they stumble I swear not, nor cut them up hill; For I firmly believe there’s no charm in an oath That can make a nag trot, when to walk he is loath.  And though I’m a coachman, I’ll freely confess, I beg of my Maker my labours to bless; I praise Him each morning, and pray every night, And ’tis this makes my heart feel so cheerful and light.  When I drive to a funeral I care not for drink; That is not the moment to guzzle, but think; And I wish I could add both of coachman and master, That both of us strove to amend a bit faster.


^^EOP^^

1 Eastern guard tower glints in sunset; convicts rest like lizards on rocks.  2 The piano man is stingy, at 3 A.M. his songs drop like plum.  3 Morning sun slants cell. Drunks stagger like cripple flies On jailhouse floor.  4 To write a blues song is to regiment riots and pluck gems from graves.  5 A bare pecan tree slips a pencil shadow down a moonlit snow slope.  6 The falling snow flakes Cannot blunt the hard aches nor Match the steel stillness.  7 Under moon shadows A tall boy flashes knife and Slices star bright ice.  8 In the August grass Struck by the last rays of sun The cracked teacup screams.  9 Making jazz swing in Seventeen syllables AIN’T No square poet’s job. 


^^EOP^^

The hand and foot that stir not, they shall find Sooner than all the rightful place to go; Now in their motion free as roving wind, Though first no snail more limited and slow; I mark them full of labor all the day, Each active motion made in perfect rest; They cannot from their path mistaken stray, Though ’tis not theirs, yet in it they are blest; The bird has not their hidden track found out, Nor cunning fox, though full of art he be; It is the way unseen, the certain route, Where ever bound, yet thou art ever free; The path of Him, whose perfect law of love Bids spheres and atoms in just order move.  


^^EOP^^

In the greenest of our valleys
 By good angels tenanted,Once a fair and stately palace—
 Radiant palace—reared its head.In the monarch Thought’s dominion,
 It stood there!Never seraph spread a pinion
 Over fabric half so fair!
Banners yellow, glorious, golden,
 On its roof did float and flow(This—all this—was in the olden
 Time long ago)And every gentle air that dallied,
 In that sweet day,Along the ramparts plumed and pallid,
 A wingèd odor went away.
Wanderers in that happy valley,
 Through two luminous windows, sawSpirits moving musically
 To a lute’s well-tunèd law,Round about a throne where, sitting,
 Porphyrogene!In state his glory well befitting,
 The ruler of the realm was seen.
And all with pearl and ruby glowing
 Was the fair palace door,Through which came flowing, flowing, flowing
 And sparkling evermore,A troop of Echoes, whose sweet duty
 Was but to sing,In voices of surpassing beauty,
 The wit and wisdom of their king.
But evil things, in robes of sorrow,
 Assailed the monarch’s high estate;(Ah, let us mourn!—for never morrow
 Shall dawn upon him, desolate!)And round about his home the glory
 That blushed and bloomedIs but a dim-remembered story
 Of the old time entombed.
And travellers, now, within that valley,
 Through the red-litten windows seeVast forms that move fantastically
 To a discordant melody;While, like a ghastly rapid river,
 Through the pale doorA hideous throng rush out forever,
 And laugh—but smile no more.



^^EOP^^

I drift into the sound of wind,
how small my life must be
to fit into his palm like that, holly
leaf, bluejay feather, milkweed fluff,
pin straw or sycamore pod, resembling
scraps of light. The world
slips through these fingers
so easily, there’s so much
to miss: the sociable bones
linked up in supple rows, mineral
seams just under the skin. I hold
my palm against the sun and don’t see
palm or sun, don’t hold anything
in either hand. I look up, look
away (what’s that?), I trip
and stumble (fall
again), find myself face down
in duff, a foam of fallen live oak
leaves, with only
this life, mine at times.


^^EOP^^




—Norton Island, Maine



For ten days now, two luna moths remain silk-winged and lavish as a double broach pinned beneath the porch light of my cabin. Two of them, patinaed that sea-glass green of copper weather vanes nosing the wind, the sun-lit green of rockweed, the lichen’s green scabbing-over of the bouldered shore, the plush green peat that carpets the island, that hushes, sinks then holds a boot print for days, and the sapling-green of new pines sprouting through it. The miraculous green origami of their wings—false eyed, doomed and sensual as the mermaid’s long green fins: a green siren calling from the moonlight.  A green siren calling from the moonlight, from the sweet gum leaves and paper birches that shed, like tiny white decrees, scrolled bark. They emerge from cocoons like greased hinges, all pheromone and wing, instinct and flutter. They rise, hardwired, driven, through the creaking pine branches tufted with beard moss and fog. Two luna moths flitting like exotic birds towards only each other and light, in these their final few days, they mate, then starving they wait, inches apart, on my cabin wall to die, to share fully each pure and burning moment. They are, like desire itself, born without mouths. What, if not this, is love?


^^EOP^^




A Sestina



We are the smiling comfortable homes With happy families enthroned therein, Where baby souls are brought to meet the world, Where women end their duties and desires, For which men labor as the goal of life, That people worship now instead of God.  Do we not teach the child to worship God? — Whose soul’s young range is bounded by the homes Of those he loves, and where he learns that life Is all constrained to serve the wants therein, Domestic needs and personal desires, — These are the early limits of his world.  And are we not the woman’s perfect world, Prescribed by nature and ordained of God, Beyond which she can have no right desires, No need for service other than in homes? For doth she not bring up her young therein? And is not rearing young the end of life?  And man? What other need hath he in life Than to go forth and labor in the world, And struggle sore with other men therein? Not to serve other men, nor yet his God, But to maintain these comfortable homes, – The end of all a normal man’s desires.  Shall not the soul’s most measureless desires Learn that the very flower and fruit of life Lies all attained in comfortable homes, With which life’s purpose is to dot the world And consummate the utmost will of God, By sitting down to eat and drink therein.  Yea, in the processes that work therein —   Fulfilment of our natural desires —   Surely man finds the proof that mighty God For to maintain and reproduce his life Created him and set him in the world; And this high end is best attained in homes.  Are we not homes? And is not all therein? Wring dry the world to meet our wide desires! We crown all life! We are the aim of God!


^^EOP^^

I will build a house of rest, Square the corners every one: At each angle on his breast Shall a cherub take the sun; Rising, risen, sinking, down, Weaving day’s unequal crown.  In the chambers, light as air, Shall responsive footsteps fall: Brother, sister, art thou there? Hush! we need not jar nor call; Need not turn to seek the face Shut in rapture’s hiding-place.  Heavy load and mocking care Shall from back and bosom part; Thought shall reach the thrill of prayer, Patience plan the dome of art. None shall praise or merit claim, Not a joy be called by name.  With a free, unmeasured tread Shall we pace the cloisters through: Rest, enfranchised, like the Dead; Rest till Love be born anew. Weary Thought shall take his time, Free of task-work, loosed from rhyme.  No reproof shall grieve or chill; Every sin doth stand confest; None need murmur, ‘This was ill’: Therefore do they grant us rest; Contemplation making whole Every ruin of the soul.  Pictures shall as softly look As in distance shows delight; Slowly shall each saintly book Turn its pages in our sight; Not the study’s wealth confuse, Urging zeal to pale abuse.  Children through the windows peep, Not reproachful, though our own; Hushed the parent passion deep, And the household’s eager tone. One above, divine and true, Makes us children like to you.  Measured bread shall build us up At the hospitable board; In Contentment’s golden cup Is the guileless liquor poured. May the beggar pledge the king In that spirit gathering,  Oh! my house is far away; Yet it sometimes shuts me in. Imperfection mars each day While the perfect works begin. In the house of labor best Can I build the house of rest.


^^EOP^^

How many times these low feet staggered -
Only the soldered mouth can tell -
Try - can you stir the awful rivet -
Try - can you lift the hasps of steel! 
Stroke the cool forehead - hot so often -
Lift - if you care - the listless hair -
Handle the adamantine fingers
Never a thimble - more - shall wear - 
Buzz the dull flies - on the chamber window -
Brave - shines the sun through the freckled pane -
Fearless - the cobweb swings from the ceiling -
Indolent Housewife - in Daisies - lain!


^^EOP^^

Go your seeking, soul.
Mine the proven path of time’s foretelling.
Yours accordance with some mysteried whole.
I am but your passion-haunted dwelling. 
Bring what news you can,
Stranger, loved of body’s humbled heart.
Say one whispered word to mortal man
From that peace whereof he claims you part. 
Hither-hence, my guest,
Blood and bone befriend, where you abide
Till withdrawn to share some timeless quest.
I am but the brain that dreamed and died.


^^EOP^^

Fit the First
            The Landing 
"Just the place for a Snark!" the Bellman cried,
   As he landed his crew with care;
Supporting each man on the top of the tide
   By a finger entwined in his hair. 
"Just the place for a Snark! I have said it twice:
   That alone should encourage the crew.
Just the place for a Snark! I have said it thrice:
   What I tell you three times is true." 
The crew was complete: it included a Boots—
   A maker of Bonnets and Hoods—
A Barrister, brought to arrange their disputes—
   And a Broker, to value their goods. 
A Billiard-marker, whose skill was immense,
   Might perhaps have won more than his share—
But a Banker, engaged at enormous expense,
   Had the whole of their cash in his care. 
There was also a Beaver, that paced on the deck,
   Or would sit making lace in the bow:
And had often (the Bellman said) saved them from wreck,
   Though none of the sailors knew how. 
There was one who was famed for the number of things
   He forgot when he entered the ship:
His umbrella, his watch, all his jewels and rings,
   And the clothes he had bought for the trip. 
He had forty-two boxes, all carefully packed,
   With his name painted clearly on each:
But, since he omitted to mention the fact,
   They were all left behind on the beach. 
The loss of his clothes hardly mattered, because
   He had seven coats on when he came,
With three pair of boots—but the worst of it was,
   He had wholly forgotten his name. 
He would answer to "Hi!" or to any loud cry,
   Such as "Fry me!" or "Fritter my wig!"
To "What-you-may-call-um!" or "What-was-his-name!"
   But especially "Thing-um-a-jig!" 
While, for those who preferred a more forcible word,
   He had different names from these:
His intimate friends called him "Candle-ends,"
   And his enemies "Toasted-cheese." 
"His form is ungainly—his intellect small—"
   (So the Bellman would often remark)
"But his courage is perfect! And that, after all,
   Is the thing that one needs with a Snark." 
He would joke with hænas, returning their stare
   With an impudent wag of the head:
And he once went a walk, paw-in-paw, with a bear,
   "Just to keep up its spirits," he said. 
He came as a Baker: but owned, when too late—
   And it drove the poor Bellman half-mad—
He could only bake Bride-cake—for which, I may state,
   No materials were to be had. 
The last of the crew needs especial remark,
   Though he looked an incredible dunce:
He had just one idea—but, that one being "Snark,"
   The good Bellman engaged him at once. 
He came as a Butcher: but gravely declared,
   When the ship had been sailing a week,
He could only kill Beavers. The Bellman looked scared,
   And was almost too frightened to speak: 
But at length he explained, in a tremulous tone,
   There was only one Beaver on board;
And that was a tame one he had of his own,
   Whose death would be deeply deplored. 
The Beaver, who happened to hear the remark,
   Protested, with tears in its eyes,
That not even the rapture of hunting the Snark
   Could atone for that dismal surprise! 
It strongly advised that the Butcher should be
   Conveyed in a separate ship:
But the Bellman declared that would never agree
   With the plans he had made for the trip: 
Navigation was always a difficult art,
   Though with only one ship and one bell:
And he feared he must really decline, for his part,
   Undertaking another as well. 
The Beaver's best course was, no doubt, to procure
   A second-hand dagger-proof coat—
So the Baker advised it—and next, to insure
   Its life in some Office of note: 
This the Banker suggested, and offered for hire
   (On moderate terms), or for sale,
Two excellent Policies, one Against Fire,
   And one Against Damage From Hail. 
Yet still, ever after that sorrowful day,
   Whenever the Butcher was by,
The Beaver kept looking the opposite way,
   And appeared unaccountably shy. 
                  Fit the Second
                      The Bellman's Speech 
The Bellman himself they all praised to the skies—
   Such a carriage, such ease and such grace!
Such solemnity, too! One could see he was wise,
   The moment one looked in his face! 
He had bought a large map representing the sea,
   Without the least vestige of land:
And the crew were much pleased when they found it to be
   A map they could all understand. 
"What's the good of Mercator's North Poles and Equators,
   Tropics, Zones, and Meridian Lines?"
So the Bellman would cry: and the crew would reply
   "They are merely conventional signs! 
"Other maps are such shapes, with their islands and capes!
   But we've got our brave Captain to thank
(So the crew would protest) "that he's bought us the best—
   A perfect and absolute blank!" 
This was charming, no doubt; but they shortly found out
   That the Captain they trusted so well
Had only one notion for crossing the ocean,
   And that was to tingle his bell. 
He was thoughtful and grave—but the orders he gave
   Were enough to bewilder a crew.
When he cried "Steer to starboard, but keep her head larboard!"
   What on earth was the helmsman to do? 
Then the bowsprit got mixed with the rudder sometimes:
   A thing, as the Bellman remarked,
That frequently happens in tropical climes,
   When a vessel is, so to speak, "snarked." 
But the principal failing occurred in the sailing,
   And the Bellman, perplexed and distressed,
Said he had hoped, at least, when the wind blew due East,
   That the ship would not travel due West! 
But the danger was past—they had landed at last,
   With their boxes, portmanteaus, and bags:
Yet at first sight the crew were not pleased with the view,
   Which consisted to chasms and crags. 
The Bellman perceived that their spirits were low,
   And repeated in musical tone
Some jokes he had kept for a season of woe—
   But the crew would do nothing but groan. 
He served out some grog with a liberal hand,
   And bade them sit down on the beach:
And they could not but own that their Captain looked grand,
   As he stood and delivered his speech. 
"Friends, Romans, and countrymen, lend me your ears!"
   (They were all of them fond of quotations:
So they drank to his health, and they gave him three cheers,
   While he served out additional rations). 
"We have sailed many months, we have sailed many weeks,
   (Four weeks to the month you may mark),
But never as yet ('tis your Captain who speaks)
   Have we caught the least glimpse of a Snark! 
"We have sailed many weeks, we have sailed many days,
   (Seven days to the week I allow),
But a Snark, on the which we might lovingly gaze,
   We have never beheld till now! 
"Come, listen, my men, while I tell you again
   The five unmistakable marks
By which you may know, wheresoever you go,
   The warranted genuine Snarks. 
"Let us take them in order. The first is the taste,
   Which is meagre and hollow, but crisp:
Like a coat that is rather too tight in the waist,
   With a flavour of Will-o'-the-wisp. 
"Its habit of getting up late you'll agree
   That it carries too far, when I say
That it frequently breakfasts at five-o'clock tea,
   And dines on the following day. 
"The third is its slowness in taking a jest.
   Should you happen to venture on one,
It will sigh like a thing that is deeply distressed:
   And it always looks grave at a pun. 
"The fourth is its fondness for bathing-machines,
   Which it constantly carries about,
And believes that they add to the beauty of scenes—
   A sentiment open to doubt. 
"The fifth is ambition. It next will be right
   To describe each particular batch:
Distinguishing those that have feathers, and bite,
   From those that have whiskers, and scratch. 
"For, although common Snarks do no manner of harm,
   Yet, I feel it my duty to say,
Some are Boojums—" The Bellman broke off in alarm,
   For the Baker had fainted away. 
            Fit the Third
               The Baker's Tale 
They roused him with muffins—they roused him with ice—
   They roused him with mustard and cress—
They roused him with jam and judicious advice—
   They set him conundrums to guess. 
When at length he sat up and was able to speak,
   His sad story he offered to tell;
And the Bellman cried "Silence! Not even a shriek!"
   And excitedly tingled his bell. 
There was silence supreme! Not a shriek, not a scream,
   Scarcely even a howl or a groan,
As the man they called "Ho!" told his story of woe
   In an antediluvian tone. 
"My father and mother were honest, though poor—"
   "Skip all that!" cried the Bellman in haste.
"If it once becomes dark, there's no chance of a Snark—
   We have hardly a minute to waste!" 
"I skip forty years," said the Baker, in tears,
   "And proceed without further remark
To the day when you took me aboard of your ship
   To help you in hunting the Snark. 
"A dear uncle of mine (after whom I was named)
   Remarked, when I bade him farewell—"
"Oh, skip your dear uncle!" the Bellman exclaimed,
   As he angrily tingled his bell. 
"He remarked to me then," said that mildest of men,
   "'If your Snark be a Snark, that is right:
Fetch it home by all means—you may serve it with greens,
   And it's handy for striking a light. 
"'You may seek it with thimbles—and seek it with care;
   You may hunt it with forks and hope;
You may threaten its life with a railway-share;
   You may charm it with smiles and soap—'" 
("That's exactly the method," the Bellman bold
   In a hasty parenthesis cried,
"That's exactly the way I have always been told
   That the capture of Snarks should be tried!") 
"'But oh, beamish nephew, beware of the day,
   If your Snark be a Boojum! For then
You will softly and suddenly vanish away,
   And never be met with again!' 
"It is this, it is this that oppresses my soul,
   When I think of my uncle's last words:
And my heart is like nothing so much as a bowl
   Brimming over with quivering curds! 
"It is this, it is this—" "We have had that before!"
   The Bellman indignantly said.
And the Baker replied "Let me say it once more.
   It is this, it is this that I dread! 
"I engage with the Snark—every night after dark—
   In a dreamy delirious fight:
I serve it with greens in those shadowy scenes,
   And I use it for striking a light: 
"But if ever I meet with a Boojum, that day,
   In a moment (of this I am sure),
I shall softly and suddenly vanish away—
   And the notion I cannot endure!" 
            Fit the Fourth
               The Hunting 
The Bellman looked uffish, and wrinkled his brow.
   "If only you'd spoken before!
It's excessively awkward to mention it now,
   With the Snark, so to speak, at the door! 
"We should all of us grieve, as you well may believe,
   If you never were met with again—
But surely, my man, when the voyage began,
   You might have suggested it then? 
"It's excessively awkward to mention it now—
   As I think I've already remarked."
And the man they called "Hi!" replied, with a sigh,
   "I informed you the day we embarked. 
"You may charge me with murder—or want of sense—
   (We are all of us weak at times):
But the slightest approach to a false pretence
   Was never among my crimes! 
"I said it in Hebrew—I said it in Dutch—
   I said it in German and Greek:
But I wholly forgot (and it vexes me much)
   That English is what you speak!" 
"'Tis a pitiful tale," said the Bellman, whose face
   Had grown longer at every word:
"But, now that you've stated the whole of your case,
   More debate would be simply absurd. 
"The rest of my speech" (he explained to his men)
   "You shall hear when I've leisure to speak it.
But the Snark is at hand, let me tell you again!
   'Tis your glorious duty to seek it! 
"To seek it with thimbles, to seek it with care;
   To pursue it with forks and hope;
To threaten its life with a railway-share;
   To charm it with smiles and soap! 
"For the Snark's a peculiar creature, that won't
   Be caught in a commonplace way.
Do all that you know, and try all that you don't:
   Not a chance must be wasted to-day! 
"For England expects—I forbear to proceed:
   'Tis a maxim tremendous, but trite:
And you'd best be unpacking the things that you need
   To rig yourselves out for the fight." 
Then the Banker endorsed a blank check (which he crossed),
   And changed his loose silver for notes.
The Baker with care combed his whiskers and hair,
   And shook the dust out of his coats. 
The Boots and the Broker were sharpening a spade—
   Each working the grindstone in turn:
But the Beaver went on making lace, and displayed
   No interest in the concern: 
Though the Barrister tried to appeal to its pride,
   And vainly proceeded to cite
A number of cases, in which making laces
   Had been proved an infringement of right. 
The maker of Bonnets ferociously planned
   A novel arrangement of bows:
While the Billiard-marker with quivering hand
   Was chalking the tip of his nose. 
But the Butcher turned nervous, and dressed himself fine,
   With yellow kid gloves and a ruff—
Said he felt it exactly like going to dine,
   Which the Bellman declared was all "stuff." 
"Introduce me, now there's a good fellow," he said,
   "If we happen to meet it together!"
And the Bellman, sagaciously nodding his head,
   Said "That must depend on the weather." 
The Beaver went simply galumphing about,
   At seeing the Butcher so shy:
And even the Baker, though stupid and stout,
   Made an effort to wink with one eye. 
"Be a man!" said the Bellman in wrath, as he heard
   The Butcher beginning to sob.
"Should we meet with a Jubjub, that desperate bird,
   We shall need all our strength for the job!" 
             Fit the Fifth
               The Beaver's Lesson 
They sought it with thimbles, they sought it with care;
   They pursued it with forks and hope;
They threatened its life with a railway-share;
   They charmed it with smiles and soap. 
Then the Butcher contrived an ingenious plan
   For making a separate sally;
And had fixed on a spot unfrequented by man,
   A dismal and desolate valley. 
But the very same plan to the Beaver occurred:
   It had chosen the very same place:
Yet neither betrayed, by a sign or a word,
   The disgust that appeared in his face. 
Each thought he was thinking of nothing but "Snark"
   And the glorious work of the day;
And each tried to pretend that he did not remark
   That the other was going that way. 
But the valley grew narrow and narrower still,
   And the evening got darker and colder,
Till (merely from nervousness, not from good will)
   They marched along shoulder to shoulder. 
Then a scream, shrill and high, rent the shuddering sky,
   And they knew that some danger was near:
The Beaver turned pale to the tip of its tail,
   And even the Butcher felt queer. 
He thought of his childhood, left far far behind—
   That blissful and innocent state—
The sound so exactly recalled to his mind
   A pencil that squeaks on a slate! 
"'Tis the voice of the Jubjub!" he suddenly cried.
   (This man, that they used to call "Dunce.")
"As the Bellman would tell you," he added with pride,
   "I have uttered that sentiment once. 
"'Tis the note of the Jubjub! Keep count, I entreat;
   You will find I have told it you twice.
Tis the song of the Jubjub! The proof is complete,
   If only I've stated it thrice." 
The Beaver had counted with scrupulous care,
   Attending to every word:
But it fairly lost heart, and outgrabe in despair,
   When the third repetition occurred. 
It felt that, in spite of all possible pains,
   It had somehow contrived to lose count,
And the only thing now was to rack its poor brains
   By reckoning up the amount. 
"Two added to one—if that could but be done,"
   It said, "with one's fingers and thumbs!"
Recollecting with tears how, in earlier years,
   It had taken no pains with its sums. 
"The thing can be done," said the Butcher, "I think.
   The thing must be done, I am sure.
The thing shall be done! Bring me paper and ink,
   The best there is time to procure." 
The Beaver brought paper, portfolio, pens,
   And ink in unfailing supplies:
While strange creepy creatures came out of their dens,
   And watched them with wondering eyes. 
So engrossed was the Butcher, he heeded them not,
   As he wrote with a pen in each hand,
And explained all the while in a popular style
   Which the Beaver could well understand. 
"Taking Three as the subject to reason about—
   A convenient number to state—
We add Seven, and Ten, and then multiply out
   By One Thousand diminished by Eight. 
"The result we proceed to divide, as you see,
   By Nine Hundred and Ninety and Two:
Then subtract Seventeen, and the answer must be
   Exactly and perfectly true. 
"The method employed I would gladly explain,
   While I have it so clear in my head,
If I had but the time and you had but the brain—
   But much yet remains to be said. 
"In one moment I've seen what has hitherto been
   Enveloped in absolute mystery,
And without extra charge I will give you at large
   A Lesson in Natural History." 
In his genial way he proceeded to say
   (Forgetting all laws of propriety,
And that giving instruction, without introduction,
   Would have caused quite a thrill in Society), 
"As to temper the Jubjub's a desperate bird,
   Since it lives in perpetual passion:
Its taste in costume is entirely absurd—
   It is ages ahead of the fashion: 
"But it knows any friend it has met once before:
   It never will look at a bribe:
And in charity-meetings it stands at the door,
   And collects—though it does not subscribe. 
"Its flavour when cooked is more exquisite far
   Than mutton, or oysters, or eggs:
(Some think it keeps best in an ivory jar,
   And some, in mahogany kegs:) 
"You boil it in sawdust: you salt it in glue:
   You condense it with locusts and tape:
Still keeping one principal object in view—
   To preserve its symmetrical shape." 
The Butcher would gladly have talked till next day,
   But he felt that the Lesson must end,
And he wept with delight in attempting to say
   He considered the Beaver his friend. 
While the Beaver confessed, with affectionate looks
   More eloquent even than tears,
It had learned in ten minutes far more than all books
   Would have taught it in seventy years. 
They returned hand-in-hand, and the Bellman, unmanned
   (For a moment) with noble emotion,
Said "This amply repays all the wearisome days
   We have spent on the billowy ocean!" 
Such friends, as the Beaver and Butcher became,
   Have seldom if ever been known;
In winter or summer, 'twas always the same—
   You could never meet either alone. 
And when quarrels arose—as one frequently finds
   Quarrels will, spite of every endeavour—
The song of the Jubjub recurred to their minds,
   And cemented their friendship for ever! 
            Fit the Sixth
               The Barrister's Dream 
They sought it with thimbles, they sought it with care;
   They pursued it with forks and hope;
They threatened its life with a railway-share;
   They charmed it with smiles and soap. 
But the Barrister, weary of proving in vain
   That the Beaver's lace-making was wrong,
Fell asleep, and in dreams saw the creature quite plain
   That his fancy had dwelt on so long. 
He dreamed that he stood in a shadowy Court,
   Where the Snark, with a glass in its eye,
Dressed in gown, bands, and wig, was defending a pig
   On the charge of deserting its sty. 
The Witnesses proved, without error or flaw,
   That the sty was deserted when found:
And the Judge kept explaining the state of the law
   In a soft under-current of sound. 
The indictment had never been clearly expressed,
   And it seemed that the Snark had begun,
And had spoken three hours, before any one guessed
   What the pig was supposed to have done. 
The Jury had each formed a different view
   (Long before the indictment was read),
And they all spoke at once, so that none of them knew
   One word that the others had said. 
"You must know—" said the Judge: but the Snark exclaimed "Fudge!"
   That statute is obsolete quite!
Let me tell you, my friends, the whole question depends
   On an ancient manorial right. 
"In the matter of Treason the pig would appear
   To have aided, but scarcely abetted:
While the charge of Insolvency fails, it is clear,
   If you grant the plea 'never indebted.' 
"The fact of Desertion I will not dispute;
   But its guilt, as I trust, is removed
(So far as relates to the costs of this suit)
   By the Alibi which has been proved. 
"My poor client's fate now depends on your votes."
   Here the speaker sat down in his place,
And directed the Judge to refer to his notes
   And briefly to sum up the case. 
But the Judge said he never had summed up before;
   So the Snark undertook it instead,
And summed it so well that it came to far more
   Than the Witnesses ever had said! 
When the verdict was called for, the Jury declined,
   As the word was so puzzling to spell;
But they ventured to hope that the Snark wouldn't mind
   Undertaking that duty as well. 
So the Snark found the verdict, although, as it owned,
   It was spent with the toils of the day:
When it said the word "GUILTY!" the Jury all groaned,
   And some of them fainted away. 
Then the Snark pronounced sentence, the Judge being quite
   Too nervous to utter a word:
When it rose to its feet, there was silence like night,
   And the fall of a pin might be heard. 
"Transportation for life" was the sentence it gave,
   "And then to be fined forty pound."
The Jury all cheered, though the Judge said he feared
   That the phrase was not legally sound. 
But their wild exultation was suddenly checked
   When the jailer informed them, with tears,
Such a sentence would have not the slightest effect,
   As the pig had been dead for some years. 
The Judge left the Court, looking deeply disgusted:
   But the Snark, though a little aghast,
As the lawyer to whom the defence was intrusted,
   Went bellowing on to the last. 
Thus the Barrister dreamed, while the bellowing seemed
   To grow every moment more clear:
Till he woke to the knell of a furious bell,
   Which the Bellman rang close at his ear. 
            Fit the Seventh
               The Banker's Fate 
They sought it with thimbles, they sought it with care;
   They pursued it with forks and hope;
They threatened its life with a railway-share;
   They charmed it with smiles and soap. 
And the Banker, inspired with a courage so new
   It was matter for general remark,
Rushed madly ahead and was lost to their view
   In his zeal to discover the Snark 
But while he was seeking with thimbles and care,
   A Bandersnatch swiftly drew nigh
And grabbed at the Banker, who shrieked in despair,
   For he knew it was useless to fly. 
He offered large discount—he offered a cheque
   (Drawn "to bearer") for seven-pounds-ten:
But the Bandersnatch merely extended its neck
   And grabbed at the Banker again. 
Without rest or pause—while those frumious jaws
   Went savagely snapping around—
He skipped and he hopped, and he floundered and flopped,
   Till fainting he fell to the ground. 
The Bandersnatch fled as the others appeared
   Led on by that fear-stricken yell:
And the Bellman remarked "It is just as I feared!"
   And solemnly tolled on his bell. 
He was black in the face, and they scarcely could trace
   The least likeness to what he had been:
While so great was his fright that his waistcoat turned white—
   A wonderful thing to be seen! 
To the horror of all who were present that day,
   He uprose in full evening dress,
And with senseless grimaces endeavoured to say
   What his tongue could no longer express. 
Down he sank in a chair—ran his hands through his hair—
   And chanted in mimsiest tones
Words whose utter inanity proved his insanity,
   While he rattled a couple of bones. 
"Leave him here to his fate—it is getting so late!"
   The Bellman exclaimed in a fright.
"We have lost half the day. Any further delay,
   And we sha'n't catch a Snark before night!" 
            Fit the Eighth
               The Vanishing 
They sought it with thimbles, they sought it with care;
   They pursued it with forks and hope;
They threatened its life with a railway-share;
   They charmed it with smiles and soap. 
They shuddered to think that the chase might fail,
   And the Beaver, excited at last,
Went bounding along on the tip of its tail,
   For the daylight was nearly past. 
"There is Thingumbob shouting!" the Bellman said,
   "He is shouting like mad, only hark!
He is waving his hands, he is wagging his head,
   He has certainly found a Snark!" 
They gazed in delight, while the Butcher exclaimed
   "He was always a desperate wag!"
They beheld him—their Baker—their hero unnamed—
   On the top of a neighbouring crag, 
Erect and sublime, for one moment of time,
   In the next, that wild figure they saw
(As if stung by a spasm) plunge into a chasm,
   While they waited and listened in awe. 
"It's a Snark!" was the sound that first came to their ears,
   And seemed almost too good to be true.
Then followed a torrent of laughter and cheers:
   Then the ominous words "It's a Boo—" 
Then, silence. Some fancied they heard in the air
   A weary and wandering sigh
That sounded like "-jum!" but the others declare
   It was only a breeze that went by. 
They hunted till darkness came on, but they found
   Not a button, or feather, or mark,
By which they could tell that they stood on the ground
   Where the Baker had met with the Snark. 
In the midst of the word he was trying to say,
   In the midst of his laughter and glee,
He had softly and suddenly vanished away—
   For the Snark was a Boojum, you see.


^^EOP^^

I am the only being whose doom
No tongue would ask, no eye would mourn;
I never caused a thought of gloom,
A smile of joy, since I was born. 
In secret pleasure, secret tears,
This changeful life has slipped away,
As friendless after eighteen years,
As lone as on my natal day. 
There have been times I cannot hide,
There have been times when this was drear,
When my sad soul forgot its pride
And longed for one to love me here. 
But those were in the early glow
Of feelings since subdued by care;
And they have died so long ago,
I hardly now believe they were. 
First melted off the hope of youth,
Then fancy’s rainbow fast withdrew;
And then experience told me truth
In mortal bosoms never grew. 
’Twas grief enough to think mankind
All hollow, servile, insincere;
But worse to trust to my own mind
And find the same corruption there.
 


^^EOP^^

I heard a Fly buzz - when I died -
The Stillness in the Room
Was like the Stillness in the Air -
Between the Heaves of Storm - 
The Eyes around - had wrung them dry -
And Breaths were gathering firm
For that last Onset - when the King
Be witnessed - in the Room - 
I willed my Keepsakes - Signed away
What portion of me be
Assignable - and then it was
There interposed a Fly - 
With Blue - uncertain - stumbling Buzz -
Between the light - and me -
And then the Windows failed - and then
I could not see to see -


^^EOP^^

I’m thankful that my life doth not deceiveItself with a low loftiness, half height,And think it soars when still it dip its wayBeneath the clouds on noiseless pinionLike the crow or owl, but it doth knowThe full extent of all its trivialness,Compared with the splendid heights above.
 See how it waits to watch the mail come inWhile ’hind its back the sun goes out perchance.And yet their lumbering cart brings me no word,Not one scrawled leaf such as my neighbors getTo cheer them with the slight events forsooth,Faint ups and downs of their far distant friends—And now ’tis passed. What next? See the long trainOf teams wreathed in dust, their atmosphere;Shall I attend until the last is passed?Else why these ears that hear the leader’s bellsOr eyes that link me in procession?But hark! the drowsy day has done its task,Far in yon hazy field where stands a barn,Unanxious hens improve the sultry hourAnd with contented voice now brag their deed—A new laid egg—Now let the day decline—They’ll lay another by tomorrow’s sun.



^^EOP^^

I remember, I remember, The house where I was born, The little window where the sun Came peeping in at morn; He never came a wink too soon, Nor brought too long a day, But now, I often wish the night Had borne my breath away!  I remember, I remember, The roses, red and white, The vi'lets, and the lily-cups, Those flowers made of light! The lilacs where the robin built, And where my brother set The laburnum on his birthday,— The tree is living yet!  I remember, I remember, Where I was used to swing, And thought the air must rush as fresh To swallows on the wing; My spirit flew in feathers then, That is so heavy now, And summer pools could hardly cool The fever on my brow!  I remember, I remember, The fir trees dark and high; I used to think their slender tops Were close against the sky: It was a childish ignorance, But now 'tis little joy To know I'm farther off from heav'n Than when I was a boy. 


^^EOP^^

I was made erect and lone, And within me is the bone; Still my vision will be clear, Still my life will not be drear, To the center all is near. Where I sit there is my throne. If age choose to sit apart, If age choose, give me the start, Take the sap and leave the heart.  


^^EOP^^

When we first heard from blocks away
the fog truck’s blustery roar,
we dropped our toys, leapt from our meals,   
and scrambled out the door 
into an evening briefly fuzzy.
We yearned to be transformed—
translated past confining flesh
to disembodied spirit. We swarmed 
in thick smoke, taking human form   
before we blurred again,
turned vague and then invisible,   
in temporary heaven. 
Freed of bodies by the fog,
we laughed, we sang, we shouted.   
We were our voices, nothing else.   
Voice was all we wanted. 
The white clouds tumbled down our streets   
pursued by spellbound children   
who chased the most distorting clouds,
ecstatic in the poison.


^^EOP^^






^^EOP^^

In spite of all the learned have said,     I still my old opinion keep; The posture, that we give the dead,     Points out the soul's eternal sleep.  Not so the ancients of these lands—     The Indian, when from life released, Again is seated with his friends,     And shares again the joyous feast.  His imaged birds, and painted bowl,     And venison, for a journey dressed, Bespeak the nature of the soul,     Activity, that knows no rest.  His bow, for action ready bent,     And arrows, with a head of stone, Can only mean that life is spent,     And not the old ideas gone.  Thou, stranger, that shalt come this way,     No fraud upon the dead commit— Observe the swelling turf, and say     They do not lie, but here they sit.  Here still a lofty rock remains,     On which the curious eye may trace (Now wasted, half, by wearing rains)     The fancies of a ruder race.  Here still an aged elm aspires,     Beneath whose far-projecting shade (And which the shepherd still admires)     The children of the forest played!  There oft a restless Indian queen     (Pale Shebah, with her braided hair) And many a barbarous form is seen     To chide the man that lingers there.  By midnight moons, o'er moistening dews;     In habit for the chase arrayed, The hunter still the deer pursues,     The hunter and the deer, a shade!  And long shall timorous fancy see     The painted chief, and pointed spear, And Reason's self shall bow the knee     To shadows and delusions here. 


^^EOP^^

Alone, unfriended, on a foreign shore,
 Behold an hapless, melancholy maid,Begging her scanty fare from door to door,
 With piteous voice, and humbly bended head.Alas! her native tongue is known to few:
 Her manners and her garb excite suprise;The vulgar stare to see her bid adieu;
 Her tattered garments fix their curious eyes.Cease, cease your laugh, ye thoughtless vain;Why sneer at yon poor Indian’s pain?’Tis nature’s artless voice that speaks:Behold the tear bedew her cheeks!Imploring actions, bursting sighs,Reveal enough to British eyes.


^^EOP^^

Colin, why this mistake?
 Why plead thy foolish love?My heart shall sooner break
 Than I a minion prove;Nor care I half a rush,
 No snare I spread for thee:Go home, my friend, and blush
 For love and liberty.
Remembrance is my own —
 Dominion bright and clear,Truth there was ever known
 To combat every care:One image there impressed
 Through life shall ever beWhilst my innocuous breast
 Owns love of liberty.
I ever taught thee how
 To prize the soul entire,When on the mountain’s brow
 I turned my rural lyre:Thou servile art and vain,
 Thy love unworthy me!Away! nor hear my strain,
 Of love or liberty.
What arts need I display
 To woo a soul like thine?Thou ne’re canst know the way
 My memory to confine;For my eternal plan
 Is to be calm and free.Estranged from tyrant man
 I’ll keep my liberty.
Yon woods their foliage wear,
 Be thou away or nigh;The warblers of the year
 Instruct me not to sigh:My tears ne’er roll the steep,
 Nor swell the restless sea,Except for those who sleep
 Bereft of liberty.
Slave to commanding eyes!
 Those eyes thou wouldst commendMy judgment must despise —
 My pity is thy friend:If eyes alone can move
 A swain so dull as thee,They mean but to reprove
 Thy loss of liberty.
I stray o’er rocks and fields
 Where native beauties shine:All fettered fancy yields
 Be, Colin, ever thine.Complain no more! but rove —
 My cheek from crimson free,Within my native grove
 I’ll guard my liberty.


^^EOP^^

Where is the promise of my years;     Once written on my brow? Ere errors, agonies and fears Brought with them all that speaks in tears, Ere I had sunk beneath my peers;     Where sleeps that promise now?  Naught lingers to redeem those hours,      Still, still to memory sweet! The flowers that bloomed in sunny bowers Are withered all; and Evil towers Supreme above her sister powers     Of Sorrow and Deceit.  I look along the columned years,      And see Life’s riven fane, Just where it fell, amid the jeers Of scornful lips, whose mocking sneers, For ever hiss within mine ears     To break the sleep of pain.  I can but own my life is vain     A desert void of peace; I missed the goal I sought to gain, I missed the measure of the strain That lulls Fame’s fever in the brain,     And bids Earth’s tumult cease.  Myself! alas for theme so poor     A theme but rich in Fear; I stand a wreck on Error’s shore, A spectre not within the door, A houseless shadow evermore,     An exile lingering here.  


^^EOP^^

At dawn the panther of the heavens peers over the edge of the world.   
She hears the stars gossip with the sun, sees the moon washing her lean   
darkness with water electrified by prayers. All over the world there are those   
who can't sleep, those who never awaken.    
My granddaughter sleeps on the breast of her mother with milk on   
her mouth. A fly contemplates the sweetness of lactose. 
Her father is wrapped in the blanket of nightmares. For safety he   
approaches the red hills near Thoreau. They recognize him and sing for   
him.    
Her mother has business in the house of chaos. She is a prophet dis-   
guised as a young mother who is looking for a job. She appears at the   
door of my dreams and we put the house back together.    
Panther watches as human and animal souls are lifted to the heavens by   
rain clouds to partake of songs of beautiful thunder.    
Others are led by deer and antelope in the wistful hours to the vil-   
lages of their ancestors. There they eat cornmeal cooked with berries   
that stain their lips with purple while the tree of life flickers in the sun.    
It's October, though the season before dawn is always winter. On the   
city streets of this desert town lit by chemical yellow travelers   
search for home.    
Some have been drinking and intimate with strangers. Others are   
escapees from the night shift, sip lukewarm coffee, shift gears to the   
other side of darkness.    
One woman stops at a red light, turns over a worn tape to the last   
chorus of a whispery blues. She has decided to live another day.    
The stars take notice, as do the half-asleep flowers, prickly pear and   
chinaberry tree who drink exhaust into their roots, into the earth.    
She guns the light to home where her children are asleep and may   
never know she ever left. That their fate took a turn in the land of   
nightmares toward the sun may be untouchable knowledge.    
It is a sweet sound.    
The panther relative yawns and puts her head between her paws.   
She dreams of the house of panthers and the seven steps to grace.


^^EOP^^

The climate thinks with its knees.
When the wound opens, music suspires.
Opening a gate, I gain the color
below the roof tiles and the tree limbs. 
You gave me
the late quartets
a black bird and
a white and the
Garden of Eden.
Your death belongs
to anyone but me. 
I wonder so as not to forget. At night in Brooklyn, the tendrils
of a white sex denuded the sky, shimmering at the tall needle-
ends of buildings. The traffic was identical in the spring. 
I am protected by only
music I cannot remember.
Why is it that the best
minds ended by composing
fairy tales? Death swarms.
There are many new beings,
the odor of hearts. The order 
of the hour of mating ends. These are many
new butterflies, and death is no longer to
be eyed by a young girl, perhaps twelve years
old, slyly, as though the future were a man’s
sleeve or stride. I wonder so as not to end
dinner in a farmhouse. We sat at a low table.
Our host was dying but unaware, as she would
be murdered the next day in a distant city. There is an out-
side of language that is not silence. There is an outside of
God that is not isolation, a domestic animal teaching a dying
woman to hunt. A wound opens. A gate opens. Tendrils climb.


^^EOP^^

A young black girl stopped by the woods,
so young she knew only one man: Jim Crow
but she wasn’t allowed to call him Mister.
The woods were his and she respected his boundaries
even in the absence of fence.
Of course she delighted in the filling up
of his woods, she so accustomed to emptiness,
to being taken at face value.
This face, her face eternally the brown
of declining autumn, watches snow inter the grass,
cling to bark making it seem indecisive
about race preference, a fast-to-melt idealism.
With the grass covered, black and white are the only options,
polarity is the only reality; corners aren’t neutral
but are on edge.
She shakes off snow, defiance wasted
on the limited audience of horse.
The snow does not hypnotize her as it wants to,
as the blond sun does in making too many prefer daylight.
She has promises to keep,
the promise that she bear Jim no bastards,
the promise that she ride the horse only as long
as it is willing to accept riders,
the promise that she bear Jim no bastards,
the promise to her face that it not be mistaken as shadow,
and miles to go, more than the distance from Africa to Andover,
more than the distance from black to white
before she sleeps with Jim.


^^EOP^^

Out of the night that covers me,
      Black as the pit from pole to pole,
I thank whatever gods may be
      For my unconquerable soul. 
In the fell clutch of circumstance
      I have not winced nor cried aloud.
Under the bludgeonings of chance
      My head is bloody, but unbowed. 
Beyond this place of wrath and tears
      Looms but the Horror of the shade,
And yet the menace of the years
      Finds and shall find me unafraid. 
It matters not how strait the gate,
      How charged with punishments the scroll,
I am the master of my fate,
      I am the captain of my soul.


^^EOP^^

Now spring appears, with beauty crowned And all is light and life around, Why comes not Jane? When friendship calls, Why leaves she not Augusta’s walls? Where cooling zephyrs faintly blow, Nor spread the cheering, healthful glow That glides through each awakened vein, As skimming o’er the spacious plain, We look around with joyous eye, And view no boundaries but the sky.  Already April’s reign is o’er, Her evening tints delight no more; No more the violet scents the gale, No more the mist o’erspreads the vale; The lovely queen of smiles and tears, Who gave thee birth, no more appears; But blushing May, with brow serene, And vestments of a livelier green, Commands the winged choir to sing, And with wild notes the meadows ring.     O come! ere all the train is gone, No more to hail thy twenty-one; That age which higher honour shares, And well become the wreath it wears. From lassitude and cities flee, And breathe the air of heaven, with me.


^^EOP^^

It’s the little towns I like  with their little mills making ratchets  and stanchions, elastic web,  spindles, you  name it. I like them in New England,  America, particularly-providing  bad jobs good enough to live on, to live in  families even: kindergarten,  church suppers, beach umbrellas ... The towns  are real, so fragile in their loneliness  a flood could come along  (and floods have) and cut them in two,  in half. There is no mayor,  the town council’s not prepared  for this, three of the four policemen  are stranded on their roofs ... and it doesn’t stop  raining. The mountain  is so thick with water parts of it just slide  down on the heifers—soggy, suicidal— in the pastures below. It rains, it rains  in these towns and, because  there’s no other way, your father gets in a rowboat  so he can go to work.


^^EOP^^

It sifts from Leaden Sieves -
It powders all the Wood.
It fills with Alabaster Wool
The Wrinkles of the Road - 
It makes an even Face
Of Mountain, and of Plain -
Unbroken Forehead from the East
Unto the East again - 
It reaches to the Fence -
It wraps it Rail by Rail
Till it is lost in Fleeces -
It deals Celestial Vail 
To Stump, and Stack - and Stem -
A Summer’s empty Room -
Acres of Joints, where Harvests were,
Recordless, but for them - 
It Ruffles Wrists of Posts
As Ankles of a Queen -
Then stills it’s Artisans - like Ghosts -
Denying they have been -


^^EOP^^

it would be that
but only if I knew how
    again
            Could something like
      that get lost?    no only
         a little a little lost 
         
      but if only I remember
      how I mean she or I
         oh a freight train goes by
    & they always do & did
          do
             I mean a real one too
         that I’m not on & am it
                very seriously 
               
         in this serious love world
       that one
      where something oddly music
            will pass through your
          night
                  and it will be me
             sweet me


^^EOP^^

What if I know, Liebknecht, who shot you dead.
Tiegarten trees unroll
staggering shadow, in spite of it all.
I am among the leaves; the inevitable
voices
have nothing left to say, the holed head
bleeding across a heap of progressive magazines;
torn from your face,
trees that turned around,
we do not sanctify the land with our wandering.
Look upon our children, they are mutilated.


^^EOP^^

All Nashville is a chill. And everywhere Like desert sand, when the winds blow, There is each moment sifted through the air, A powdered blast of January snow. O! thoughtless Dandelion, to be misled By a few warm days to leave thy natural bed, Was folly growth and blooming over soon. And yet, thou blasted yellow-coated gem, Full many a heart has but a common boon With thee, now freezing on thy slender stem. When the heart has bloomed by the touch of love’s warm breath Then left and chilling snow is sifted in, It still may beat but there is blast and death To all that blooming life that might have been. 


^^EOP^^






^^EOP^^

unlike you and I jesus knew he’d die 
some days a headache woke him it 
lingered nothing terrible but the word 
hung around his temples like this 
soul everyone wants but can’t find jesus 
knew he’d die he just didn’t know how 
& that bothered him sometimes & then 
he’d do one of his little bootleg tricks 
what the hell, didn’t hurt anyone 
didn’t make anyone disappear for- 
ever but the tricks stopped working he forgot 
why he did them & what for he confused 
a story about a guy named jesus 
with a story about a father he never knew 
& it all began to hang like a motheaten coat 
pulled out of a trunk on shaky days hey let’s 
return to the scene of the fucken tragedy at least 
we all know how it turns out instead of this end- 
less uncertainty hey let’s sell our souls a few 
more times no one’s really counting (those 
little papers you trade for your sins, 
what do you call them? anyone? no?) 
—anyway—jesus this jesus that 
god of nickel god of dime 
right, the real jesus he was lost he walked in- 
to the desert not far really his friends his 
disciples he told them he’d come back 
like us he said this every time he left but jesus 
never said wait never pointed to the sky 
never claimed he’d rise again never asked us to eat 
his flesh jesus never asked anything as far 
as I can tell he got tired everyday & then slept 
sometimes okay sometimes un- 
bearable, the dreams, the father 
pointing a finger at everyone a finger we can’t 
even look at.


^^EOP^^




An Etching



A meadow brown; across the yonder edge A zigzag fence is ambling; here a wedge Of underbush has cleft its course in twain, Till where beyond it staggers up again; The long, grey rails stretch in a broken line Their ragged length of rough, split forest pine, And in their zigzag tottering have reeled In drunken efforts to enclose the field, Which carries on its breast, September born, A patch of rustling, yellow, Indian corn. Beyond its shrivelled tassels, perched upon The topmost rail, sits Joe, the settler’s son, A little semi-savage boy of nine. Now dozing in the warmth of Nature’s wine, His face the sun has tampered with, and wrought, By heated kisses, mischief, and has brought Some vagrant freckles, while from here and there A few wild locks of vagabond brown hair Escape the old straw hat the sun looks through, And blinks to meet his Irish eyes of blue. Barefooted, innocent of coat or vest, His grey checked shirt unbuttoned at his chest, Both hardy hands within their usual nest—   His breeches pockets — so, he waits to rest His little fingers, somewhat tired and worn, That all day long were husking Indian corn. His drowsy lids snap at some trivial sound, With lazy yawns he slips towards the ground, Then with an idle whistle lifts his load And shambles home along the country road That stretches on fringed out with stumps and weeds, And finally unto the backwoods leads, Where forests wait with giant trunk and bough The axe of pioneer, the settler’s plough.  


^^EOP^^

When I was a boy and a man would die we’d say a verse when the hearse went by one car two car three car foursomeone knocking on the devil’s door.
I smoked all night myself awakeand saw the lights and the day break. When the sun was done with the final star I left the house and the door ajarand went to the church. The father was nice but the holy water was cold as ice. I found a friend and felt his hand fall through mine like crumbling sand. I went to hear the talk in the square but there were headless people there. I turned to the clock for the time of day but the hole in the wall had nothing to say. Callous of heaven and careless of hell you knew something you didn’t tell. The soul you said was only fear, and heaven, well heaven at best was here. So heaven is gone if that was itand the soul lies there in the private pit but hell is big and hell is a boneand hell comes in from the edge of alone.Hell is a dead girl who walks through the town and hunts for my bed to lay herself down.


^^EOP^^

A physician of eminence, some years ago,
 Was called in, to attend on a lady of fashion,Who had long been admired — and the toast of each beau,
 Tho’ now, her sunk features excited compassion.
The doctor no sooner the lady had eyed,
 Than he begged, ‘She for once would his freedom forgiveIf he stepped from the rules of good breeding aside,
 To mention the terms on which she might live.’
‘By all means,’ cried the lady, ‘for surely no word
 A physician may utter, should e’er give offence;Punctilio, in illness, is always absurd,
 And shows either doctor, or patient wants sense.’
‘Why then, my dear lady, I cannot resist
 Pronouncing this truth, like a plain honest man;That if, in the use of white paint you persist
 No medicine will save you, do all that I can.’
‘You astonish me, Doctor! but, such is my case,
 That I may as well die, as leave painting alone;For, should I appear with my natural face   Amongst my acquaintance — I should not be known.’


^^EOP^^

Very soon the Yankee teachers
   Came down and set up school;
But, oh! how the Rebs did hate it,—
   It was agin’ their rule. 
Our masters always tried to hide
   Book learning from our eyes;
Knowledge did’nt agree with slavery—
   ’Twould make us all too wise. 
But some of us would try to steal
   A little from the book.
And put the words together,
   And learn by hook or crook. 
I remember Uncle Caldwell,
   Who took pot liquor fat
And greased the pages of his book,
   And hid it in his hat. 
And had his master ever seen
   The leaves upon his head,
He’d have thought them greasy papers,
   But nothing to be read. 
And there was Mr. Turner’s Ben,
   Who heard the children spell,
And picked the words right up by heart,
   And learned to read ’em well. 
Well, the Northern folks kept sending
   The Yankee teachers down;
And they stood right up and helped us,
   Though Rebs did sneer and frown. 
And I longed to read my Bible,
   For precious words it said;
But when I begun to learn it,
   Folks just shook their heads, 
And said there is no use trying,
   Oh! Chloe, you’re too late;
But as I was rising sixty,
   I had no time to wait. 
So I got a pair of glasses,
   And straight to work I went,
And never stopped till I could read
   The hymns and Testament. 
Then I got a little cabin
   A place to call my own—
And I felt independent
   As the queen upon her throne.
 


^^EOP^^

                    
                    
                    Let us consider the farmer who makes his straw hat his   
sweetheart; or the old woman who makes a floor lamp her son;
or the young woman who has set herself the task of scraping
her shadow off a wall....

    Let us consider the old woman who wore smoked cows’
tongues for shoes and walked a meadow gathering cow chips
in her apron; or a mirror grown dark with age that was given
to a blind man who spent his nights looking into it, which
saddened his mother, that her son should be so lost in
vanity....

    Let us consider the man who fried roses for his dinner,
whose kitchen smelled like a burning rose garden; or the man
who disguised himself as a moth and ate his overcoat, and for   
dessert served himself a chilled fedora....
                

^^EOP^^

Forgive me, if I wound your ear,
     By calling of you Nancy,Which is the name of my sweet friend,
     The other’s but her fancy.
Ah, dearest girl! how could your mind
     The strange distinction frame?The whimsical, unjust caprice,
     Which robs you of your name.
Nancy agrees with what we see
     A being wild and airy;Gay as a nymph of Flora’s train,
     Fantastic as a fairy.
But Anna’s of a different kind,
     A melancholy maid,Boasting a sentimental soul,
     In solemn pomp arrayed.
Oh ne’er will I forsake the sound,
     So artless and so freeBe what you will with all mankind,
     But Nancy still with me.


^^EOP^^

Lift ev’ry voice and sing,   Till earth and heaven ring, Ring with the harmonies of Liberty; Let our rejoicing rise High as the list’ning skies, Let it resound loud as the rolling sea. Sing a song full of the faith that the dark past has taught us, Sing a song full of the hope that the present has brought us; Facing the rising sun of our new day begun, Let us march on till victory is won.  Stony the road we trod, Bitter the chast’ning rod, Felt in the days when hope unborn had died;   Yet with a steady beat, Have not our weary feet Come to the place for which our fathers sighed? We have come over a way that with tears has been watered, We have come, treading our path through the blood of the slaughtered, Out from the gloomy past,   Till now we stand at last Where the white gleam of our bright star is cast.  God of our weary years,   God of our silent tears, Thou who has brought us thus far on the way; Thou who has by Thy might,   Led us into the light, Keep us forever in the path, we pray. Lest our feet stray from the places, our God, where we met Thee, Lest our hearts, drunk with the wine of the world, we forget Thee; Shadowed beneath Thy hand,   May we forever stand.   True to our God, True to our native land.


^^EOP^^

I did not have exactly a way of lifebut the bee amazed me and the wind’s plenty was almost believable. Hearing a magpie laugh
through a ghost town in Wyoming, saying Hello in Cambridge, eating cheese by the frothy Rhine, leaning from plexiglass over Tokyo,
I was not able to make one life of all the presences I haunted. Still the bee amazed me, and I did not care to call
accounts from the wind. Once only, at Pompeii, I fell into a sleep I understood, and woke to find I had not lost my way.


^^EOP^^

I have been cherish’d and forgiven     By many tender-hearted, ’Twas for the sake of one in Heaven     Of him that is departed.  Because I bear my Father’s name     I am not quite despised, My little legacy of fame     I’ve not yet realized.  And yet if you should praise myself     I’ll tell you, I had rather You’d give your love to me, poor elf,     Your praise to my great father.  


^^EOP^^

Who has not waked to list the busy sounds Of summer’s morning, in the sultry smoke Of noisy London? On the pavement hot The sooty chimney-boy, with dingy face And tattered covering, shrilly bawls his trade, Rousing the sleepy housemaid. At the door The milk-pail rattles, and the tinkling bell Proclaims the dustman’s office; while the street Is lost in clouds impervious. Now begins The din of hackney-coaches, waggons, carts; While tinmen’s shops, and noisy trunk-makers, Knife-grinders, coopers, squeaking cork-cutters, Fruit-barrows, and the hunger-giving cries Of vegetable-vendors, fill the air. Now every shop displays its varied trade, And the fresh-sprinkled pavement cools the feet Of early walkers. At the private door The ruddy housemaid twirls the busy mop, Annoying the smart ’prentice, or neat girl, Tripping with band-box lightly. Now the sun Darts burning splendor on the glittering pane, Save where the canvas awning throws a shade On the gay merchandise. Now, spruce and trim, In shops (where beauty smiles with industry) Sits the smart damsel; while the passenger Peeps through the window, watching every charm. Now pastry dainties catch the eye minute Of humming insects, while the limy snare Waits to enthrall them. Now the lamp-lighter Mounts the tall ladder, nimbly venturous, To trim the half-filled lamps, while at his feet The pot-boy yells discordant! All along The sultry pavement, the old-clothes-man cries In tone monotonous, while sidelong views The area for his traffic: now the bag Is slyly opened, and the half-worn suit (Sometimes the pilfered treasure of the base Domestic spoiler), for one half its worth, Sinks in the green abyss. The porter now Bears his huge load along the burning way; And the poor poet wakes from busy dreams, To paint the summer morning.


^^EOP^^

I see it as it looked one afternoon In August,— by a fresh soft breeze o’erblown. The swiftness of the tide, the light thereon, A far-off sail, white as a crescent moon. The shining waters with pale currents strewn, The quiet fishing-smacks, the Eastern cove, The semi-circle of its dark, green grove. The luminous grasses, and the merry sun In the grave sky; the sparkle far and wide, Laughter of unseen children, cheerful chirp Of crickets, and low lisp of rippling tide, Light summer clouds fantastical as sleep  Changing unnoted while I gazed thereon. All these fair sounds and sights I made my own.


^^EOP^^

Long neglect has worn awayHalf the sweet enchanting smile;Time has turned the bloom to gray;Mold and damp the face defile.
But that lock of silky hair,Still beneath the picture twined,Tells what once those features were,Paints their image on the mind.
Fair the hand that traced that line,“Dearest, ever deem me true”;Swiftly flew the fingers fineWhen the pen that motto drew.



^^EOP^^

Long time a child, and still a child, when yearsHad painted manhood on my cheek, was I,—For yet I lived like one not born to die;A thriftless prodigal of smiles and tears,No hope I needed, and I knew no fears.But sleep, though sweet, is only sleep, and waking,I waked to sleep no more, at once o’ertakingThe vanguard of my age, with all arrearsOf duty on my back. Nor child, nor man,Nor youth, nor sage, I find my head is grey,For I have lost the race I never ran:A rathe December blights my lagging May;And still I am a child, tho’ I be old,Time is my debtor for my years untold.


^^EOP^^

Holy Trinity Airship
billows a 
chrys-
elephantine
cave Louis Sullivan, Arch-
itect, lord master,
conceived of
in the hollow of power. 
He swells.
I am his balloonist
balancing an azimuth 
as earth-apse I
orbit, robed in
hot gas & leather 
fastened by a yolk-stalk
of gravity to gold-
end onions nozzling heavens 
whose suns are stomachs
with churches in their navels. 
Each we are priests
as aeronauts at the vestibules,
& enter the cavity: 
space, self, organ; celest- 
ial nave
bellies 
stars sailors name saints
and adore— 
their egress is bitter
weeping, their praise pure
Russian form: 
a cathedral,
my inner orrery.


^^EOP^^

To claim, at a dead party, to have spotted a grackle,
When in fact you haven’t of late, can do no harm.
Your reputation for saying things of interest
Will not be marred, if you hasten to other topics,
Nor will the delicate web of human trust
Be ruptured by that airy fabrication.
Later, however, talking with toxic zest
Of golf, or taxes, or the rest of it
Where the beaked ladle plies the chuckling ice,
You may enjoy a chill of severance, hearing
Above your head the shrug of unreal wings.
Not that the world is tiresome in itself:
We know what boredom is: it is a dull
Impatience or a fierce velleity,
A champing wish, stalled by our lassitude,
To make or do. In the strict sense, of course,
We invent nothing, merely bearing witness
To what each morning brings again to light:
Gold crosses, cornices, astonishment
Of panes, the turbine-vent which natural law
Spins on the grill-end of the diner’s roof,
Then grass and grackles or, at the end of town
In sheen-swept pastureland, the horse’s neck
Clothed with its usual thunder, and the stones
Beginning now to tug their shadows in
And track the air with glitter. All these things
Are there before us; there before we look
Or fail to look; there to be seen or not
By us, as by the bee’s twelve thousand eyes,
According to our means and purposes.
So too with strangeness not to be ignored,
Total eclipse or snow upon the rose,
And so with that most rare conception, nothing.
What is it, after all, but something missed?
It is the water of a dried-up well
Gone to assail the cliffs of Labrador.
There is what galled the arch-negator, sprung
From Hell to probe with intellectual sight
The cells and heavens of a given world
Which he could take but as another prison:
Small wonder that, pretending not to be,
He drifted through the bar-like boles of Eden
In a black mist low creeping, dragging down
And darkening with moody self-absorption
What, when he left it, lifted and, if seen
From the sun’s vantage, seethed with vaulting hues.
Closer to making than the deftest fraud
Is seeing how the catbird’s tail was made
To counterpoise, on the mock-orange spray,
Its light, up-tilted spine; or, lighter still,
How the shucked tunic of an onion, brushed
To one side on a backlit chopping-board
And rocked by trifling currents, prints and prints
Its bright, ribbed shadow like a flapping sail.
Odd that a thing is most itself when likened:
The eye mists over, basil hints of clove,
The river glazes toward the dam and spills
To the drubbed rocks below its crashing cullet,
And in the barnyard near the sawdust-pile
Some great thing is tormented. Either it is
A tarp torn loose and in the groaning wind
Now puffed, now flattened, or a hip-shot beast
Which tries again, and once again, to rise.
What, though for pain there is no other word,
Finds pleasure in the cruellest simile?
It is something in us like the catbird’s song
From neighbor bushes in the grey of morning
That, harsh or sweet, and of its own accord,
Proclaims its many kin. It is a chant
Of the first springs, and it is tributary
To the great lies told with the eyes half-shut
That have the truth in view: the tale of Chiron
Who, with sage head, wild heart, and planted hoof
Instructed brute Achilles in the lyre,
Or of the garden where we first mislaid
Simplicity of wish and will, forgetting
Out of what cognate splendor all things came
To take their scattering names; and nonetheless
That matter of a baggage-train surprised
By a few Gascons in the Pyrenees
Which, having worked three centuries and more
In the dark caves of France, poured out at last
The blood of Roland, who to Charles his king
And to the dove that hatched the dove-tailed world
Was faithful unto death, and shamed the Devil.


^^EOP^^




Outside the Party



Thick throng the snow-flakes, the evening is dreary,Glad rings the music in yonder gay hall;On her who listens here, friendless and weary,Heavier chill than the winter’s doth fall.
At yon clear window, light-opened before me,Glances the face I have worshipped so well:There’s the fine gentleman, grand in his glory;There, the fair smile by whose sweetness I fell.
This is akin to him, shunned and forsaken,That at my bosom sobs low, without bread;Had not such pleading my marble heart shaken,I had been quiet, long since, with the dead.
Oh! Could I enter there, ghastly and squalid,Stand in men’s eyes with my spirit o’erborne,Show them where roses bloomed, crushed now and pallid,What he found innocent, leaving forlorn,—
How the fair ladies would fail from their dances,Trembling, aghast at my horrible tale!How would he shrink from my words and my glances!How would they shrink from him, swooning and pale!
This is the hair that was soft to enchain him;Snakelike, it snarls on my beautiless brow:These are the hands that were fond to detain himWith a sense-magic then, powerless now!
No: could I come, like a ghost, to affright him,How should that heal my wound, silence my pain?Had I the wrath of God’s lightning to smite him,That could not bring me my lost peace again.
Ne’er let him grieve while good fortunes betide him,Ne’er count again the poor game lost of old;When he comes forth, with his young bride beside him,Here shall they find us both, dead in the cold.



^^EOP^^




Street Yarn



Roses caged in windows, heighten
  Your faint blooms today;Silks and sheeny satins, brighten;
  He has passed this way!
Could ye keep his fleeting presence
  Gone beyond recall,But a little of his essence,
  I would have you all.
Arabesque so quaint and shady,
  That mightst catch his eyeTo adorn a stately lady
  Ere her hour went by,
Canst assure me that his glancing
  Rested on they fold?Did that set your purples dancing?
  Wake the sleepy gold?
Ye neglected apple-venders
  Mouldering in the street,Did he curse between your tenders,
  Spurning with his feet?
Then must I an alms deliver
  For his graceless pride;Could I buy his sins forever,
  I’d not be denied.
Paying patiently his ransom
  Never conscience-pricked;Cheating Justice of her handsome
  Heartless derelict.
Did he view thee, ancient steeple,
  With thy weird clock-face,Frowning down on sinful people
  Passing out of grace?
Nay, respond not to my question
  With thy prate of time:Things to which my soul must hasten
  Lie beyond thy chime.
With no circumstance to screen us,
  We must meet again:I shall bid God judge between us,
  Answering Amen.



^^EOP^^

He claps a hand
Across the gaping hole— 
Or else the sight might
Well inside to 
Melt the mind—if any
Thinking spoke 
Were in the wheel,
Or any real 
Fright-fragments broke
Out of the gorge to 
Soak the breast, the meaning
Might incite a stroke—best 
Press against it, close
The clawhole, stand 
In stupor, petrified. The dream
Be damned, the deeps defied. 
The hand’s to keep
The scream inside.


^^EOP^^

A thin wet sky, that yellows at the rim,
And meets with sun-lost lip the marsh’s brim. 
The pools low lying, dank with moss and mould,
Glint through their mildews like large cups of gold. 
Among the wild rice in the still lagoon,
In monotone the lizard shrills his tune. 
The wild goose, homing, seeks a sheltering,
Where rushes grow, and oozing lichens cling. 
Late cranes with heavy wing, and lazy flight,
Sail up the silence with the nearing night. 
And like a spirit, swathed in some soft veil,
Steals twilight and its shadows o’er the swale. 
Hushed lie the sedges, and the vapours creep,
Thick, grey and humid, while the marshes sleep.


^^EOP^^

The backyard apple tree gets sad so soon,
takes on a used-up, feather-duster look
within a week. 
The ivy’s spring reconnaissance campaign
sends red feelers out and up and down
to find the sun. 
Ivy from last summer clogs the pool,
brewing a loamy, wormy, tea-leaf mulch
soft to the touch 
and rank with interface of rut and rot.
The month after the month they say is cruel
is and is not.


^^EOP^^




Sunday, 12 May 1833



The clouds are marshalling across the sky, Leaving their deepest tints upon yon range Of soul-alluring hills. The breeze comes softly, Laden with tribute that a hundred orchards Now in their fullest blossom send, in thanks For this refreshing shower. The birds pour forth In heightened melody the notes of praise They had suspended while God’s voice was speaking, And his eye flashing down upon his world. I sigh, half-charmed, half-pained. My sense is living, And, taking in this freshened beauty, tells Its pleasure to the mind. The mind replies, And strives to wake the heart in turn, repeating Poetic sentiments from many a record Which other souls have left, when stirred and satisfied By scenes as fair, as fragrant. But the heart Sends back a hollow echo to the call Of outward things, — and its once bright companion, Who erst would have been answered by a stream Of life-fraught treasures, thankful to be summoned, — Can now rouse nothing better than this echo; Unmeaning voice, which mocks their softened accents. Content thee, beautiful world! and hush, still busy mind! My heart hath sealed its fountains. To the things Of Time they shall be oped no more. Too long, Too often were they poured forth: part have sunk Into the desert; part profaned and swollen By bitter waters, mixed by those who feigned They asked them for refreshment, which, turned back, Have broken and o’erflowed their former urns. So when ye talk of pleasure, lonely world, And busy mind, ye ne’er again shall move me To answer ye, though still your calls have power To jar me through, and cause dull aching here.  No so the voice which hailed me from the depths Of yon dark-bosomed cloud, now vanishing Before the sun ye greet. It touched my centre, The voice of the Eternal, calling me To feel his other worlds; to feel that if I could deserve a home, I still might find it In other spheres, — and bade me not despair, Though ‘want of harmony’ and ‘aching void’ Are terms invented by the men of this, Which I may not forget.                                  In former times I loved to see the lightnings flash athwart The stooping heavens; I loved to hear the thunder Call to the seas and mountains; for I thought ‘Tis thus man’s flashing fancy doth enkidle The firmament of mind; ‘tis thus his eloquence   Calls unto the soul’s depths and heights; and still I defied the creature, nor remembered The Creator in his works.                                     Ah now how different! The proud delight of that keen sympathy Is gone; no longer riding on the wave, But whelmed beneath it: my own plans and works, Or, as the Scriptures phrase it, my ’inventions’ No longer interpose ‘twist me and Heaven.  Today, for the first time, I felt the Deity, And uttered prayer on hearing thunder. This Must be thy will, — for finer, higher spirits Have gone through this same process, — yet I think There was religion in that strong delight, Those sounds, those thoughts of power imparted. True, I did not say, ‘He is the Lord thy God,’ But I had feeling of his essence. But ‘’Twas pride by which the angels fell.’ So be it! But O, might I but see a little onward! Father, I cannot be a spirit of power; May I be active as a spirit of love, Since thou hast ta’en me from that path which Nature Seemed to appoint, O, deign to ope another, Where I may walk with thought and hope assured; ‘Lord, I believe; help thou mine unbelief!’ Had I but faith like that which fired Novalis, I too could bear that the heart ‘fall in ashes,’ While the freed spirit rises from beneath them, With heavenward-look, and Phoenix-plumes upsoaring!


^^EOP^^

The wooden horsesare tired of their courses
and plead from head to hoof to be fed to a stove—
In leaping lunging flames they’d rise again, flared manes
snapping like chains behind them. The smoke would not blind them
as do these children’s hands: beyond our cruel commands
the fire will free them then as once the artisan when
out of the tree theywere nagged to this neigh.


^^EOP^^

                    
                    
                    Out of the golden West, out of the leaden East, into the iron South, and to the silver North . . . Oh metals metals everywhere, forks and knives, belt buckles and hooks . . . When you are beaten you sing. You do not give anyone a chance . . .

      You come out of the earth and fly with men. You lodge in men. You hurt them terribly. You tear them. You do not care for anyone.

      Oh metals metals, why are you always hanging about? Is it not enough that you hold men’s wrists? Is it not enough that we let you in our mouths?

      Why is it you will not do anything for yourself? Why is it you always wait for men to show you what to be?

      And men love you. Perhaps it is because you soften so often.
      You did, it is true, pour into anything men asked you to. It has always proved you to be somewhat softer than you really are.

      Oh metals metals, why are you always filling my house?
      You are like family, you do not care for anyone.
                

^^EOP^^

Down valley a smoke haze
Three days heat, after five days rain   
Pitch glows on the fir-cones
Across rocks and meadows
Swarms of new flies. 
I cannot remember things I once read   
A few friends, but they are in cities.   
Drinking cold snow-water from a tin cup   
Looking down for miles
Through high still air.


^^EOP^^

It is too early for white boughs, too late For snows. From out the hedge the wind lets fall A few last flakes, ragged and delicate. Down the stripped roads the maples start their small, Soft, ’wildering fires. Stained are the meadow stalks A rich and deepening red. The willow tree Is woolly. In deserted garden-walks The lean bush crouching hints old royalty, Feels some June stir in the sharp air and knows Soon ’twill leap up and show the world a rose.  The days go out with shouting; nights are loud; Wild, warring shapes the wood lifts in the cold; The moon’s a sword of keen, barbaric gold, Plunged to the hilt into a pitch black cloud.


^^EOP^^

Doctor, you say there are no haloes
around the streetlights in Paris
and what I see is an aberration
caused by old age, an affliction.
I tell you it has taken me all my life
to arrive at the vision of gas lamps as angels,
to soften and blur and finally banish
the edges you regret I don’t see,
to learn that the line I called the horizon
does not exist and sky and water,
so long apart, are the same state of being.
Fifty-four years before I could see
Rouen cathedral is built
of parallel shafts of sun,
and now you want to restore
my youthful errors: fixed
notions of top and bottom,
the illusion of three-dimensional space,
wisteria separate
from the bridge it covers.
What can I say to convince you
the Houses of Parliament dissolve
night after night to become
the fluid dream of the Thames?
I will not return to a universe
of objects that don’t know each other,
as if islands were not the lost children
of one great continent.  The world
is flux, and light becomes what it touches,
becomes water, lilies on water,
above and below water,
becomes lilac and mauve and yellow
and white and cerulean lamps,
small fists passing sunlight
so quickly to one another
that it would take long, streaming hair
inside my brush to catch it.
To paint the speed of light!
Our weighted shapes, these verticals,
burn to mix with air
and change our bones, skin, clothes
to gases.  Doctor,
if only you could see
how heaven pulls earth into its arms
and how infinitely the heart expands
to claim this world, blue vapor without end.


^^EOP^^

The moon now rises to her absolute rule, And the husbandman and hunter Acknowledge her for their mistress. Asters and golden reign in the fields And the life everlasting withers not. The fields are reaped and shorn of their pride But an inward verdure still crowns them; The thistle scatters its down on the pool And yellow leaves clothe the river— And nought disturbs the serious life of men. But behind the sheaves and under the sod There lurks a ripe fruit which the reapers have not gathered, The true harvest of the year—the boreal fruit Which it bears forever, With fondness annually watering and maturing it. But man never severs the stalk Which bears this palatable fruit.


^^EOP^^

She raised her head. With hot and glittering eye, ‘I know,’ she said, ‘that I am going to die. Come here, my daughter, while my mind is clear. Let me make plain to you your duty here; My duty once — I never failed to try—   But for some reason I am going to die.’ She raised her head, and, while her eyes rolled wild, Poured these instructions on the gasping child:  ‘Begin at once — don’t iron sitting down—   Wash your potatoes when the fat is brown—   Monday, unless it rains — it always pays To get fall sewing done on the right days—   A carpet-sweeper and a little broom—   Save dishes — wash the summer dining-room With soda — keep the children out of doors—   The starch is out — beeswax on all the floors—   If girls are treated like your friends they stay—   They stay, and treat you like their friends — the way To make home happy is to keep a jar —   And save the prettiest pieces for the star In the middle — blue’s too dark — all silk is best—   And don’t forget the corners — when they’re dressed Put them on ice — and always wash the chest Three times a day, the windows every week—   We need more flour — the bedroom ceilings leak—   It’s better than onion — keep the boys at home—   Gardening is good — a load, three loads of loam—   They bloom in spring — and smile, smile always, dear—   Be brave, keep on — I hope I’ve made it clear.’  She died, as all her mothers died before. Her daughter died in turn, and made one more.


^^EOP^^

Now in thy dazzling half-oped eye, Thy curled nose and lip awry, Uphoisted arms and noddling head, And little chin with crystal spread, Poor helpless thing! what do I see, That I should sing of thee?  From thy poor tongue no accents come, Which can but rub thy toothless gum: Small understanding boasts thy face, Thy shapeless limbs nor step nor grace: A few short words thy feats may tell, And yet I love thee well.  When wakes the sudden bitter shriek, And redder swells thy little cheek When rattled keys thy woes beguile, And through thine eyelids gleams the smile, Still for thy weakly self is spent Thy little silly plaint.  But when thy friends are in distress. Thou’lt laugh and chuckle n’ertheless, Nor with kind sympathy be smitten, Though all are sad but thee and kitten; Yet puny varlet that thou art, Thou twitchest at the heart.  Thy smooth round cheek so soft and warm; Thy pinky hand and dimpled arm; Thy silken locks that scantly peep, With gold tipped ends, where circle deep, Around thy neck in harmless grace, So soft and sleekly hold their place, Might harder hearts with kindness fill, And gain our right goodwill.  Each passing clown bestows his blessing, Thy mouth is worn with old wives’ kissing; E’en lighter looks the gloomy eye Of surly sense when thou art by; And yet, I think, whoe’er they be, They love thee not like me.  Perhaps when time shall add a few Short years to thee, thou’lt love me too; And after that, through life’s long way, Become my sure and cheering stay; Wilt care for me and be my hold, When I am weak and old.  Thou’lt listen to my lengthened tale, And pity me when I am frail — But see, the sweepy spinning fly Upon the window takes thine eye. Go to thy little senseless play; Thou dost not heed my lay. 


^^EOP^^

  CV 
Not-Orpheus is singing   He sings his nothing   He sings his night   
He sings all the names   The name of nothing   The only name    Since   
long ago   He didn’t know it   And knew it in his night   
All things sing   All names sing   Every tonal difference, every
sound   All music in its destruction   In its sublation   Toward which point?
The mountain of nothing hovers   Before it crushes us   With its night   With its
   song   
In the evening I walked through town with you, Dearest, along the river   
A clear cold spring evening, the half-moon shone   As if walking in a foreign city   
Though I recognized parts of it   You said it was almost like   
walking in Prague, where we would have been if my mother hadn’t fallen ill   
When we stood by one corner of the Hotel Svea, where I played in a dance band in
    1957,   
the huge flock of jackdaws, in the trees by the bastion near the castle, flew   
out over the river, in micropolyphonic conversation    As in a piece by Ligeti   
That night I dreamed I crossed a bridge spanning the river, now very broad   
The long bridge was swaying, huge ocean swells entering the river from the sea   
I walked with a girl, kissed her on the mouth, on the opposite bank   
In the morning you came into my bed, Dear, we slinked like teenagers, so my   
       mother wouldn’t hear us,
where she slept, in the room outside ours   She’s already much better   
I look at my face in the bathroom mirror   Will I manage to go out into the Brain   
Trucks pass   Traffic goes on, in the great exchange of goods   
Gulls, trees, people   The degree of virtuality in different goods, the phantasms   
also in what we eat, conceptions of origin, contents, effects
Fear    Cultivated tastes    We are in the immediacy of memory    Only in a flash of
astonishment can memory be broken   But even lightning is informed    I look at
    the
      magical   
diagrams of Giordano Bruno, read his texts   See that all this is exactly as in   
Jung, fundamental magical forms, for guiding the divine,   
the unknown within the soul   Also the similarity with tantric forms      
    Yes, that’s   
        how it is,   
I think, both Freud and Jung are magicians, the difference in rationality is   
only marginal, Jung’s a little older, Freud’s more modern, a continuation of   
Descartes, developed later in Spinoza’s pneumatic model for the passions,   
and yet both are found, subsumed in Bruno’s love-flow, the lineage backward,   
the tantric flow, also Plato’s Diotima, her flow . . .   
Hölderlin saw the stream of people in dark water, streaming over   
the ledges in the human-geological world, the levels of the abyss,   Para-   
       dise’s various degrees of stasis   
What use can I make of these magical forms? I’m no magician    And yet
I acknowledge their power, also within my self   If they prevail, sovereignty   
is crushed   Libero arbitrio   There the forms also break down   
The stream of love breaks down    Fluid lightning    The flash of vibrating being   
But also the flash of darkness   The light of Beatrice’s eyes, their lightning
    flash   How  
am I to understand this? How to understand unknowing   That I do not!


^^EOP^^

Much Madness is divinest Sense -
To a discerning Eye -
Much Sense - the starkest Madness -
’Tis the Majority
In this, as all, prevail -
Assent - and you are sane -
Demur - you’re straightway dangerous -
And handled with a Chain -


^^EOP^^

                    
                    
                    My house is the red earth; it could be the center of the world. I’ve heard New York, Paris, or Tokyo called the center of the world, but I say it is magnificently humble. You could drive by and miss it. Radio waves can obscure it. Words cannot construct it, for there are some sounds left to sacred wordless form. For instance, that fool crow, picking through trash near the corral, understands the center of the world as greasy strips of fat. Just ask him. He doesn’t have to say that the earth has turned scarlet through fierce belief, after centuries of heartbreak and laughter—he perches on the blue bowl of the sky, and laughs.
                

^^EOP^^




I set out now
    in a box upon the sea. 

^^EOP^^

Let not the title of my verse offend,    Nor let the pride contract her rigid brow; That helpless Innocence demands a friend,    Virtue herself will cheerfully allow:  And should my pencil prove too weak to paint,    The ills attendant on the babe ere born; Whose parents swerved from virtue’s mild restraint,    Forgive the attempt, nor treat the Muse with scorn.  Yon rural farm, where Mirth was wont to dwell,    Of Melancholy, now appears the seat; Solemn and silent as the hermit’s cell —    Say what, my muse, has caused a change so great?  This hapless morn, an infant first saw light,    Whose innocence a better fate might claim, Than to be shunned as hateful to the sight,    And banished soon as it receives a name.  No joy attends its entrance into life,    No smile upon its mother’s face appears, She cannot smile, alas! she is no wife;    But vents the sorrow of her heart in tears.  No father flies to clasp it to his breast,    And bless the power that gave it to his arms; To see his form, in miniature expressed,    Or trace, with ecstacy, its mother’s charms.  Unhappy babe! thy father is thy foe!    Oft shall he wish thee numbered with the dead; His crime entails on thee a load of woe,    And sorrow heaps on thy devoted head.  Torn from its breast, by shame or pride,    No matter which — to hireling hands assigned; A parent’s tenderness, when thus denied,    Can it be thought its nurse is overkind?  Too many, like this infant may we see,    Exposed, abandoned, helpless and forlorn; Till death, misfortune’s friend, has set them free,    From a rude world, which gave them nought but scorn.  Too many mothers — horrid to relate!    Soon as their infants breathe the vital air, Deaf to their plaintive cries, their helpless state,    Led on by shame, and driven by despair,  Fell murderers to become — Here cease, my pen,    And leave these wretched victims of despair; But oh! what punishments await the men,    Who in such depths of misery plunge the fair.


^^EOP^^

Celebrated, the moustache,
And near enough ignored
His “beautiful hands”. 
Capable on a keyboard, improvised
A polonaise, his own artistic
Compositions “dull and decent”. 
He could see, some, but much swam, out there:
Knives and forks, print, street signs.
Then, his mind made up, he laid about, 
Sank immense nets into the cultural acid.
When we winched them back in, on fingertips,
They rippled with rainbows—herring and sprat 
He could fling, raw, in the teeth
Of the Bürgertum, God rot it. Ah, no God:
So to invoke the impact of quanta on quanta 
And extirpate for keeps the German cabbage,
His fingers, subject to whim, and rounded
Like objects in a metephor, made good the feeble 
Peering eyes. Each tip housed a labyrinth,
Circling in or out, from ivories an octopod
Pressed the torrent of a tune. From Cretan pots 
Their gestures, snaking out, apprehended,
Turn on turn, a tumbril in the stars.
Those fingers must have held, no less, the comb 
To bush his hairy icon out, to primp.
On long mountain walks they jotted Gothic
Letters on a page, deleted angrily 
Brainwaves, on a page one trouser leg
Segregated from his knee. What a joy,
At long last, to know the knower not deceived 
But disobedient, at his word. Underneath
The creams of language here’s a tongue can taste
A universe, cyclopic, but propulsive, alien 
To a species blocked by self-torment,
To shopping, authority—all the cockahoop
Engines of flesh not fuelled by despair. 
When Nietzche, squinting, trimmed his fingernails,
Did he care for suchlike slighter things?
To a turning pot a potter’s fingers do not cling.


^^EOP^^

—Now let me tell you why I said that.
Try to put yourself into an experimental mood.
Stop right here and try to review everything
you felt about that line. Did you accept it
as wisdom? as perception? as a gem, maybe,
for your private anthology of Telling Truths? 
My point is that the line is fraudulent.
A blurb. It is also relevant that I know
at least a dozen devoutly intellectual
journals that will gladly buy any fourteen
such lines plus a tinny rhyme scheme and
compound the felony by calling that a sonnet. 
—Very well, then, I am a cynic. Though, for
the record, let me add that I am a cynic with
one wife, three children, and other invest-
ments. Whoever heard of a cynic carrying a
pack for the fun of it? It won’t really do
I’m something else.
                                        Were I to dramatize myself,
I’d say I am a theologian who keeps meeting
the devil as a master of make-up, and that
among his favorite impersonations he appears,
often as not, as the avuncular old ham who winks,
tugs his ear, and utters such gnomic garbage
as: “Nothing is really hard but to be real.” 
I guess what the devil gets out of this—if he is
the fool he seems to be—is the illusion of
imitating heaven. If, on the other hand, he is no
fool, then his deceptions are carefully practiced
and we are all damned. For all of us, unless
we are carefully warned, will accept such noises
as examples of the sound an actual mind makes. 
Why arc we damned then?—I am glad you asked that.
It is, as we say to flatter oafs, a good question.
(Meaning, usually, the one we were fishing for. Good.)
In any case. I may now pretend to think out the answer
I have memorized:
                                      We are damned for accepting as
the sound a man makes, the sound of something else,
thereby losing the truth of our own sound.
                                                                                  How do we
learn our own sound? (Another good question. Thank you.)
—by listening to what men there have been and are
—by reading more poets than jurists (without scorning
Law)—and by reading what we read not for its
oration, but for its resemblance to that sound in which
we best hear most of what a man is. Get that sound into
your heads and you will know what tones to exclude. 
—if there is enough exclusion in you to keep the
pie plates out of the cymbals, the tin horns out of
the brass section, the baling wire out of the strings,
and thereby to let the notes roll full to the ear
that has listened enough to be a listener. 
As for the devil—when he has finished every imp-
ersonation, the best he will have been able to accomplish
is only that sound which is exactly not the music.


^^EOP^^

The fields are white;
 The laborers are few;Yet say the idle:
 There’s nothing to do.
Jails are crowded;
 In Sunday-schools few;We still complain:
 There’s nothing to do.
Drunkards are dying—
 Your sons, it is true;Mothers’ arms folded
 With nothing to do.
Heathens are dying;
 Their blood falls on you;How can you people
 Find nothing to do?



^^EOP^^

Leucon, no one’s allowed to know his fate, Not you, not me: don’t ask, don’t hunt for answers In tea leaves or palms. Be patient with whatever comes. This could be our last winter, it could be many More, pounding the Tuscan Sea on these rocks: Do what you must, be wise, cut your vines And forget about hope. Time goes running, even As we talk. Take the present, the future’s no one’s affair.


^^EOP^^

Happy the man, whose wish and care    A few paternal acres bound, Content to breathe his native air,                             In his own ground.  Whose herds with milk, whose fields with bread,    Whose flocks supply him with attire, Whose trees in summer yield him shade,                             In winter fire.  Blest, who can unconcernedly find    Hours, days, and years slide soft away, In health of body, peace of mind,                             Quiet by day,  Sound sleep by night; study and ease,    Together mixed; sweet recreation; And innocence, which most does please,                             With meditation.  Thus let me live, unseen, unknown;    Thus unlamented let me die; Steal from the world, and not a stone                             Tell where I lie.


^^EOP^^

I As once, if not with light regard I read aright that gifted bard (Him whose school above the rest His loveliest Elfin Queen has blest), One, only one unrivaled fair Might hope the magic girdle wear, At solemn tourney hung on high, The wish of each love-darting eye;  Lo! to each other nymph in turn applied,     As if, in air unseen, some hov'ring hand, Some chaste and angel-friend to virgin-fame,     With whispered spell had burst the starting band, It left unblessed her loathed dishonoured side;     Happier, hopeless fair, if never     Her baffled hand with vain endeavour Had touched that fatal zone to her denied! Young Fancy thus, to me divinest name,     To whom, prepared and bathed in Heav'n,     The cest of amplest power is giv'n,     To few the godlike gift assigns,     To gird their blessed, prophetic loins, And gaze her visions wild, and feel unmixed her flame!  II The band, as fairy legends say, Was wove on that creating day, When He, who called with thought to birth Yon tented sky, this laughing earth, And dressed with springs, and forests tall, And poured the main engirting all, Long by the loved enthusiast wooed, Himself in some diviner mood, Retiring, sate with her alone, And placed her on his sapphire throne; The whiles, the vaulted shrine around, Seraphic wires were heard to sound; Now sublimest triumph swelling, Now on love and mercy dwelling; And she, from out the veiling cloud, Breathed her magic notes aloud: And thou, thou rich-haired youth of morn, And all thy subject life was born! The dang'rous Passions kept aloof, Far from the sainted growing woof; But near it sate ecstatic Wonder, List'ning the deep applauding thunder; And Truth, in sunny vest arrayed, By whose the tarsel's eyes were made; All the shad'wy tribes of Mind, In braided dance their murmurs joined; And all the bright uncounted powers Who feed on Heav'n's ambrosial flowers. Where is the bard, whose soul can now Its high presuming hopes avow? Where he who thinks, with rapture blind, This hallowed work for him designed?  III High on some cliff, to Heav'n up-piled, Of rude access, of prospect wild, Where, tangled round the jealous steep, Strange shades o'erbrow the valleys deep, And holy Genii guard the rock, Its glooms embrown, its springs unlock, While on its rich ambitious head, An Eden, like his own, lies spread: I view that oak the fancied glades among, By which as Milton lay, his evening ear, From many a cloud that dropped ethereal dew, Nigh sphered in Heav'n its native strains could hear: On which that ancient trump he reached was hung;     Thither oft, his glory greeting,     From Waller's myrtle shades retreating, With many a vow from Hope's aspiring tongue, My trembling feet his guiding steps pursue;     In vain— such bliss to one alone     Of all the sons of soul was known,     And Heav'n and Fancy, kindred powers,     Have now o'erturn'd th'inspiring bowers, Or curtained close such scene from every future view. 


^^EOP^^

If aught of oaten stop, or past'ral song,May hope, chaste Eve, to soothe thy modest ear,
  Like thy own solemn springs,
  Thy springs and dying gales,O nymph reserved, while now the bright-haired sunSits in yon western tent, whose cloudy skirts,
  With brede ethereal wove,
  O'erhang his wavy bed;Now air is hushed, save where the weak-ey'd batWith short shrill shriek flits by on leathern wing,
  Or where the beetle winds
  His small but sullen hornAs oft he rises 'midst the twilight pathAgainst the pilgrim, borne in heedless hum:
  Now teach me, maid composed,
  To breathe some softened strain,Whose numbers stealing through thy dark'ning valeMay not unseemly with its stillness suit,
  As musing slow, I hail
  Thy genial loved return.For when thy folding star arising showsHis paly circlet, at his warning lamp
  The fragrant Hours, and elves
  Who slept in flowers the day,And many a nymph who wreathes her brows with sedgeAnd sheds the fresh'ning dew, and lovelier still,
  The pensive pleasures sweet
  Prepare thy shad'wy car.Then lead, calm votress, where some sheety lakeCheers the lone heath, or some time-hallowed pile
  Or upland fallows grey
  Reflect its last cool gleam.But when chill blust'ring winds, or driving rain,Forbid my willing feet, be mine the hut
  That from the mountain's side
  Views wilds, and swelling floods,And hamlets brown, and dim-discovered spires,And hears their simple bell, and marks o'er all
  Thy dewy fingers draw
  The gradual dusky veil.
While Spring shall pour his showers, as oft he wont,And bathe thy breathing tresses, meekest Eve;
  While Summer loves to sport
  Beneath thy ling'ring light;While sallow Autumn fills thy lap with leaves;Or Winter, yelling through the troublous air,
  Affrights thy shrinking train
  And rudely rends thy robes;So long, sure-found beneath the sylvan shed,Shall Fancy, Friendship, Science, rose-lipp'd Health,
  Thy gentlest influence own,
  And hymn thy fav'rite name!


^^EOP^^

And now, my Marian, from its shackles free, My wearied fancy turns for ease to thee; To thee, my compass through life’s varied stream, My constant object, and unfailing theme. Torn from the bosom of my soul’s repose, And self-devoted to surrounding woes, Oft o’er my solitary thoughts I brood— (For passing crowds to me are solitude)— Catch thy loved image, on thy beauties dwell, Improved by graces which no tongue can tell, The look which I have seen, by love endeared, The voice to love attuned, which I have heard. Or rapt in thoughts of higher worth, adore Thy virtues, drawn by mem’ry’s faithful store; Or court, as now obsequious at her shrine, The Muse, unkind on ev’ry theme but thine. Nor foreign deem from such a frame of mind This tale, to meet thy gracious ear designed, To me, and to my state, alike belong The subject, and the moral, of my song,  ’Tis true, no serpent of envenomed breath Hath stung my love, ere yet a bride, to death; And, O! may Heav’n for many years to come, Preserve her life from Nature’s final doom! Yet is she lost to me, in substance dead, With half the traversed globe between us spread; Dreadful transition! in one moment’s cost My soul’s whole wealth I saw, and held, and lost. The Fate and Silence closed life’s blissful scene, Its being past, as it had never been. The sad rememberance only now remains, And by contrasting aggravates my pains. Hope still attendant and delusive stands, And points, but coldly points, to distant lands; Gilds their faint summits with her flatt’ring ray; But deserts, rocks, and seas obstruct the way; And age, and sickness, and the clouds that teem With unknown thunders, through the prospect gleam.  Ah me! no Gods, nor Angels now descend, The sons of men in pity to befriend! My sufferings else might some kind spirit move To give me back on terms the wife I love: And more than half my life would I resign, For health, her purchase, and herself, for mine, Borne by the Pow’rs of Air, or she should rise, Or I rejoin her through the distant skies. No more my thoughts in solitude should mourn My sweet companion from my presence torn; Nor rigid duty force me to remain, And see her sails diminish on the main. To her my destined hours, though few, I’d give, And while I lived, a life of bliss I’d live.  


^^EOP^^

We have memorized America,
how it was born and who we have been and where.
In ceremonies and silence we say the words,
telling the stories, singing the old songs.
We like the places they take us. Mostly we do.
The great and all the anonymous dead are there.
We know the sound of all the sounds we brought.
The rich taste of it is on our tongues.
But where are we going to be, and why, and who?
The disenfranchised dead want to know.
We mean to be the people we meant to be,
to keep on going where we meant to go. 
But how do we fashion the future? Who can say how
except in the minds of those who will call it Now?
The children. The children. And how does our garden grow?
With waving hands—oh, rarely in a row—
and flowering faces. And brambles, that we can no longer allow. 
Who were many people coming together
cannot become one people falling apart.
Who dreamed for every child an even chance
cannot let luck alone turn doorknobs or not.
Whose law was never so much of the hand as the head
cannot let chaos make its way to the heart.
Who have seen learning struggle from teacher to child
cannot let ignorance spread itself like rot.
We know what we have done and what we have said,
and how we have grown, degree by slow degree,
believing ourselves toward all we have tried to become—
just and compassionate, equal, able, and free. 
All this in the hands of children, eyes already set
on a land we never can visit—it isn’t there yet—
but looking through their eyes, we can see
what our long gift to them may come to be.
If we can truly remember, they will not forget.


^^EOP^^

Hold high the woof, dear friends, that we may see The cunning mixture of its colours rare. Nothing in nature purposely is fair,— Her beauties in their freedom disagree; But here all vivid dyes that garish be, To that tint mellowed which the sense will bear, Glow, and not wound the eye that, resting there, Lingers to feed its gentle ecstacy. Crimson and purple and all hues of wine, Saffron and russet, brown and sober green Are rich the shadowy depths of blue between; While silver threads with golden intertwine, To catch the glimmer of a fickle sheen,— All the long labour of some captive queen.   


^^EOP^^

O what a strange parcel of creatures are we, Scarce ever to quarrel, or even agree; We all are alone, though at home altogether, Except to the fire constrained by the weather; Then one says, ‘’Tis cold’, which we all of us know, And with unanimity answer, ‘’Tis so’: With shrugs and with shivers all look at the fire, And shuffle ourselves and our chairs a bit nigher; Then quickly, preceded by silence profound, A yawn epidemical catches around: Like social companions we never fall out, Nor ever care what one another’s about; To comfort each other is never our plan, For to please ourselves, truly, is more than we can.


^^EOP^^




December 1789



When infant Reason first exerts her sway,
And new-formed thoughts their earliest charms display;
Then let the growing race employ your care
Then guard their opening minds from Folly’s snare;
Correct the rising passions of their youth,
Teach them each serious, each important truth;
Plant heavenly virtue in the tender breast,
Destroy each vice that might its growth molest;
Point out betimes the course they should pursue;
Then with redoubled pleasure shall you view
Their reason strengthen as their years increase,
Their virtue ripen and their follies cease;
Like corn sown early in the fertile soil,
The richest harvest shall repay your toil.


^^EOP^^

Alas! and am I born for this,
 To wear this slavish chain?Deprived of all created bliss,
 Through hardship, toil and pain!
How long have I in bondage lain,
 And languished to be free!Alas! and must I still complain—
 Deprived of liberty.
Oh, Heaven! and is there no relief
 This side the silent grave—To soothe the pain—to quell the grief
 And anguish of a slave?
Come Liberty, thou cheerful sound,
 Roll through my ravished ears!Come, let my grief in joys be drowned,
 And drive away my fears.
Say unto foul oppression, Cease:
 Ye tyrants rage no more,And let the joyful trump of peace,
 Now bid the vassal soar.
Soar on the pinions of that dove
 Which long has cooed for thee,And breathed her notes from Afric’s grove,
 The sound of Liberty.
Oh, Liberty! thou golden prize,
 So often sought by blood—We crave thy sacred sun to rise,
 The gift of nature’s God!
Bid Slavery hide her haggard face,
 And barbarism fly:I scorn to see the sad disgrace
 In which enslaved I lie.
Dear Liberty! upon thy breast,
 I languish to respire; And like the Swan unto her nest,
 I’d like to thy smiles retire.
Oh, blest asylum—heavenly balm!
 Unto thy boughs I flee—And in thy shades the storm shall calm,
 With songs of Liberty!



^^EOP^^

Along the grave green downs, this idle afternoon,
Shadows of loitering silver clouds, becalmed in blue,
Bring, like unfoldment of a flower, the best of June. 
Shadows outspread in spacious movement, always you
Have dappled the downs and valleys at this time of year,
While larks, ascending shrill, praised freedom as they flew.
Now, through that song, a fighter-squadron’s drone I hear
From Scratchbury Camp, whose turfed and cowslip’d rampart seems
More hill than history, ageless and oblivion-blurred. 
I walk the fosse, once manned by bronze and flint-head spear;
On war’s imperious wing the shafted sun-ray gleams:
One with the warm sweet air of summer stoops the bird. 
Cloud shadows, drifting slow like heedless daylight dreams,
Dwell and dissolve; uncircumstanced they pause and pass.
I watch them go. My horse, contented, crops the grass.


^^EOP^^

My spirit is too weak—mortality
   Weighs heavily on me like unwilling sleep,
   And each imagined pinnacle and steep
Of godlike hardship tells me I must die
Like a sick eagle looking at the sky.
   Yet ’tis a gentle luxury to weep
   That I have not the cloudy winds to keep
Fresh for the opening of the morning’s eye.
Such dim-conceived glories of the brain
   Bring round the heart an undescribable feud;
So do these wonders a most dizzy pain,
   That mingles Grecian grandeur with the rude
Wasting of old time—with a billowy main—
   A sun—a shadow of a magnitude.
 


^^EOP^^

Esteville begins to burn;
   The auburn fields of harvest rise;
The torrid flames again return,
   And thunders roll along the skies. 
Perspiring Cancer lifts his head,
   And roars terrific from on high;
Whose voice the timid creatures dread;
   From which they strive with awe to fly. 
The night-hawk ventures from his cell,
   And starts his note in evening air;
He feels the heat his bosom swell,
   Which drives away the gloom of fear. 
Thou noisy insect, start thy drum;
   Rise lamp-like bugs to light the train;
And bid sweet Philomela come,
   And sound in front the nightly strain. 
The bee begins her ceaseless hum,
   And doth with sweet exertions rise;
And with delight she stores her comb,
   And well her rising stock supplies. 
Let sportive children well beware,
   While sprightly frisking o’er the green;
And carefully avoid the snare,
   Which lurks beneath the smiling scene. 
The mistress bird assumes her nest,
   And broods in silence on the tree,
Her note to cease, her wings at rest,
   She patient waits her young to see.
 


^^EOP^^

There are who separate the eternal light In forms of man and woman, day and night; They cannot bear that God be essence quite.  Existence is as deep a verity: Without the dual, where is unity? And the ‘I am’ cannot forbear to be;  But from its primal nature forced to frame Mysteries, destinies of various name, Is forced to give what it has taught to claim.  Thus love must answer to its own unrest; The bad commands us to expect the best, And hope of its own prospects is the test.  And dost thou seek to find the one in two? Only upon the old can build the new; The symbol which you seek is found in you.  The heart and mind, the wisdom and the will, The man and woman, must be severed still, And Christ must reconcile the good and ill.  There are to whom each symbol is a mask; The life of love is a mysterious task; They want no answer, for they would not ask.  A single thought transfuses every form; The sunny day is changed into the storm, For light is dark, hard soft, and cold is warm.  One presence fills and floods the whole serene; Nothing can be, nothing has ever been, Except the one truth that creates the scene.  Does the heart beat, — that is a seeming only; You cannot be alone, though you are lonely; The All is neutralized in the One only.  You ask a faith, — they are content with faith; You ask to have, — but they reply, ‘IT hath.’ There is no end, and there need be no path.  The day wears heavily, — why, then, ignore it; Peace is the soul’s desire, — such thoughts restore it; The truth thou art, — it needs not to implore it.  The Presence all thy fancies supersedes, All that is done which thou wouldst seek in deeds, The wealth obliterates all seeming needs.  Both these are true, and if they are at strife, The mystery bears the one name of Life, That, slowly spelled, will yet compose the strife.  The men of old say, ‘Live twelve thousand years, And see the need of all that here appears, And Moxen* shall absorb thy smiles and tears.’  These later men say, ‘Live this little day. Believe that human nature is the way, And know both Son and Father while you pray;  And one in two, in three, and none alone, Letting you know even as you are known, Shall make the you and me eternal parts of one.’  To me, our destinies seem flower and fruit Born of an ever-generating root; The other statement I cannot dispute.  But say that Love and Life eternal seem, And if eternal ties be but a dream, What is the meaning of that self-same seem?  Your nature craves Eternity for Truth; Eternity of Love is prayer of youth; How, without love, would have gone forth your truth?  I do not think we are deceived to grow, But that the crudest fancy, slightest show, Covers some separate truth that we may know.  In the one Truth, each separate fact is true; Eternally in one I many view, And destinies through destiny pursue.  This is my tendency; but can I say That this my thought leads the true, only way? I only know it constant leads, and I obey.  I only know one prayer — ‘Give me the truth, Give me that colored whiteness, ancient youth, Complex and simple, seen in joy and truth.  Let me not by vain wishes bar my claim, Nor soothe my hunger by an empty name,  Nor crucify the Son of man by hasty blame.  But in the earth and fire, water and air, Live earnestly by turns without despair, Nor seek a home till home be every where!’


^^EOP^^

I do not know if, climbing some steep hill,  Through fragrant wooded pass, this glimpse I bought, Or whether in some mid-day I was caught To upper air, where visions of God’s will In pictures to our quickened sense fulfil His word. But this I saw.                                     A path I sought Through wall of rock. No human fingers wrought The golden gates which opened sudden, still, And wide. My fear was hushed by my delight. Surpassing fair the lands; my path lay plain; Alas, so spell-bound, feasting on the sight, I paused, that I but reached the threshold bright, When, swinging swift, the golden gates again Were rocky wall, by which I wept in vain.  


^^EOP^^

Gone to seed, ailanthus, the poverty
   tree. Take a phrase, then
fracture it, the pods’ gaudy nectarine shades
      ripening to parrots taking flight, all crest
and tail feathers.
                           A musical idea.
                                                 Macaws
   scarlet and violet,
                               tangerine as a song
the hue of sunset where my street becomes water 
and down shore this phantom city skyline’s
   mere hazy silhouette. The alto’s
liquid geometry weaves a way of thinking,
      a way of breaking
synchronistic
                     through time
                                        so the girl
   on the comer
                      has the bones of my face,
the old photos, beneath the Kansas City hat, 
black fedora lifting hair off my neck
   cooling the sweat of a night-long tidal
pull from bar to bar the night we went
       to find Bird’s grave. Eric’s chartreuse
perfume. That
                   poured-on dress
                                          I lived days 
and nights inside,
                           made love
and slept in, a mesh and slur of zipper 
down the back. Women smoked the boulevards
   with gardenias after-hours, asphalt shower-
slick, ozone charging air with sixteenth
      notes, that endless convertible ride to find
the grave
               whose sleep and melody   
                                                 wept neglect
enough to torch us
                            for a while
through snare-sweep of broom on pavement, 
the rumpled musk of lover’s sheets, charred
   cornices topping crosstown gutted buildings.   
Torches us still—cat screech, matte blue steel
      of pistol stroked across the victim’s cheek
where fleet shoes
                           jazz this dark
                                                 and peeling
block, that one.
                        Vine Street, Olive.
We had the music, but not the pyrotechnics— 
rhinestone straps lashing my shoes, heels sinking
   through earth and Eric in casual drag,
mocha cheekbones rouged, that flawless
      plummy mouth. A style for moving,
heel tap and
                  lighter flick,
                                       lion moan
of buses pulling away
                               through the static
brilliant fizz of taffeta on nyloned thighs. 
Light mist, etherous, rinsed our faces
   and what happens when
you touch a finger to the cold stone
      that jazz and death played
down to?
            Phrases.
                        Take it all
   and break forever—
                              a man
with gleaming sax, an open sill in summertime, 
and the fire-escape’s iron zigzag tumbles
   crazy notes to a girl cooling her knees,
wearing one of those dresses no one wears
      anymore, darts and spaghetti straps, glitzy
fabrics foaming
                        an iron bedstead.
                                                 The horn’s
alarm, then fluid brass chromatics.
                                                    Extravagant
ailanthus, the courtyard’s poverty tree is spike
and wing, slate-blue
                               mourning dove,
                                                      sudden cardinal flame.  If you don’t live it, it won’t come out your horn.


^^EOP^^




On the death of my sister Cecilia—the last of five members of the family, who died successively.



Our family tree is in the sear
 And yellow leaf of life;Branch after branch, year after year,
 Yields to death’s pruning knife.First, youngest born, as if ’twere meet,
 The sacrifice should be,“The last of earth,” the first to meet
 Th’ unknown eternity.’Twas God who gave, ’twas He who took,
 His voice let us obey,So that in his eternal book,
 Our names shine bright as day.


^^EOP^^

I am the mother of sorrows,    I am the ender of grief; I am the bud and the blossom,    I am the late-falling leaf.  I am thy priest and thy poet,    I am thy serf and thy king; I cure the tears of the heartsick,    When I come near they shall sing.  White are my hands as the snowdrop;    Swart are my fingers as clay; Dark is my frown as the midnight,    Fair is my brow as the day.  Battle and war are my minions,    Doing my will as divine; I am the calmer of passions,    Peace is a nursling of mine.  Speak to me gently or curse me,    Seek me or fly from my sight; I am thy fool in the morning,    Thou art my slave in the night.  Down to the grave will I take thee,    Out from the noise of the strife; Then shalt thou see me and know me—    Death, then, no longer, but life.  Then shalt thou sing at my coming,    Kiss me with passionate breath, Clasp me and smile to have thought me    Aught save the foeman of Death.  Come to me, brother, when weary,    Come when thy lonely heart swells; I’ll guide thy footsteps and lead thee    Down where the Dream Woman dwells.


^^EOP^^

Ye tender young virgins attend to my lay,
 My heart is divided in twain;My Collin is beautiful, witty, and gay,
 And Damon’s a kind-hearted swain.
Whenever my lovely young Collin I meet,
 What pleasures arise in my breast;The dear gentle swain looks so charming and sweet,
 I fancy I love him the best.
But when my dear Damon does to me complain,
 So tender, so loving and kind,My bosom is softened to hear the fond swain,
 And Collin slips out of my mind.
Whenever my Damon repeats his soft tale,
 My heart overflows with delight;But when my dear Collin appears in the vale,
 I languish away at the sight.
’Tis Collin alone shall possess my fond heart, 
 Now Damon for ever adieu;But can I? — I cannot from Damon thus part!
 He’s loved me so long, and so true.
My heart to my Damon I’ll instantly bind,
 And on him will fix all my care;But, O should I be to my Collin unkind,
 He surely will die with despair.
How happy, how happy with Damon I’d been,
 If Collin I never had knew;As happy with Collin, if I’d never seen
 My Damon, so tender and true.


^^EOP^^

Octopus floatingin earth’s ink-ore core whose arms extend up here as treesmay your branches squirt their black across my pages please


^^EOP^^

The tea-kettle bubbled, the tea things were set, The candles were lighted, the ladies were met; The how d’ye’s were over, and entering bustle, The company seated, and silks ceased to rustle: The great Mrs. Consequence opened her fan, And thus the discourse in an instant began (All affected reserve and formality scorning): “I suppose you all saw in the paper this morning A volume of Poems advertised—’tis said They’re produced by the pen of a poor servant-maid.” “A servant write verses!” says Madam Du Bloom: “Pray what is the subject—a Mop, or a Broom?” “He, he, he,” says Miss Flounce: “I suppose we shall see An ode on a Dishclout—what else can it be?” Says Miss Coquettilla, “Why, ladies, so tart? Perhaps Tom the footman has fired her heart; And she’ll tell us how charming he looks in new clothes, And how nimble his hand moves in brushing the shoes; Or how, the last time that he went to May Fair, He bought her some sweethearts of gingerbread ware.” “For my part I think,” says old Lady Marr-joy, “A servant might find herself other employ: Was she mine I’d employ her as long as ’twas light, And send her to bed without candle at night.” “Why so?” says Miss Rhymer, displeased: “I protest ’Tis pity a genius should be so depressed!” “What ideas can such low-bred creatures conceive?” Says Mrs. Noworthy, and laughed in her sleeve. Says old Miss Prudella, “If servants can tell How to write to their mothers, to say they are well, And read of a Sunday The Duty of Man, Which is more I believe than one half of them can; I think ’tis much properer they should rest there, Than be reaching at things so much out of their sphere.” Says old Mrs. Candour, “I’ve now got a maid That’s the plague of my life—a young gossiping jade; There’s no end of the people that after her come, And whenever I’m out, she is never at home; I’d rather ten times she would sit down and write, Than gossip all over the town every night.” “Some whimsical trollop most like,” says Miss Prim, “Has been scribbling of nonsense, just out of a whim, And, conscious it neither is witty nor pretty, Conceals her true name, and ascribes it to Betty.” “I once had a servant myself,” says Miss Pines, “That wrote on a wedding some very good lines.” Says Mrs. Domestic, “And when they were done, I can’t see for my part what use they were on; Had she wrote a receipt, to’ve instructed you how To warm a cold breast of veal, like a ragout, Or to make cowslip wine, that would pass for Champagne, It might have been useful, again and again.” On the sofa was old Lady Pedigree placed; She owned that for poetry she had no taste, That the study of heraldry was more in fashion, And boasted she knew all the crests in the nation. Says Mrs. Routella, “Tom, take out the urn, And stir up the fire, you see it don’t burn.”    The tea-things removed, and the tea-table gone, The card-tables brought, and the cards laid thereon, The ladies, ambitious for each other’s crown, Like courtiers contending for honours, sat down.


^^EOP^^

Along Ancona’s hills the shimmering heat,A tropic tide of air with ebb and flowBathes all the fields of wheat until they glowLike flashing seas of green, which toss and beatAround the vines. The poppies lithe and fleetSeem running, fiery torchmen, to and froTo mark the shore.
                   The farmer does not knowThat they are there. He walks with heavy feet,Counting the bread and wine by autumn’s gain,But I,—I smile to think that days remainPerhaps to me in which, though bread be sweetNo more, and red wine warm my blood in vain,I shall be glad remembering how the fleet,Lithe poppies ran like torchmen with the wheat.



^^EOP^^

High on a bright and sunny bed
 A scarlet poppy grewAnd up it held its staring head,
 And thrust it full in view.
Yet no attention did it win,
 By all these efforts made,And less unwelcome had it been
 In some retired shade.
Although within its scarlet breast
 No sweet perfume was found,It seemed to think itself the best
 Of all the flowers round,
From this I may a hint obtain
 And take great care indeed,Lest I appear as pert and vain
 As does this gaudy weed.


^^EOP^^

I saw an old cottage of clay,
 And only of mud was the floor;It was all falling into decay,
 And the snow drifted in at the door.
Yet there a poor family dwelt,
 In a hovel so dismal and rude;And though gnawing hunger they felt,
 They had not a morsel of food.
The children were crying for bread,
 And to their poor mother they’d run;‘Oh, give us some breakfast,’ they said,
 Alas! their poor mother had none.
She viewed them with looks of despair,
 She said (and I’m sure it was true),‘’Tis not for myself that I care,
 But, my poor little children, for you.’
O then, let the wealthy and gay
 But see such a hovel as this,That in a poor cottage of clay
 They may know what true misery is.And what I may have to bestow
 I never will squander away,While many poor people I know
 Around me are wretched as they.


^^EOP^^

Rain, midnight rain, nothing but the wild rain On this bleak hut, and solitude, and me Remembering again that I shall die And neither hear the rain nor give it thanks For washing me cleaner than I have been Since I was born into solitude. Blessed are the dead that the rain rains upon: But here I pray that none whom once I loved Is dying tonight or lying still awake Solitary, listening to the rain, Either in pain or thus in sympathy Helpless among the living and the dead, Like a cold water among broken reeds, Myriads of broken reeds all still and stiff, Like me who have no love which this wild rain Has not dissolved except the love of death, If love it be towards what is perfect and Cannot, the tempest tells me, disappoint.  


^^EOP^^

Soft falls the shower, the thunders cease!And see the messenger of peace
   Illumes the eastern skies;Blest sign of firm unchanging love!While others seek the cause to prove,
   That bids thy beauties rise.
My soul, content with humbler views,Well pleased admires thy varied hues,
   And can with joy beholdThy beauteous form, and wondering gazeEnraptured on thy mingled rays
   Of purple, green, and gold.
Enough for me to deem divineThe hand that paints each glowing line;
   To think that thou art givenA transient gleam of that bright placeWhere Beauty owns celestial grace,
   A faint display of Heaven!


^^EOP^^

Cold blew the freezing northern blast,
   And winter sternly frowned;The flaky snow fell thick and fast,
   And clad the fields around.
Forced by the storm’s relentless power,
   Emboldened by despair,A shivering redbreast sought my door,
   Some friendly warmth to share.
‘Welcome, sweet bird!’ I fondly cried,
   ‘No danger need’st thou fear,Secure with me thou may’st abide,
   Till warmer suns appear.
‘And when mild spring comes smiling on,
   And bids the fields look gay,Thou, with thy sweet, thy grateful song,
   My kindness shalt repay.’
Mistaken thought! — But how shall I 
   The mournful truth display?An envious cat, with jealous eye,
   Had marked him as her prey.
Remorseless wretch! — her cruel jaws
   Soon sealed her victim’s doom,While I in silence mourn his loss,
   And weep o’er robin’s tomb.
So, oft in life’s uneven way,
   Some stroke may intervene;Sweep all our fancied joys away,
   And change the flattering scene.


^^EOP^^

Beside a spreading elm, from whose high boughs Like knotted tufts the crow’s light dwelling shows, Where screened from northern blasts, and winter-proof, Snug stands the parson’s barn with thatched roof; At chaff-strewed door where, in the morning ray, The gilded motes in mazy circles play, And sleepy Comrade in the sun is laid, More grateful to the cur than neighbouring shade. In snowy shirt unbraced, brown Robin stood, And leant upon his flail in thoughtful mood: His full round cheek where deeper flushes glow, The dewy drops which glisten on his brow; His dark cropped pate that erst at church or fair, So smooth and silky, showed his morning’s care, Which, all uncouth in matted locks combined, Now, ends erect, defies the ruffling wind; His neck-band loose, and hosen rumpled low, A careful lad, nor slack at labour, show. Nor scraping chickens chirping ’mongst the straw, Nor croaking rook o’erhead, nor chattering daw; Loud-breathing cow amongst the rampy weeds, Nor grunting sow that in the furrows feeds: Nor sudden breeze that shakes the quaking leaves, And lightly rustles through the scattered sheaves; Nor floating straw that skims athwart his nose, The deeply-musing youth may discompose. For Nelly fair, the blithest village maid, Whose tuneful voice beneath the hedgerow-shade, At early milking, o’er the meadows borne, E’er cheered the ploughman’s toil at rising morn: The neatest maid that e’er, in linen gown, Bore cream and butter to the market town: The tightest lass, that with untutored air, E’er footed alehouse floor at wake or fair, Since Easter last had Robin’s heart possessed, And many a time disturbed his nightly rest. Full oft, returning from the loosened plough, He slacked his pace, and knit his thoughtful brow; And oft, ere half his thresher’s talk was o’er, Would muse, with arms across, at cooling door: His mind thus bent, with downcast eyes he stood, And leant upon his flail in thoughtful mood. His soul o’er many a soft rememberance ran, And, muttering to himself, the youth began.     ‘Ah! happy is the man whose early lot Hath made him master of a furnished cot; Who trains the vine that round his window grows, And after setting sun his garden hoes; Whose wattled pales his own enclosure shield, Who toils not daily in another’s field. Wheree’er he goes, to church or market-town, With more respect he and his dog are known; A brisker face he wears at wake or fair, Nor views with longing eyes the pedlar’s ware, But buys at will or ribbands, gloves or beads, And willing maidens to the alehouse leads; And, oh! secure from toils which cumber life, He makes the maid he loves an easy wife. Ah, Nelly! canst thou, with contented mind, Become the helpmate of a labouring hind, And share his lot, whate’er the chances be, Who hath no dower but love to fix on thee? Yes, gayest maid may meekest matron prove, And things of little note may ’token love. When from the church thou cam’st at eventide And I and red-haired Susan by thy side, I pulled the blossoms from the bending tree, And some to Susan gave, and some to thee; Thine were the best, and well thy smiling eye The difference marked, and guessed the reason why. When on a holiday we rambling strayed, And passed old Hodge’s cottage in the glade; Neat was the garden dressed, sweet hummed the bee, I wished both cot and Nelly made for me; And well methought thy very eyes revealed The self-same wish within thy breast concealed. When artful, once, I sought my love to tell, And spoke to thee of one who loved thee well, You saw the cheat, and jeering homeward hied, Yet secret pleasure in thy looks I spied. Ay, gayest maid may meekest matron prove, And smaller signs than these have ’tokened love.’     Now, at a distance, on the neighbouring plain, With creaking wheels slow comes the heavy wain: High on its towering load a maid appears, And Nelly’s voice sounds shrill in Robin’s ears. Quick from his hand he throws the cumbrous flail, And leaps with lightsome limbs the enclosing pale. O’er field and fence he scours, and furrows wide, With wakened Comrade barking by his side; Whilst tracks of trodden grain, and sidelong hay, And broken hedge-flowers sweet, mark his impetuous way. 


^^EOP^^

Yes, injured Woman! rise, assert thy right!
Woman! too long degraded, scorned, opprest;
O born to rule in partial Law's despite,
Resume thy native empire o'er the breast! 
Go forth arrayed in panoply divine;
That angel pureness which admits no stain;
Go, bid proud Man his boasted rule resign,
And kiss the golden sceptre of thy reign. 
Go, gird thyself with grace; collect thy store
Of bright artillery glancing from afar;
Soft melting tones thy thundering cannon's roar,
Blushes and fears thy magazine of war. 
Thy rights are empire: urge no meaner claim,—
Felt, not defined, and if debated, lost;
Like sacred mysteries, which withheld from fame,
Shunning discussion, are revered the most. 
Try all that wit and art suggest to bend
Of thy imperial foe the stubborn knee;
Make treacherous Man thy subject, not thy friend;
Thou mayst command, but never canst be free. 
Awe the licentious, and restrain the rude;
Soften the sullen, clear the cloudy brow:
Be, more than princes' gifts, thy favours sued;—
She hazards all, who will the least allow. 
But hope not, courted idol of mankind,
On this proud eminence secure to stay;
Subduing and subdued, thou soon shalt find
Thy coldness soften, and thy pride give way. 
Then, then, abandon each ambitious thought,
Conquest or rule thy heart shall feebly move,
In Nature's school, by her soft maxims taught,
That separate rights are lost in mutual love.


^^EOP^^

When Britain first, at heaven's command,     Arose from out the azure main, This was the charter of the land,     And guardian angels sung this strain—        "Rule, Britannia, rule the waves;        Britons never will be slaves."  The nations, not so blest as thee,     Must in their turns to tyrants fall; While thou shalt flourish great and free,     The dread and envy of them all.        "Rule, Britannia, rule the waves;        Britons never will be slaves."  Still more majestic shalt thou rise,     More dreadful from each foreign stroke; As the loud blast that tears the skies     Serves but to root thy native oak.        "Rule, Britannia, rule the waves;        Britons never will be slaves."  Thee haughty tyrants ne'er shall tame;     All their attempts to bend thee down, Will but arouse thy generous flame,     But work their woe and thy renown.        "Rule, Britannia, rule the waves;        Britons never will be slaves."  To thee belongs the rural reign;     Thy cities shall with commerce shine; All thine shall be the subject main,     And every shore it circles thine.        "Rule, Britannia, rule the waves;        Britons never will be slaves."  The Muses, still with freedom found,     Shall to thy happy coast repair: Blest isle! with matchless beauty crowned,     And manly hearts to guard the fair.        "Rule, Britannia, rule the waves;        Britons never will be slaves." 


^^EOP^^

Ease is the pray’r of him who, in a whaleboatCrossing Lake Champlain, by a storm’s o’ertaken:Not struck his blanket, not a friendly island
 Near to receive him.
Ease is the wish too of the sly Canadian;Ease the delight of bloody Caghnawagas;Ease, Richard, ease, not to be bought with wampum,
 Nor paper money.
Nor colonel’s pay, nor yet a dapper sergeant,Orderly waiting with recovered halberd,Can chase the crowd of troubles still surrounding
 Laced regimentals.
That sub lives best who, with a sash in tattersWorn by his grandsire at the fight of Blenheim,To fear a stranger, and to wild ambition,
 Snores on a bearskin.
Why like fine-fellows are we ever scheming,We short-lived mortals? Why so fond of climatesWarmed by new suns? O who, that runs from home, can
 Run from himself too?
Care climbs radeaux with four-and-twenty pounders,Not quits our light troops, or our Indian warriors,Swifter than moose-deer, or the fleeter east wind,
 Pushing the clouds on.
He, whose good humor can enjoy the present,Scorns to look forward; with a smile of patienceTemp’ring the bitter. Bliss uninterrupted
 None can inherit.
Death instantaneous hurried off Achilles;Age far-extended wore away Tithonus.Who will live longer, thou or I, Montgom’ry?
 Dicky or Tommy?
Thee twenty messmates, full of noise and laughter,Cheer with their sallies; thee the merry damselsPlease with their titt’ring; whilst thou sitt’st adorned with 
 Boots, sash and gorget.
Me to Fort Hendrick, midst a savage nation,Dull Connajohry, cruel fate has driven.O think on Morris, in a lonely chamber,
 Dabbling in Sapphic.



^^EOP^^






^^EOP^^

Do this: take two fingers, place them on
the spot behind your ear, either 
ear, the spot where your skull drops off 
into that valley of muscle
& nerve—that is the muscle that holds up 
the skull, that turns the dumb bone
this way & that, that nods your face up & 
down when you think you
get it—press deeper, touch the little bundle of 
nerves buried there, buried in
the gristle—the nerves that make you blink 
when the light bewilders you, that make your tongue
slide in & out when you think you’re in 
love, when you think you need a drink, touch
that spot as if you have an itch, close your eyes & 
listen, please, close
your eyes—can you hear it? We think our souls live 
in boxes, we think someone sits behind our eyes,
lording in his little throne, steering the fork to 
the mouth, the mouth to the tit, we think
hungry children live in our bellies & run out with their 
empty bowls as the food rains
down, we sometimes think we are those 
hungry children, we think
we can think anything & it won’t 
matter, we think we can think cut out her tongue,
& then ask her to sing.


^^EOP^^

Here is the ancient floor,Footworn and hollowed and thin,Here was the former doorWhere the dead feet walked in.
She sat here in her chair,Smiling into the fire;He who played stood there,Bowing it higher and higher.
Childlike, I danced in a dream;Blessings emblazoned that day;Everything glowed with a gleam;Yet we were looking away!



^^EOP^^

I’ve sent my empty pot again
 To beg another slip;The last you gave, I’m grieved to tell
 December’s frost did nip.
I love fair Flora and her train
 But nurse her children ill;I tend too little, or too much;
 They die from want of skill.
I blush to trouble you again,
 Who’ve served me oft before;But, should this die, I’ll break the pot,
 And trouble you no more.


^^EOP^^

There is a silence where hath been no sound,    There is a silence where no sound may be,    In the cold grave—under the deep deep sea, Or in the wide desert where no life is found, Which hath been mute, and still must sleep profound;    No voice is hush’d—no life treads silently,    But clouds and cloudy shadows wander free, That never spoke, over the idle ground: But in green ruins, in the desolate walls    Of antique palaces, where Man hath been, Though the dun fox, or wild hyena, calls,    And owls, that flit continually between, Shriek to the echo, and the low winds moan, There the true Silence is, self-conscious and alone.  


^^EOP^^




to Pete Foss,God give him good berth!



Shipped deckhand June of ’fifty-one aboard the freighter Willis Kerrigan,

^^EOP^^

If Heaven has into being deigned to callThy light, O Liberty! to shine on all;Bright intellectual Sun! why does thy rayTo earth distribute only partial day?Since no resisting cause from spirit flowsThy universal presence to oppose;No obstacles by Nature’s hand impressed,Thy subtle and ethereal beams arrest;Not swayed by matter is they course benign,Or more direct or more oblique to shine;Nor motion’s laws can speed thy active course;Nor strong repulsion’s powers obstruct thy force:Since there is no convexity in mind,Why are thy genial rays to parts confined?While the chill North with thy bright beam is blest,Why should fell darkness half the South invest?Was it decreed, fair Freedom! at thy birth,That thou should’st ne’er irradiate all the earth?While Britain basks in thy full blaze of light,Why lies sad Afric quenched in total night?
 Thee only, sober Goddess! I attest,In smiles chastised, and decent graces dressed;To thee alone, pure daughter of the skies,The hallowed incense of the Bard should rise:Not that mad Liberty, in whose wild praiseToo oft he trims his prostituted bays;Not that unlicensed monster of the crowd,Whose roar terrific bursts in peals so loud,Deafening the ear of Peace; fierce Faction’s tool,Of rash Sedition born, and mad Misrule;Whose stubborn mouth, rejecting Reason’s rein,No strength can govern, and no skill restrain;Whose magic cries the frantic vulgar drawTo spurn at Order, and to outrage Law;To tread on grave Authority and Power,And shake the work of ages in an hour:Convulsed her voice, and pestilent her breath,She raves of mercy, while she deals out death:Each blast is fate; she darts from either handRed conflagration o’er the astonished land;Clamouring for peace, she rends the air with noise,And, to reform a part, the whole destroys.Reviles oppression only to oppress,And, in the act of murder, breathes redress.Such have we seen on Freedom’s genuine coast,Bellowing for blessings which were never lost.‘Tis past, and Reason rules the lucid hour,And beauteous Order reassumes his power:Lord of the bright ascendant may he reign,Till perfect Peace eternal sway maintain!
 O, plaintive Southerne! whose impassioned page Can melt the soul to grief, or rouse to rage;Now, when congenial themes engage the Muse,She burns to emulate thy generous views;Her failing efforts mock her fond desires,She shares thy feelings, not partakes thy fires.Strange power of song! the strain that warms the heartSeems the same inspiration to impart;Touched by the extrinsic energy alone,We think the flame which melts us is our own;Deceived, for genius we mistake delight,Charmed as we read, we fancy we can write.
 Though not to me, sweet Bard, thy powers belong,The cause I plead shall sanctify my song.The Muse awakes no artificial fire,For Truth rejects what Fancy would inspire:Here Art would weave her gayest flowers in vain,The bright invention Nature would disdain.For no fictitious ills these numbers flow,But living anguish, and substantial woe;No individual griefs my bosom melt,For millions feel what Oroonoko felt:Fired by no single wrongs, the countless hostI mourn, by rapine dragg’d from Afric’s coast.Perish the illiberal thought which would debaseThe native genius of the sable race!Perish the proud philosophy, which soughtTo rob them of the powers of equal thought!What! does the immortal principle withinChange with the casual colour of a skin?Does matter govern spirit? or is mindDegraded by the form to which it’s joined?
 No: they have heads to think, and hearts to feel,And souls to act, with firm, though erring zeal;For they have keen affections, soft desires,Love strong as death, and active patriot fires:All the rude energy, the fervid flameOf high-souled passion, and ingenuous shame:Strong, but luxuriant virtues, boldly shootFrom the wild vigour of a savage root.
 Nor weak their sense of honour’s proud control,For pride is virtue in a Pagan soul;A sense of worth, a conscience of desert,A high, unbroken haughtiness of heart; That selfsame stuff which erst proud empires swayed,Of which the conquerors of the world were made.Capricious fate of men! that very prideIn Afric scourged, in Rome was deified.
 No Muse, O Qua-shi! shall thy deeds relate,No statue snatch thee from oblivious fate!For thou wast born where never gentle MuseOn Valour’s grave the flowers of Genius strews;And thou wast born where no recording pagePlucks the fair deed from Time’s devouring rage.Had fortune placed you on some happier coast,Where polished Pagans souls heroic boast,To thee, who sought’st a voluntary grave,The uninjured honours of thy name to save,Whose generous arm thy barbarous Master spared,Altars had smoked, and temples had been reared.
 Whene’er to Afric’s shores I turn my eyes,Horrors of deepest, deadliest guilt arise;I see, by more than Fancy’s mirror shown,The burning village, and the blazing town:See the dire victim torn from social life,See the sacred infant, hear the shrieking wife!She, wretch forlorn! is dragged by hostile hands,To distant tyrants sold, in distant lands:Transmitted miseries, and successive chains,The sole sad heritage her child obtains.E’en this last wretched boon their foes deny,To weep together, or together die.By felon hands, by one relentless stroke,See the fond links of Nature broke!The fibres twisting round a parent’s heart,Torn from their grasp, and bleeding as they part.                 
 Hold, murderers! hold! nor aggravate distress;Respect the passions you yourself possess:Ev’n you, of ruffian heart, and ruthless hand,Love your own offspring, love your native land;Ev’n you, with fond impatient feelings burn,Though free as air, though certain of return.Then, if to you, who voluntary roam,So dear the memory of your distant home,O think how absence the loved scene endearsTo him, whose food is groan, whose drink is tears;Think on the wretch whose aggravated painsTo exile misery adds, to misery chains.If warm your heart, to British feelings true,As dear his land to him as yours to you;And Liberty, in you a hallowed flame,Burns, unextinguished, in his breast the same.Then leave him holy Freedom’s cheering smile,The heaven-taught fondness for the parent soil;Revere affections mingled with our frame,In every nature, every clime the same;In all, these feelings equal sway maintain;In all, the love of home and freedom reign:And Tempe’s vale, and parched Angola’s sand,One equal fondness of their sons command.The unconquered savage laughs at pain and toil,Basking in Freedom’s beams which gild his native soil.
 Does thirst of empire, does desire of fame,               (For these are specious crimes) our rage inflame?No: sordid lust of gold their fate controls,The basest appetite of basest souls;Gold, better gained by what their ripening sky,Their fertile fields, their arts, and mines supply.             
 What wrongs, what injuries does Oppression pleadTo smooth the crime and sanctify the deed?What strange offence, what aggravated sin?They stand convicted — of a darker skin!Barbarians, hold! the opprobrious commerce spare,             Respect His sacred image which they bear.Though dark and savage, ignorant and blind,They claim the common privilege of kind;Let Malice strip them of each other plea,They still are men, and men should still be free.           Insulted Reason loathes the inverted trade —Loathes, as she views the human purchase made;The outraged Goddess, with abhorrent eyes,Sees Man the traffic, souls the merchandise!Man, whom fair Commerce taught with judging eye,And liberal hand, to barter or to buy,Indignant Nature blushes to behold,Degraded man himself, trucked, bartered, sold;Of every native privilege bereft,Yet cursed with every wounded feeling left.Hard lot! each brutal suffering to sustain,Yet keep the sense acute of human pain.Plead not, in reason’s palpable abuse,Their sense of feeling callous and obtuse,From heads to hearts lies Nature’s plain appeal,Though few can reason, all mankind can feel.Though wit may boast a livelier dread of shame,A loftier sense of wrong, refinement claim;Though polished manners may fresh wants invent,And nice distinctions nicer souls torment;Though these on finer spirits heavier fall,Yet natural evils are the same to all.Though wounds there are which reason’s force may heal,There needs no logic sure to make us feel.The nerve, howe’er untutored, can sustainA sharp, unutterable sense of pain;As exquisitely fashioned in a slave,As where unequal fate a sceptre gave.Sense is as keen where Gambia’s waters glide,As where proud Tiber rolls his classic tide.Though verse or rhetoric point the feeling line,They do not whet sensation, but define.Did ever wretch less feel the galling chain,When Zeno proved there was no ill in pain?In vain the sage to smooth its horror tries;Spartans and Helots see with different eyes;Their miseries philosophic quirks deride,Slaves groan in pangs disowned by Stoic pride.
 When the fierce Sun darts vertical his beams,And thirst and hunger mix their wild extremes;When the sharp iron wounds his inmost soul,And his strained eyes in burning anguish roll;Will the parched Negro own, ere he expire,No pain in hunger, and no heat in fire?
 For him, when agony his frame destroys,What hope of present fame or future joys?For that have heroes shortened Nature’s date;For this have martyrs gladly met their fate;              But him, forlorn, no hero’s pride sustains,No martyr’s blissful visions soothe his pains;Sullen, he mingles with his kindred dust,For he has learned to dread the Christian’s trust;To him what mercy can that God display,Whose servants murder, and whose sons betray?Savage! thy venial error I deplore,They are not Christians who infest thy shore.
 O thou sad spirit, whose preposterous yokeThe great deliver Death, at length, has broke!Released from misery, and escaped from care,Go, meet that mercy man denied thee here.In thy dark home, sure refuge of the oppressed,The wicked vex not, and the weary rest.And, if some notions, vague and undefined,Of future terrors have assailed thy mind;If such thy masters have presumed to teach,As terrors only they are prone to preach;(For should they paint eternal Mercy’s reign,Where were the oppressor’s rod, the captive’s chain?)               If then, thy troubled soul has learned to dreadThe dark unknown thy trembling footsteps tread;On Him, who made thee what thou art, depend;He, who withholds the means, accepts the end.Thy mental night they Saviour will not blame,He died for those who never heard his name.Not thine the reckoning dire of Light abused,Knowledge disgraced, and Liberty misused;On thee no awful judge incensed shall sitFor parts perverted, and dishonoured wit.Where ignorance will be found the surest plea,How many learned and wise shall envy thee!
 And thou, White Savage! whether lust of gold,Or lust of conquest rule thee uncontrolled!Hero, or robber! — by whatever nameThou plead thy impious claim to wealth or fame;Whether inferior mischief be thy boast,A tyrant trader rifling Congo’s coast:Or bolder carnage track thy crimson way,Kings dispossessed, and provinces thy prey;Whether thou pant to tame earth’s distant bound;All Cortez murdered, all Columbus found;O’er plundered realms to reign, detested Lord,Make millions wretched, and thyself abhorred: —Whether Cartouche in forests break the law,Or bolder Caesar keep the world in awe;In Reason’s eye, in Wisdom’s fair account,Your sum of glory boasts a like amount:The means may differ, but the end’s the same;Conquest is pillage with a nobler name.Who makes the sum of human blessings less,Or sinks the stock of general happiness,Though erring fame may grace, though false renown,His life may blazon or his memory crown,Yet the last audit shall reverse the cause,And God shall vindicate his broken laws.
 Had those adventurous spirits who exploreThrough ocean’s trackless wastes, the far-sought shore;Whether of wealth insatiate, or of power,Conquerors who waste, or ruffians who devour:Had these possessed, O Cook! thy gentle mind,Thy love of arts, thy love of human kind;Had these pursued thy mild and liberal plan,Discoverers had not been a curse to man.Then, blessed Philanthropy! thy social handsHad linked dissevered worlds in brothers’ bands;Careless, if colour, or if clime divide;Then, loved and loving, man had lived, and died.Then with pernicious skill we had not knownTo bring their vices back and leave our own.
 The purest wreaths which hang on glory’s shrine,For empires founded, peaceful Penn! are thine;No blood-stained laurels crowned thy virtuous toil,No slaughtered natives drenched thy fair-earned soil.Still thy meek spirit in thy flock survives,Consistent still, their doctrines rule their lives;Thy followers only have effaced the shameInscribed by slavery on the Christian name.
 Shall Britain, where the soul of Freedom reigns,Forge chains for others she herself disdains?Forbid it, Heaven! O let the nations knowThe liberty she tastes she will bestow;Not to herself the glorious gift confined,She spreads the blessing wide as human kind;And scorning narrow views of time and place,Bids all be free in earth’s extended space.
 What page of human annals can recordA deed so bright as human rights restored?O may that god-like deed, that shining page,Redeem our fame, and consecrate our age!And let this glory mark our favoured shore,To curb false freedom and the true restore!
 And see, the cherub Mercy from above,Descending softly, quits the spheres of love!On Britain’s isle she sheds her heavenly dew,And breathes her spirit o’er the enlightened few;From soul to soul the spreading influence steals,Till every breast the soft contagion feels.She speeds, exulting, to the burning shore,With the best message angel ever bore;Hark! ’tis the note which spoke a Saviour’s birth,Glory to God on high, and peace on earth!She vindicates the Power in Heaven adored,She stills the clank of chains, and sheathes the sword;She cheers the mourner, and with soothing handsFrom bursting hearts unbinds the oppressor’s bands;Restores the lustre of the Christian name,And clears the foulest blot that dimmed its fame.
 As the mild Spirit hovers o’er the coast,A fresher hue the withered landscapes boast;Her healing smiles the ruined scenes repair,And blasted Nature wears a joyous air;While she proclaims through all their spicy groves,‘Henceforth your fruits, your labours, and your loves,All that your Sire possessed, or you have sown,Sacred from plunder — all is now your own.’
 And now, her high commission from above,Stamped with the holy characters of love,The meek-eyed spirit waving in her hand,Breathes manumission o’er the rescued land:She tears the banner stained with blood and tears,And, Liberty! thy shining standard rears!As the bright ensign’s glory she displays,See pale Oppression faints beneath the blaze!The giant dies! no more his frown appals,The chain, untouched, drops off, the fetter falls.Astonished echo tells the vocal shore,Oppression’s fallen, and slavery is no more!               The dusky myriads crowd the sultry plain,And hail that mercy long invoked in vain.Victorious power! she bursts their two-fold bands,And Faith and Freedom spring from Britain’s hands.
 And Thou! great source of Nature and of Grace,Who of one blood didst form the human race,Look down in mercy in thy chosen time,With equal eye on Afric’s suffering clime:Disperse her shades of intellectual night,Repeat thy high behest — Let there be light!Bring each benighted soul, great God, to Thee,And with thy wide Salvation make them free!


^^EOP^^

I counted till they danced so
Their slippers leaped the town –
And then I took a pencil
To note the rebels down –
And then they grew so jolly
I did resign the prig –
And ten of my once stately toes
Are marshalled for a jig!
 


^^EOP^^

One must have a mind of winter
To regard the frost and the boughs
Of the pine-trees crusted with snow; 
And have been cold a long time
To behold the junipers shagged with ice,
The spruces rough in the distant glitter 
Of the January sun; and not to think
Of any misery in the sound of the wind,
In the sound of a few leaves, 
Which is the sound of the land
Full of the same wind
That is blowing in the same bare place 
For the listener, who listens in the snow,
And, nothing himself, beholds
Nothing that is not there and the nothing that is.


^^EOP^^

Alas, my Purse! how lean and low!My silken Purse! what art thou now!One I beheld—but stocks will fall—When both thy ends had wherewithal.When I within thy slender fenceMy fortune placed, and confidence;A poet’s fortune!—not immense:Yet, mixed with keys, and coins among,Chinked to the melody of song.
   Canst thou forget, when, high in air,I saw thee fluttering at a fair?And took thee, destined to be sold,My lawful Purse, to have and hold?Yet used so oft to disembogue,No prudence could thy fate prorogue.Like wax thy silver melted down,Touch but the brass, and lo! ’twas gone:And gold would never with thee stay,For gold had wings, and flew away.
   Alas, my Purse! yet still be proud,For see the Virtues round thee crowd!See, in the room of paltry wealth,Calm Temperance rise, the nurse of health;And Self-Denial, slim and spare,And Fortitude, with look severe;And Abstinence, to leanness prone,And Patience, worn to skin and bone:Prudence and Foresight on thee wait,And Poverty lies here in state!Hopeless her spirits to recruit,For every Virtue is a mute.
   Well then, my Purse, thy Sabbaths keep;Now thou art empty, I shall sleep.No silver sounds shall thee molest,Nor golden dreams disturb my breast.Safe shall I walk with thee along,Amidst temptations thick and strong;Catched by the eye, no more shall stopAt Wildey’s toys, or Pinchbeck’s shop;Nor cheapening Payne’s ungodly books,Be drawn aside by pastry-cooks:But fearless now we both may goWhere Ludgate’s mercers bow so low;Beholding all with equal eye,Nor moved at—“Madam, what d’ye buy?”
   Away, far hence each worldly care!Nor dun nor pick-purse shalt thou fear,Nor flatterer base annoy my ear.Snug shalt thou travel through the mob,For who a poet’s purse will rob?And softly sweet in garret high
Will I thy virtues magnify;Outsoaring flatterers’ stinking breath,And gently rhyming rats to death. 



^^EOP^^

What voice is this, thou evening gale!
That mingles with thy rising wail;
And, as it passes, sadly seems
The faint return of youthful dreams? 
Though now its strain is wild and drear,
Blithe was it once as sky-lark’s cheer —
Sweet as the night-bird’s sweetest song, —
Dear as the lisp of infant’s tongue. 
It was the voice, at whose sweet flow
The heart did beat, and cheek did glow,
And lip did smile, and eye did weep,
And motioned love the measure keep. 
Oft be thy sound, soft gale of even,
Thus to my wistful fancy given;
And, as I list the swelling strain,
The dead shall seem to live again!


^^EOP^^

I
No riches from his scanty store
 My lover could impart;He gave a boon I valued more —
 He gave me all his heart!
                 II
His soul sincere, his generous worth,
 Might well this bosom move;And when I asked for bliss on earth,
 I only meant his love.
                 III
But now for me, in search of gain
 From shore to shore he flies;Why wander riches to obtain,
 When love is all I prize?
                 IV
The frugal meal, the lowly cot
 If blest my love with thee!That simple fare, that humble lot,
 Were more than wealth to me.
                 V
While he the dangerous ocean braves,
 My tears but vainly flow:Is pity in the faithless waves
 To which I pour my woe?
                 VI
The night is dark, the waters deep,
 Yet soft the billows roll;Alas! at every breeze I weep —
 The storm is in my soul.


^^EOP^^

A youth for Jane with ardour sighed,
 The maid with sparkling eye;But to his vows she still replied,
 ‘I’ll hear you by and by.’
‘Suspense (he cries) my bloom decays,
 And bids my spirits fly;Now hear my vows,’ — but still she says,
 ‘I’ll hear you by and by.’
At length her frowns his love subdue,
 He shuns her scornful eye,And Emma seeks, who’ll hear him woo
 Both now, and by and by.
And soon to church he leads the maid,
 When lo! he sees draw nigh,The now repentant fair who said
 She’d hear him by and by.
‘Hear me (she cries): no more in vain
 Thy hear for me shall sigh!’ —
 ‘I’m busy now (said he) — but, Jane!
 I’ll hear you by and by.’


^^EOP^^

I once rejoiced, sweet evening gale,To see thy breath the poplar wave;But now it makes my cheek turn pale,It waves the grass o’er Henry’s grave.
Ah! setting sun! how changed I seem!I to thy rays prefer deep gloom, —Since now, alas! I see them beamUpon my Henry’s lonely tomb.
Sweet evening gale, howe’er I seem,I wish thee o’er my sod to wave;Ah! setting sun! soon mayst thou beamOn mine, as well as Henry’s grave!


^^EOP^^

Men of England, wherefore ploughFor the lords who lay ye low?Wherefore weave with toil and careThe rich robes your tyrants wear?
Wherefore feed and clothe and saveFrom the cradle to the graveThose ungrateful drones who wouldDrain your sweat—nay, drink your blood?
Wherefore, Bees of England, forgeMany a weapon, chain, and scourge,That these stingless drones may spoilThe forced produce of your toil?
Have ye leisure, comfort, calm,Shelter, food, love’s gentle balm?Or what is it ye buy so dearWith your pain and with your fear?
The seed ye sow, another reaps;The wealth ye find, another keeps;The robes ye weave, another wears;The arms ye forge, another bears.
Sow seed—but let no tyrant reap:Find wealth—let no imposter heap:Weave robes—let not the idle wear:Forge arms—in your defence to bear.
Shrink to your cellars, holes, and cells—In hall ye deck another dwells.Why shake the chains ye wrought? Ye seeThe steel ye tempered glance on ye.
With plough and spade and hoe and loomTrace your grave and build your tombAnd weave your winding-sheet—till fairEngland be your Sepulchre.



^^EOP^^

Long have I long’d to see my love againe,
  Still have I wisht, but never could obtaine it;
  Rather than all the world (if I might gaine it)Would I desire my love’s sweet precious gaine.Yet in my soule I see him everie day,
  See him, and see his still sterne countenaunce,
  But (ah) what is of long continuance,Where majestie and beautie beares the sway?Sometimes, when I imagine that I see him,
  (As love is full of foolish fantasies)
  Weening to kisse his lips, as my love’s fees,I feele but aire: nothing but aire to bee him.
  Thus with Ixion, kisse I clouds in vaine:
  Thus with Ixion, feele I endles paine.



^^EOP^^

Cherry-lipt Adonis in his snowie shape,
    Might not compare with his pure ivorie white,
    On whose faire front a poet’s pen may write,
Whose roseate red excels the crimson grape,
His love-enticing delicate soft limbs,
    Are rarely fram’d t’intrap poore gazine eies:
    His cheeks, the lillie and carnation dies,
With lovely tincture which Apollo’s dims.
His lips ripe strawberries in nectar wet,
    His mouth a Hive, his tongue a hony-combe,
    Where Muses (like bees) make their mansion.
His teeth pure pearle in blushing correll set.
    Oh how can such a body sinne-procuring,
    Be slow to love, and quicke to hate, enduring?
 


^^EOP^^

While one sere leaf, that parting Autumn yields,    Trembles upon the thin, and naked spray,    November, dragging on this sunless day,    Lours, cold and sullen, on the watery fields; And Nature to the waste dominion yields,    Stripped her last robes, with gold and purple gay —    So droops my life, of your soft beams despoiled,    Youth, Health, and Hope, that long exulting smiled; And the wild carols, and the bloomy hues    Of merry Spring-time, spruce on every plain    Her half-blown bushes, moist with sunny rain, More pensive thoughts in my sunk heart infuse    Than Winter’s grey, and desolate domain    Faded like my lost Youth, that no bright Spring renews.


^^EOP^^

On the fleet streams, the Sun, that late arose,    In amber radiance plays; the tall young grass    No foot hath bruised; clear morning, as I pass,    Breathes the pure gale, that on the blossom blows; And, as with gold yon green hill’s summit glows,    The lake inlays the vale with molten glass:    Now is the year’s soft youth, yet one, alas!    Cheers not as it was wont; impending woes Weigh on my heart; the joys, that once were mine,    Spring leads not back; and those that yet remain    Fade while she blooms. Each hour more lovely shine Her crystal beams, and feed her floral train,    But oh with pale, and warring fires, decline    Those eyes, whose light my filial hopes sustain.


^^EOP^^

Behold that tree, in Autumn’s dim decay,    Stripped by the frequent, chill, and eddying wind;    Where yet some yellow, lonely leaves we find    Lingering and trembling on the naked spray, Twenty, perchance, for millions whirled away!    Emblem, also! too just, of humankind!    Vain man expects longevity, designed    For few indeed; and their protracted day What is it worth that Wisdom does not scorn?    The blasts of sickness, care, and grief appal,    That laid the friends in dust, whose natal morn Rose near their own; and solemn is the call;    Yet, like those weak deserted leaves forlorn,    Shivering they cling to life, and fear to fall!


^^EOP^^

To tell the truth, those brick Housing Authority buildings
For whose loveliness no soul had planned,
Like random dominoes stood, worn out and facing each other,
Creating the enclosure that was our home. 
Long basement corridors connected one house to another
And had a special smell, from old bicycles and baby carriages
In the storage rooms. The elevators
Were used by kissing teenagers. 
The playground—iron swingchains, fences, iron monkey bars,
Iron seesaw handles, doubtless now rusted—
Left a strong iron smell on my hands and in the autumn air
And rang with cries. To me it is even precious 
Where they chased the local Mongoloid, yelling “Stupid Joey! Stupid Joey!”
Now I’ve said everything nice I can about this.


^^EOP^^

While summer roses all their glory yield
   To crown the votary of love and joy,
   Misfortune’s victim hails, with many a sigh,
   Thee, scarlet Poppy of the pathless field,
Gaudy, yet wild and lone; no leaf to shield
   Thy flaccid vest that, as the gale blows high,
   Flaps, and alternate folds around thy head.
   So stands in the long grass a love-crazed maid,
Smiling aghast; while stream to every wind
   Her garish ribbons, smeared with dust and rain;
   But brain-sick visions cheat her tortured mind,
And bring false peace. Thus, lulling grief and pain,
   Kind dreams oblivious from thy juice proceed,
   Thou flimsy, showy, melancholy weed.


^^EOP^^




            “The English Garden.”—Mason



The cold transparent ham is on my fork—
 It hardly rains—and hark the bell!—ding-dingle—Away! Three thousand feet at gravel work,
 Mocking a Vauxhall shower!—Married and SingleCrush—rush;—Soak’d Silks with wet white Satin mingle.
 Hengler! Madame! round whom all bright sparks lurkCalls audibly on Mr. and Mrs. Pringle
 To study the Sublime, &c.—(vide Burke)All Noses are upturn’d!—Whish-ish!—On high
 The rocket rushes—trails—just steals in sight—Then droops and melts in bubbles of blue light—
 And Darkness reigns—Then balls flare up and die—Wheels whiz—smack crackers—serpents twist—and then
 Back to the cold transparent ham again!



^^EOP^^

As in the midst of battle there is room For thoughts of love, and in foul sin for mirth; As gossips whisper of a trinket’s worth Spied by the death-bed’s flickering candle-gloom; As in the crevices of Caesar’s tomb The sweet herbs flourish on a little earth: So in this great disaster of our birth We can be happy, and forget our doom. For morning, with a ray of tenderest joy Gilding the iron heaven, hides the truth, And evening gently woos us to employ Our grief in idle catches. Such is youth; Till from that summer’s trance we wake, to find Despair before us, vanity behind.


^^EOP^^

Out of this roar of innumerable demons 
hot cinema tarzan sweat
rolling moth ball eyes yellow teeth   
cries of claws slashes clanks 
a faint high pallor 
dust 
oceans rolling over the dry sand of the savanna 
your houses homes warm still with the buffalo milk   
bladder of elephant . tusk of his stripped tree   
sing soft clinks 
but the barracks 
the dark dark barks of the shark   
boys
the cool juice of soweto . . .  
out of this dust they are coming
our eyes listen out of rhinoceros thunder   
darkness of lion 
the whale roar stomping in heaven
that black bellied night of hell and helleluia
when all the lights of anger flicker flicker flicker flicker 
and we know somewhere there there is real fire
basuto mokhethi namibia azania shaka the zulu kenyatta the shatt   
erer the maasai wandering into the everlasting shadow of jah 
daughters lost daughters 
bellowing against bullhorn and kleghorn
bellowing against bargwart and the searchlights of dogs   
bellowing against crick and the kick in the stomach 
the acrid wretch against the teeth
bellowing against malan malan malam malan
and boer and boerwreck and boertrek and truckloads of metal 
helmet and fusil and the hand grenade
and acid rhodes and the diamonds of oppenheimer   
the opulence of voortresshers the grass streiders . . .  
suddenly like that fire the crows in johannesburg   
you were there
torn. in tears. tatters 
but the eyes glittered and the fist
clenching around that scream of your mother bled   
into a black head of hammers 
and the night fell howl   
on soweto 
the night fell howl   
on soweto 
and we who had failed to listen all. those. foot. steps   
who had given you up like a torn paper package 
your heroes       burning in your houses   
                        rising from your dust bowls   
                        flaring from the sky 
                        listen now as the news items lengthen   
                        gathering like hawks looking upward like the   
                        leopard plunging into the turmoil like the 
                        constrictor 
and that crouch/shot
shout out against that beast and pistol
the police who shot patrice who castrated kimathi 
                        and clattering clattering clattering clattering   
                        the veldts gun metals wings
                        rise from their last supper their hunger of bones 
                        bomba 
and the daniels sing 
                        ukufa akuqheleki kodwa ke   
                        kuthiwa akuhlanga lungehlanga   
                        lalani ngenxeba nikhuzeka

^^EOP^^




An Epistle to Mr. Cuthbert Jackson



This motley piece to you I send,Who always were a faithful friend;Who, if disputes should happen hence,Can best explain the author’s sense;And, anxious for the public weal,Do, what I sing, so often feel.
  The want of method pray excuse,Allowing for a vapored Muse;Nor to a narrow path confined,Hedge in by rules a roving mind.
  The child is genuine, you may traceThroughout the sire’s transmitted face.Nothing is stolen: my Muse, though mean,Draws from the spring she finds within;Nor vainly buy what Gildon sells,Poetic buckets for dry wells.
  School-helps I want, to climb on high,Where all the ancient treasures lie,And there unseen commit a theftOn wealth in Greek exchequers left.Then where? from whom? what can I steal,Who only with the moderns deal?This were attempting to put onRaiment from naked bodies won:They safely sing before a thief,They cannot give who want relief;Some few excepted, names well known,And justly laurelled with renown,Whose stamp of genius marks their ware,And theft detects: of theft beware;From More so lashed, example fit,Shun petty larceny in wit.
  First know, my friend, I do not meanTo write a treatise on the spleen;Nor to prescribe when nerves convulse;Nor mend th’ alarum watch, your pulse.If I am right, your question lay,What course I take to drive awayThe day-mare Spleen, by whose false pleasMen prove mere suicides in ease;And how I do myself demeanIn stormy world to live serene.
  When by its magic lantern SpleenWith frightful figures spreads life’s scene,And threat’ning prospects urged my fears,A stranger to the luck of heirs;Reason, some quiet to restore,Showed part was substance, shadow more;With Spleen’s dead weight though heavy grown,In life’s rough tide I sunk not down,But swam, ’till Fortune threw a rope,Buoyant on bladders fill’d with hope.
  I always choose the plainest foodTo mend viscidity of blood.Hail! water-gruel, healing power,Of easy access to the poor;Thy help love’s confessors implore,And doctors secretly adore;To thee, I fly, by thee dilute—Through veins my blood doth quicker shoot,And by swift current throws off cleanProlific particles of Spleen.
  I never sick by drinking grow,Nor keep myself a cup too low,And seldom Cloe’s lodgings haunt,Thrifty of spirits, which I want.
  Hunting I reckon very goodTo brace the nerves, and stir the blood:But after no field-honors itch,Achieved by leaping hedge and ditch,While Spleen lies soft relaxed in bed,Or o’er coal fires inclines the head,Hygeia’s sons with hound and horn,And jovial cry awake the morn.
               *  *  *
  To cure the mind’s wrong bias, Spleen,Some recommended the bowling-green;Some, hilly walks; all, exercise;Fling but a stone, the giant dies;Laugh and be well. Monkeys have beenExtreme good doctors for the Spleen;And kitten, if the humor hit,Has harlequinned away the fit.
               *  *  *
  If spleen-fogs rise at close of day,I clear my evening with a play,Or to some concert take my way.The company, the shine of lights,The scenes of humor, music’s flights,Adjust and set the soul to rights.
  Life’s moving pictures, well-wrought plays,To others’ grief attention raise:Here, while the tragic fictions glow,We borrow joy by pitying woe;There gaily comic scenes delight,And hold true mirrors to our sight.Virtue, in charming dress arrayed,Calling the passions to her aid,When moral scenes just actions join,Takes shape, and shows her face divine.
               *  *  *
  Sometimes I dress, with women sit,And chat away the gloomy fit;Quit the stiff garb of serious sense,And wear a gay impertinence,Nor think nor speak with any pains,But lay on fancy’s neck the reins;Talk of unusual swell of waistIn maid of honor loosely laced,And beauty borr’wing Spanish red,And loving pair with sep’rate bed,And jewels pawned for loss of game,And then redeemed by loss of fame;Of Kitty (aunt left in the lurchBy grave pretence to go to church)Perceived in hack with lover fine,Like Will and Mary on the coin:And thus in modish manner we,In aid of sugar, sweeten tea.
  Permit, ye fair, your idol form,Which e’en the coldest heart can warm,May with its beauties grace my line,While I bow down before its shrine,And your thronged altars with my laysPerfume, and get by giving praise.With speech so sweet, so sweet a mien,You excommunicate the Spleen.
               *  *  *



^^EOP^^

Among the signs of autumn I perceive The Roman wormwood (called by learned men Ambrosia elatior, food for gods,— For to impartial science the humblest weed Is as immortal once as the proudest flower—) Sprinkles its yellow dust over my shoes As I cross the now neglected garden. —We trample under foot the food of gods And spill their nectar in each drop of dew— My honest shoes, fast friends that never stray Far from my couch, thus powdered, countryfied, Bearing many a mile the marks of their adventure, At the post-house disgrace the Gallic gloss Of those well dressed ones who no morning dew Nor Roman wormwood ever have been through, Who never walk but are transported rather— For what old crime of theirs I do not gather.   


^^EOP^^




A Colonial Custom



Bathsheba came out to the sun, Out to our wallèd cherry-trees; The tears adown her cheek did run, Bathsheba standing in the sun, Telling the bees.  My mother had that moment died; Unknowing, sped I to the trees, And plucked Bathsheba’s hand aside; Then caught the name that there she cried Telling the bees.  Her look I never can forget, I that held sobbing to her knees; The cherry-boughs above us met; I think I see Bathsheba yet Telling the bees.


^^EOP^^

Look at their faces. You know it all.
They married the week he left for the war.
Both are gentle, intelligent people,
as all four of their parents were. 
They’ve never talked about much
except the children. They love each other
but never wondered why they married
or had the kids or stayed together. 
It wasn’t because they knew the answers.
They had never heard the questions
that twisted through the jokes to come
of Moses and the Ten Suggestions. 
They paid their debts and never doubted
God rewarded faith and virtue
or when you got out of line
had big and little ways to hurt you. 
People walked alone in parks.
Children slept in their yards at night.
Most every man had a paying job,
and black was black and white was white. 
Would you go back? Say that you can,
that all it takes is a wave and a wink
and there you are. So what do you do?
The question is crueler than you think.


^^EOP^^

This is a letter to the worm-threaded earth. 
This is a letter to November, its gray bowl of sky riven by black-branched trees.
A letter to split-tomato skins, overripe apples, & a flock of fruit flies lifting
      from the blueing clementines’ wood crate.
To the broken confetti of late fall leaves.
This is a letter to rosemary. 
This is a letter to the floor’s sink & creak, the bedroom door’s torn hinge
      moaning its good-night.
This is to the unshaven cheek.
To cedar, mothballs, camphor, & last winter’s unwashed wool.
This is a letter to the rediscovered, 
to mulch, pine needles, the moon, frost, flats of pansies, the backyard,
      hunger, night, the unseen.
This is a letter to soil, thrumming as it waits to be turned.
This is a letter to compost, eggshell’s bone-ash chips, fruit rinds curved like
      fingernails, & stale chunks of bread.
A letter to the intimate dark—mouth-warm & damp as a bed. 
This is a letter to the planet’s scavenging lips.


^^EOP^^

I have no Brother,—they who meet me nowOffer a hand with their own wills defiled,And, while they wear a smooth unwrinkled brow,Know not that Truth can never be beguiled;Go wash the hand that still betrays thy guilt;Before the spirit’s gaze what stain can hide?Abel’s red blood upon the earth is spilt,And by thy tongue it cannot be denied;I hear not with my ear,—the heart doth tellIts secret deeds to me untold before;Go, all its hidden plunder quickly sell,Then shalt thou cleanse thee from thy brother’s gore,Then will I take thy gift; that bloody stainShall not be seen upon thy hand again.



^^EOP^^

Like a loose island on the wide expanse,Unconscious floating on the fickle sea,Herself her all, she lives in privacy;Her waking life as lonely as a trance,Doom’d to behold the universal dance,And never hear the music which expoundsThe solemn step, coy slide, the merry bounds.The vague, mute language of the countenance.In vain for her I smooth my antic rhyme;She cannot hear it. All her little beingConcentrated in her solitary seeing—What can she know of beauty or sublime?And yet methinks she looks so calm and good,God must be with her in her solitude!


^^EOP^^

To love these books, and harmless tea,
 Has always been my foible,Yet will I ne’er forgetful be
 To read my Psalms and Bible.
Travels I like, and history too,
 Or entertaining fiction;Novels and plays I’d have a few,
 If sense and proper diction.
I love a natural harmless song,
 But I cannot sing like Handel;Deprived of such resource, the tongue
 Is sure employed — in scandal.


^^EOP^^

Since you are, dear madam, so favoured by time,That he seems to have granted a lease of his prime,With the power to renew it whenever you please;Unencumbered by taxes of age and disease;Prolonging that date, which in others appears,The frail fleeting tenure of very few years:Why could you not ask him some favour to send,Enclosed with a present designed for a friend?One tint for her cheeks of youth’s vivid hue,To suit with those beautiful ribands of blue;One spark for her eyes of a juvenile twinkle,One smile of her mouth undeformed by a wrinkle;One ringlet or two — on her forehead to play,Unmixed with the sorrowful colour of grey?Yet too modest, perhaps, these requests you forbore,Yourself so indebted would not ask for more.And perchance had you teased him, thus Time might reply;‘That to you I am partial — I will not deny;Nor need I declare — what who sees you must know:That on few I such singular graces bestow.But if from my rules I recede for your sake,And still give to you what from others I take,I cannot for all so go out of my way,And reverse those decrees which all mortals obey.My law is that youth shall soon wither and fade,And like morning’s bright beam shall be followed by shade.Most severe is the sentence I pass on the face,Full soon on its features my finger you trace.Yet I no such dread rigour extend to the mind,In age that still charms if it be but resigned.If calmly beholding fair youth’s setting sun,It with fortitude reckons my sands as they run;Not with peevishness fraught as each wrinkle appears,And resisting my progress with petulant tears.No — your sex must learn patient good humour of you,And meet my approaches with smiles as you do:With temper unruffled by envy or spleen,Like the sun of the autumn — thus mild and serene,Learn of you to converse with politeness and ease;Then in spite of my spoils — they will know how to please.


^^EOP^^

Germ of new life, whose powers expanding slow For many a moon their full perfection wait,— Haste, precious pledge of happy love, to go Auspicious borne through life's mysterious gate.  What powers lie folded in thy curious frame,— Senses from objects locked, and mind from thought! How little canst thou guess thy lofty claim To grasp at all the worlds the Almighty wrought!  And see, the genial season's warmth to share, Fresh younglings shoot, and opening roses glow! Swarms of new life exulting fill the air,— Haste, infant bud of being, haste to blow!  For thee the nurse prepares her lulling songs, The eager matrons count the lingering day; But far the most thy anxious parent longs On thy soft cheek a mother's kiss to lay.  She only asks to lay her burden down, That her glad arms that burden may resume; And nature's sharpest pangs her wishes crown, That free thee living from thy living tomb.  She longs to fold to her maternal breast Part of herself, yet to herself unknown; To see and to salute the stranger guest, Fed with her life through many a tedious moon.  Come, reap thy rich inheritance of love! Bask in the fondness of a Mother's eye! Nor wit nor eloquence her heart shall move Like the first accents of thy feeble cry.  Haste, little captive, burst thy prison doors! Launch on the living world, and spring to light! Nature for thee displays her various stores, Opens her thousand inlets of delight.  If charmed verse or muttered prayers had power, With favouring spells to speed thee on thy way, Anxious I'd bid my beads each passing hour, Till thy wished smile thy mother's pangs o'erpay. 


^^EOP^^

There is health in thy gray wing,Health of nature’s furnishing.Say, thou modern-winged antique,Was thy mistress ever sick?In each heaving of thy wingThou dost health and leisure bring,Thou dost waive disease and painAnd resume new life again.



^^EOP^^

Gay Fashion thou Goddess so pleasing,    However imperious thy sway; Like a mistress capricious and teasing,    Thy slaves tho’ they murmur obey.  The simple, the wise, and the witty,    The learned, the dunce, and the fool, The crooked, straight, ugly, and pretty,    Wear the badge of thy whimsical school.  Tho’ thy shape be so fickle and changing,    That a Proteus thou art to the view; And our taste so for ever deranging,    We know not which form to pursue.  Yet wave but thy frolicksome banners,    And hosts of adherents we see; Arts, morals, religion, and manners,    Yield implicit obedience to thee.  More despotic than beauty thy power,    More than virtue thy rule o’er the mind: Tho’ transient thy reign as a flower,    That scatters its leaves to the wind.  Ah! while folly thou dealest such measure,    No matter how fleeting thy day! Be Wisdom, dear goddess, thy pleasure!    Then lasting as time be thy stay.


^^EOP^^

Uncessant Minutes, whil’st you move you tell
 The time that tells our life, which though it run
 Never so fast or farr, you’r new begunShort steps shall overtake; for though life well
May scape his own Account, it shall not yours,
 You are Death’s Auditors, that both divideAnd summ what ere that life inspir’d endures
 Past a beginning, and through you we bide
The doom of Fate, whose unrecall’d Decree
 You date, bring, execute; making what’s new
 Ill and good, old, for as we die in you,You die in Time, Time in Eternity.



^^EOP^^

The tale which I send, will, I’m sure, hit your fancy,Of Sandy the Captain, and kitchen-maid Nancy;The youth, by friend Colin’s good liquor made gay,Met the damsel, and brimful of frolic and play,He romped with, and kissed her, and tho’ he’d his gun,In vain the poor lassie attempted to run;She pouted and scolded, and liked not the joke,And at least, in the struggle, his finger she broke.Ah! who, my dear brother, would ever believe,That a swain with a look so demure could deceive?We ladies, kind creatures, devoid of suspicion,Were each very ready to play the physician;By Mackay, his sore finger in spirits was laid,And a bag, by my orders, was carefully made.For it neither by one, nor the other was thoughtThat with Nancy, instead of a gate he had fought.But now the poor maiden has told us the truth,As we cannot ourselves have a laugh at the youth;We entreat that from us, you the hero would tell,In his frolicks he ne’er should forget to bribe well;For had but his kisses been seasoned with gold,How he got his lame finger — had never been told.


^^EOP^^

Midway the hill of science, after steepAnd rugged paths that tire the unpractised feet,A grove extends; in tangled mazes wrought, And filled with strange enchantment: dubious shapesFlit through dim glades, and lure the eager footOf youthful ardour to eternal chase.Dreams hang on every leaf: unearthly formsGlide through the gloom; and mystic visions swimBefore the cheated sense. Athwart the mists, Far into vacant space, huge shadows stretchAnd seem realities; while things of life,Obvious to sight and touch, all glowing round, Fade to the hue of shadows. Scruples here, With filmy net, most like the autumnal websOf floating gossamer, arrest the footOf generous enterprise; and palsy hopeAnd fair ambition with the chilling touchOf sickly hesitation and blank fear. Nor seldom Indolence these lawns amongFixes her turf-built seat; and wears the garbOf deep philosophy, and museful sitsIn dreamy twilight of the vacant mind,Soothed by the whispering shade; for soothing softThe shades; and vistas lengthening into air,With moonbeam rainbows tinted. Here each mindOf finer mould, acute and delicate, In its high progress to eternal truthRests for a space, in fairy bowers entranced;And loves the softened light and tender gloom;And, pampered with most unsubstantial food,Looks down indignant on the grosser world,And matter’s cumbrous shapings. Youth belovedOf science — of the Muse beloved, — not here, Not in the maze of metaphysic lore,Build thou thy place of resting! Lightly treadThe dangerous ground, on noble aims intent; And be this Circe of the studious cellEnjoyed, but still subservient. Active scenesShall soon with healthful spirit brace thy mind;And fair exertion, for bright fame sustained,For friends, for country, chase each spleen-fed fogThat blots the wide creation — Now heaven conduct thee with a parent’s love!


^^EOP^^

What crowding thoughts around me wake,What marvels in a Christmas-cake!Ah say, what strange enchantment dwellsEnclosed within its odorous cells?Is there no small magician boundEncrusted in its snowy round?For magic surely lurks in this,A cake that tells of vanished bliss;A cake that conjures up to viewThe early scenes, when life was new;When memory knew no sorrows past,And hope believed in joys that last! —Mysterious cake, whose folds containLife’s calendar of bliss and pain;That speaks of friends for ever fled,And wakes the tears I love to shed.Oft shall I breathe her cherished nameFrom whose fair hand the offering came:For she recalls the artless smileOf nymphs that deck my native isle;Of beauty that we love to trace,Allied with tender, modest grace;Of those who, while abroad they roam,Retain each charm that gladdens home,And whose dear friendships can impartA Christmas banquet for the heart!


^^EOP^^

Dear to my heart as life’s warm stream
 Which animates this mortal clay,For thee I court the waking dream,
 And deck with smiles the future day;And thus beguile the present painWith hopes that we shall meet again.
Yet, will it be as when the past
 Twined every joy, and care, and thought,And o’er our minds one mantle cast
 Of kind affections finely wrought?Ah no! the groundless hope were vain,For so we ne’er can meet again!
May he who claims thy tender heart
 Deserve its love, as I have done!For, kind and gentle as thou art,
 If so beloved, thou art fairly won.Bright may the sacred torch remain,And cheer thee till we meet again!


^^EOP^^

You brave Heroique Minds,Worthy your countries name,
 That honour still pursue,
 Goe, and subdue,Whilst loyt'ring HindsLurke here at home, with shame.
Britans, you stay too long,Quickly aboord bestow you,
  And with a merry Gale
  Swell your stretch'd Sayle,With Vowes as strong,As the Winds that blow you.
Your Course securely steere,West and by South forth keepe,
  Rocks, Lee-shores, nor Sholes,
  When Eolus scowles,You need not feare,So absolute the Deepe.
And cheerfully at Sea,Successe you still intice,
  To get the Pearle and Gold,
  And ours to hold,Virginia,Earth's onely Paradise.
Where nature hath in storeFowle, Venison, and Fish,
  And the fruitfull'st Soyle,
  Without your Toyle,Three Harvests more,All greater than your wish.
And the ambitious VineCrownes with his purple Masse,
  The Cedar reaching hie
  To kisse the Sky,The Cypresse, PineAnd use-full Sassafras.
To whose, the golden AgeStill Natures lawes doth give,
  No other Cares that tend,
  But Them to defendFrom Winters age,That long there doth not live.
When as the Lushious smellOf that delicious Land,
  Above the Seas that flowes,
  The cleere Wind throwes,Your Hearts to swellApproching the deare Strand.
In kenning of the Shore,(Thanks to God first given,)
  O you, the happy'st men,
  Be Frolike then,Let Cannons roare,Frighting the wide Heaven.
And in Regions farreSuch Heroes bring yee foorth,
  As those from whom We came,
  And plant Our name,Under that StarreNot knowne unto our North.
And as there Plenty growesOf Lawrell every where,
Apollo's Sacred tree,
  You it may see,A Poets BrowesTo crowne, that may sing there.
Thy Voyage attend,Industrious     Whose Reading shall inflame
  Men to seeke Fame,And much commendTo after-times thy Wit.


^^EOP^^

Such are the little memories of you;They come and go, return and lie apartFrom all main things of life; yet more than they,With noiseless feet, they come and grip the heart.Gay laughter leading quick and stormy tears,Then smiles again and pulse of flying feet,In breathless chase of fleeting gossamers,Are memories so dear, so bitter-sweet.
No more are echoes of your flying feet.Hard by, where Pike’s Peak rears its head in state,The erstwhile rushing feet, with halting steps,For health’s return in Denver watch and wait.But love and memories of noiseless tread,Where angels hovered once, all shining fair,To tuck you in your little trundle bed,Kneel nightly now in agony of prayer.



^^EOP^^

There is a strain to read among the hills,
 The old and full of voices — by the sourceOf some free stream, whose gladdening presence fills
 The solitude with sound; for in its courseEven such is thy deep song, that seems a partOf those high scences, a fountain from the heart.
Or its calm spirit fitly may be taken
 To the still breast in sunny garden bowers,Where vernal winds each tree’s low tones awaken,
 And bud and bell with changes mark the hours.There let thy thoughts be with me, while the daySinks with a golden and serene decay.
Or by some hearth where happy faces meet,
 When night hath hushed the woods, with all their birds,There, from some gentle voice, that lay were sweet
 As antique music, linked with household words;While in pleased murmurs woman’s lip might move,And the raised eye of childhood shine in love.
Or where the shadows of dark solemn yews
 Brood silently o’er some lone burial-ground,Thy verse hath power that brightly might diffuse
 A breath, a kindling, as of spring, around;From its own glow of hope and courage high,And steadfast faith’s victorious constancy.
True bard and holy! — thou art e’en as one
 Who, by some secret gift of soul or eye,In every spot beneath the smiling sun,
 Sees where the springs of living waters lie;Unseen awhile they sleep — till, touched by thee,Bright healthful waves flow forth, to each glad wanderer free.


^^EOP^^

Poet of Nature, thou hast wept to knowThat things depart which never may return:Childhood and youth, friendship and love’s first glow,Have fled like sweet dreams, leaving thee to mourn.These common woes I feel. One loss is mineWhich thou too feel’st, yet I alone deplore.Thou wert as a lone star, whose light did shineOn some frail bark in winter’s midnight roar:Thou hast like to a rock-built refuge stoodAbove the blind and battling multitude:In honoured poverty thy voice did weaveSongs consecrate to truth and liberty,—Deserting these, thou leavest me to grieve,Thus having been, that thou shouldst cease to be.



^^EOP^^

Green mwold on zummer bars do show
 That they’ve a-dripp’d in winter wet;The hoof-worn ring o’ groun’ below
 The tree, do tell o’ storms or het;The trees in rank along a ledgeDo show where woonce did bloom a hedge;An’ where the vurrow-marks do stripeThe down, the wheat woonce rustled ripe.Each mark ov things a-gone vrom view—To eyezight’s woone, to soulzight two.
The grass ageän the mwoldrèn door
 ’S a tóken sad o’ vo’k a-gone,An’ where the house, bwoth wall an’ vloor,
 ’S a-lost, the well mid linger on.What tokens, then, could Meäry gi’eThat she’d a-liv’d, an’ liv’d vor me,But things a-done vor thought an’ view?Good things that nwone ageän can do,An’ every work her love ha’ wroughtTo eyezight’s woone, but two to thought.



^^EOP^^

Where moonlight angles
                  through the east-west streets,
down among the old
                  for America
tall buildings that changed
                  the streets of other
cities circulate
                  elevated trains
overhead shrieking
                  and drumming, lit by
explosions of sparks
                  that harm no one and
the shadowed persons
                  walking underneath
the erratic waves
                  not of the lake but
of noise move through fog
                  sieved by the steel mesh
of the supporting
                  structures or through rain
that rinses pavements
                  and the el platforms
or through new snow that
                  quiets corners, moods,
riveted careers.   
                  Working for others
with hands, backs, machines,
                  men built hard towers
that part the high air,   
                  women and men built,
cooked, cleaned, delivered,
                  typed and filed, carried
and delivered, priced
                  and sold. The river
and air were filthy.
                  In a hundred years
builders would migrate
                  north a mile but in
these modern times this
                  was all the downtown
that was. And circling
                  on a round-cornered   
rectangle of tracks
                  run the trains, clockwise
and counter, veering
                  through or loop-the-loop
and out again. Why
                  even try to list   
the kinds of places   
                  men and women made
to make money? Not
                  enough of them, yet
too many. From slow
                  trains overhead some
passengers can still
                  see stone ornaments,
pilasters, lintels,
                  carved by grandfathers,
great uncles and gone
                  second cousins of   
today—gargoyle heads
                  and curving leaves, like
memorials for
                  that which was built to
be torn down again
                  someday, for those who
got good wages out
                  of all this building
or were broken by   
                  it, or both, yet whose   
labor preserves a   
                  record of labor,   
imagination,
                  ambition, skill, greed,
folly, error, cost,
                  story, so that a   
time before remains
                  present within the
bright careening now.


^^EOP^^

I am thy grass, O Lord!     I grow up sweet and tall But for a day; beneath Thy sword     To lie at evenfall.  Yet have I not enough     In that brief day of mine? The wind, the bees, the wholesome stuff     The sun pours out like wine.  Behold, this is my crown;     Love will not let me be; Love holds me here; Love cuts me down;     And it is well with me.  Lord, Love, keep it but so;     Thy purpose is full plain; I die that after I may grow     As tall, as sweet again.


^^EOP^^

I saw a boy with eager eye
Open a book upon a stall,
And read as he’d devour it all;
Which when the stall-man did espy,
Soon to the boy I heard him call,
‘You, Sir, you never buy a book,
Therefore in one you shall not look.’
The boy passed slowly on, and with a sigh
He wished he never had been taught to read,
Then of the old churl’s books he should have had no need. 
Of sufferings the poor have many,
Which never can the rich annoy.
I soon perceived another boy
Who looked as if he’d not had any
Food for that day at least, enjoy
The sight of cold meat in a tavern larder.
This boy’s case, thought I, is surely harder,
Thus hungry longing, thus without a penny,
Beholding choice of dainty dressed meat;
No wonder if he wish he ne’er had learned to eat.


^^EOP^^

Heavy hangs the raindropFrom the burdened spray;Heavy broods the damp mistOn uplands far away;
Heavy looms the dull sky,Heavy rolls the sea—And heavy beats the young heartBeneath that lonely tree.
Never has a blue streakCleft the clouds since morn—Never has his grim FateSmiled since he was born.
Frowning on the infant,Shadowing childhood’s joy,Guardian angel knows notThat melancholy boy.
Day is passing swiftlyIts sad and sombre prime;Youth is fast invadingSterner manhood’s time.
All the flowers are prayingFor sun before they close,And he prays too, unknowing,That sunless human rose!
Blossoms, that the west windHas never wooed to blow,Scentless are your petals,Your dew as cold as snow.
Soul, where kindred kindnessNo early promise woke,Barren is your beautyAs weed upon the rock.
Wither, Brothers, wither,You were vainly given—Earth reserves no blessingFor the unblessed of Heaven!
Child of Delight! with sunbright hair,And seablue, seadeep eyes;Spirit of Bliss, what brings thee here,Beneath these sullen skies?
Thou shouldst live in eternal spring,Where endless day is never dim;Why, seraph, has thy erring wingBorne thee down to weep with him?
“Ah, not from heaven am I descended,And I do not come to mingle tears;But sweet is day, though with shadows blended;And, though clouded, sweet are youthful years.
“I, the image of light and gladness,Saw and pitied that mournful boy,And I swore to take his gloomy sadness,And give to him my beamy joy.
“Heavy and dark the night is closing;Heavy and dark may its biding be:Better for all from grief reposing,And better for all who watch like me.
“Guardian angel, he lacks no longer;Evil fortune he need not fear:Fate is strong, but Love is stronger;And more unsleeping than angel’s care.”



^^EOP^^

Custom, whose laws we all allow,
   And bow before his shrine,Has so ordained, my friend, that you
   Are now my Valentine.
Ah, could my humble Muse aspire
   To catch the flame divine!These are the gifts that I’d require
   For thee, my Valentine!
May virtue o’er thy steps preside
   And in thy conduct shine;May truth and wisdom ever guide
   And guard my Valentine.
May piety, seraphic maid,
   Her influence divineShed on thy head, and ever lead,
   And bless my Valentine.
Life’s dangerous paths safe may’st thou tread,
   Shielded by Grace divine;And when these artless lines are read,
   Think on my Valentine!


^^EOP^^

The village life, and every care that reignsO'er youthful peasants and declining swains;What labour yields, and what, that labour past,Age, in its hour of languor, finds at last;What forms the real picture of the poor,Demands a song—the Muse can give no more.Fled are those times, if e'er such times were seen, When rustic poets praised their native green;No shepherds now, in smooth alternate verse,Their country's beauty or their nymphs' rehearse;Yet still for these we frame the tender strain,Still in our lays fond Corydons complain,And shepherds' boys their amorous pains reveal,The only pains, alas! they never feel.
 On Mincio's banks, in Caesar's bounteous reign,If Tityrus found the Golden Age again,Must sleepy bards the flattering dream prolong,Mechanic echoes of the Mantuan song?From truth and nature shall we widely stray,Where Virgil, not where Fancy, leads the way?
 Yes, thus the Muses sing of happy swains,Because the Muses never knew their pains.They boast their peasants' pipes, but peasants nowResign their pipes and plod behind the plough;And few amid the rural tribe have timeTo number syllables and play with rhyme;Save honest Duck, what son of verse could shareThe poet's rapture and the peasant's care?Or the great labours of the field degradeWith the new peril of a poorer trade?
 From one chief cause these idle praises spring,That themes so easy few forbear to sing;They ask no thought, require no deep design,But swell the song and liquefy the line;The gentle lover takes the rural strain,A nymph his mistress and himself a swain;With no sad scenes he clouds his tuneful prayer,But all, to look like her, is painted fair.I grant indeed that fields and flocks have charmsFor him that gazes or for him that farms;But when amid such pleasing scenes I traceThe poor laborious natives of the place,And see the mid-day sun, with fervid ray,On their bare heads and dewy temples play;While some, with feebler heads and fainter hearts,Deplore their fortune, yet sustain their parts:Then shall I dare these real ills to hideIn tinsel trappings of poetic pride?
 No, cast by Fortune on a frowning coast,Which can no groves nor happy valleys boast;Where other cares than those the Muse relates,And other shepherds dwell with other mates;By such examples taught, I paint the cot,As truth will paint it, and as bards will not:Nor you, ye poor, of lettered scorn complain,To you the smoothest song is smooth in vain;O'ercome by labour and bowed down by time,Feel you the barren flattery of a rhyme?Can poets soothe you, when you pine for bread,By winding myrtles round your ruined shed?Can their light tales your weighty griefs o'erpower,Or glad with airy mirth the toilsome hour?
 Lo! where the heath, with withering brake grown o'er,Lends the light turf that warms the neighboring poor;From thence a length of burning sand appears,Where the thin harvest waves its withered ears;Rank weeds, that every art and care defy,Reign o'er the land and rob the blighted rye:There thistles stretch their prickly arms afar,And to the ragged infant threaten war;There poppies, nodding, mock the hope of toil,There the blue bugloss paints the sterile soil;Hardy and high, above the slender sheaf,The slimy mallow waves her silky leaf;O'er the young shoot the charlock throws a shade,And the wild tare clings round the sickly blade;With mingled tints the rocky coasts abound,And a sad splendor vainly shines around.
 So looks the nymph whom wretched arts adorn,Betrayed by man, then left for man to scorn;Whose cheek in vain assumes the mimic roseWhile her sad eyes the troubled breast disclose;Whose outward splendour is but folly's dress,Exposing most, when most it gilds distress.
 Here joyless roam a wild amphibious race,With sullen woe displayed in every face;Who far from civil arts and social fly,And scowl at strangers with suspicious eye.
 Here too the lawless merchant of the mainDraws from his plough th' intoxicated swain;Want only claimed the labor of the day,But vice now steals his nightly rest away.
 Where are the swains, who, daily labor done,With rural games played down the setting sun;Who struck with matchless force the bounding ball,Or made the pond'rous quoit obliquely fall;While some huge Ajax, terrible and strong,Engaged some artful stripling of the throng,And, foiled, beneath the young Ulysses fell,When peals of praise the merry mischief tell?Where now are these?—Beneath yon cliff they stand,To show the freighted pinnace where to land;To load the ready steed with guilty haste;To fly in terror o'er the pathless waste,Or, when detected in their straggling course,To foil their foes by cunning or by force;Or, yielding part (when equal knaves contest),To gain a lawless passport for the rest.
 Here, wand'ring long amid these frowning fields,I sought the simple life that Nature yields;Rapine and Wrong and Fear usurped her place,And a bold, artful, surly, savage race;Who, only skilled to take the finny tribe,The yearly dinner, or septennial bribeWait on the shore and, as the waves run high,On the tossed vessel bend their eager eye,Which to their coast directs its vent'rous way,Theirs, or the ocean's, miserable prey.
 As on their neighbouring beach yon swallows stand,And wait for favoring winds to leave the land;While still for flight the ready wing is spread:So waited I the favouring hour, and fled;Fled from these shores where guilt and famine reign,And cried, Ah! hapless they who still remain;Who still remain to hear the ocean roar,Whose greedy waves devour the lessening shore;Till some fierce tide, with more imperious sway,Sweeps the low hut and all it holds away;When the sad tenant weeps from door to door,And begs a poor protection from the poor!
 But these are scenes where Nature's niggard handGave a spare portion to the famished land;Hers is the fault, if here mankind complainOf fruitless toil and labor spent in vain;But yet in other scenes, more fair in view,Where Plenty smiles—alas! she smiles for fewAnd those who taste not, yet behold her store,Are as the slaves that dig the golden ore,The wealth around them makes them doubly poor.Or will you deem them amply paid in health,Labor's fair child, that languishes with wealth?Go then! and see them rising with the sun,Through a long course of daily toil to run;Like him to make the plenteous harvest grow,And yet not shard the plenty they bestow;See them beneath the dog-star's raging heat,When the knees tremble and the temples beat;Behold them, leaning on their scythes, look o'erThe labour past, and toils to come explore;See them alternate suns and showers engage,And hoard up aches and anguish for their age;Through fens and marshy moors their steps pursue,When their warm pores imbibe the evening dew;Then own that labour may as fatal beTo these thy slaves, as luxury to thee.
 Amid this tribe too oft a manly prideStrives in strong toil the fainting heart to hide;There may you see the youth of slender frameContend with weakness, weariness, and shame:Yet urged along, and proudly loth to yield,He strives to join his fellows of the field;Till long-contending nature droops at last,Declining health rejects his poor repast,His cheerless spouse the coming danger sees,And mutual murmurs urge the slow disease.Yet grant them health, 'tis not for us to tell,Though the head droops not, that the heart is well;Or will you urge their homely, plenteous fare,Healthy and plain and still the poor man's share!Oh! trifle not with wants you cannot feel,Nor mock the misery of a stinted meal;Homely not wholesome, plain not plenteous, suchAs you who envy would disdain to touch.
 Ye gentle souls, who dream of rural ease,Whom the smooth stream and smoother sonnet please;Go! if the peaceful cot your praises share,Go, look within, and ask if peace be there:If peace be his—that drooping weary sire,Or theirs, that offspring round their feeble fire,Or hers, that matron pale, whose trembling handTurns on the wretched hearth th' expiring brand.Nor yet can time itself obtain for theseLife's latest comforts, due respect and ease;For yonder see that hoary swain, whose ageCan with no cares except his own engage;Who, propped on that rude staff, looks up to seeThe bare arms broken from the withering tree,On which, a boy, he climbed the loftiest bough,Then his first joy, but his sad emblem now.
 He once was chief in all the rustic trade,His steady hand the straightest furrow made;Full many a prize he won, and still is proudTo find the triumphs of his youth allowed.A transient pleasure sparkles in his eyes,He hears and smiles, then thinks again and sighs:For now he journeys to his grave in pain;The rich disdain him, nay, the poor disdain;Alternate masters now their slave command,And urge the efforts of his feeble hand;Who, when his age attempts its task in vain,With ruthless taunts of lazy poor complain.
 Oft may you see him, when he tends the sheep,His winter-charge, beneath the hillock weep;Oft hear him murmur to the winds that blowO'er his white locks and bury them in snow;When, roused by rage and muttering in the morn,He mends the broken hedge with icy thorn:
 "Why do I live, when I desire to beAt once from life and life's long labour free?Like leaves in spring, the young are blown away,Without the sorrows of a slow decay;I, like yon withered leaf, remain behind,Nipped by the frost, and shivering in the wind;There it abides till younger buds come on,As I, now all my fellow-swains are gone;Then, from the rising generation thrust,It falls, like me, unnoticed to the dust.
 "These fruitful fields, these numerous flocks I see,Are others' gain, but killing cares to me;To me the children of my youth are lords,Slow in their gifts but hasty in their words:Wants of their own demand their care, and whoFeels his own want and succors others too?A lonely, wretched man, in pain I go,None need my help and none relieve my woe;Then let my bones beneath the turf be laid,And men forget the wretch they would not aid."
 Thus groan the old, till, by disease oppressed,They taste a final woe, and then they rest.Theirs is yon house that holds the parish poor,Whose walls of mud scarce bear the broken door;There, where the putrid vapours, flagging, play,And the dull wheel hums doleful through the day;There children dwell, who know no parents' care,Parents, who know no children's love, dwell there;Heart-broken matrons on their joyless bed,Forsaken wives, and mothers never wed;Dejected widows with unheeded tears,And crippled age with more than childhood-fears;The lame, the blind, and, far the happiest they!The moping idiot and the madman gay.
 Here too the sick their final doom receive,Here brought, amid the scenes of grief, to grieve,Where the loud groans from some sad chamber flow,Mixed with the clamors of the crowd below;Here, sorrowing, they each kindred sorrow scan,And the cold charities of man to man:Whose laws indeed for ruined age provide,And strong compulsion plucks the scrap from pride;But still that scrap is bought with many a sigh,And pride embitters what it can't deny.
 Say ye, oppressed by some fantastic woes,Some jarring nerve that baffles your repose;Who press the downy couch, while slaves advanceWith timid eye to read the distant glance;Who with sad prayers the weary doctor teaseTo name the nameless ever-new disease;Who with mock patience dire complaints endure,Which real pain, and that alone, can cure;How would ye bear in real pain to lie,Despised, neglected, left alone to die?How would ye bear to draw your latest breath,Where all that's wretched paves the way for death?
 Such is that room which one rude beam divides,And naked rafters form the sloping sides;Where the vile bands that bind the thatch are seen,And lath and mud is all that lie between;Save one dull pane, that, coarsely patched, gives wayTo the rude tempest, yet excludes the day.Here, on a matted flock, with dust o'erspread,The drooping wretch reclines his languid head;For him no hand the cordial cup applies,Nor wipes the tear that stagnates in his eyes;No friends with soft discourse his pain beguile,Nor promise hope till sickness wears a smile.
 But soon a loud and hasty summons calls,Shakes the thin roof, and echoes round the walls.Anon, a figure enters, quaintly neat,All pride and business, bustle and conceit;With looks unaltered by these scenes of woe,With speed that, entering, speaks his haste to go,He bids the gazing throng around him fly,And carries fate and physic in his eye;A potent quack, long versed in human ills,Who first insults the victim whom he kills;Whose murd'rous hand a drowsy bench protect,And whose most tender mercy is neglect.
 Paid by the parish for attendance here,He wears contempt upon his sapient sneer;In haste he seeks the bed where misery lies,Impatience marked in his averted eyes;And, some habitual queries hurried o'er,Without reply, he rushes on the door:His drooping patient, long inured to pain,And long unheeded, knows remonstrance vain;He ceases now the feeble help to craveOf man, and mutely hastens to the grave.
 But ere his death some pious doubts arise,Some simple fears, which "bold bad" men despise;Fain would he ask the parish priest to proveHis title certain to the joys above;For this he sends the murmuring nurse, who callsThe holy stranger to these dismal walls;And doth not he, the pious man, appear,He, "passing rich with forty pounds a year"?Ah! no; a shepherd of a different stock,And far unlike him, feeds this little flock:A jovial youth, who thinks his Sunday's taskAs much as God or man can fairly ask;The rest he gives to loves and labors light,To fields the morning and to feasts the night;None better skilled the noisy pack to guide,To urge their chase, to cheer them or to chide;Sure in his shot, his game he seldom missed,And seldom failed to win his game at whist;Then, while such honors bloom around his head,Shall he sit sadly by the sick man's bedTo raise the hope he feels not, or with zealTo combat fears that ev'n the pious feel
 Now once again the gloomy scene explore,Less gloomy now; the bitter hour is o'er,The man of many sorrows sighs no more.
 Up yonder hill, behold how sadly slowThe bier moves winding from the vale below;There lie the happy dead, from trouble free,And the glad parish pays the frugal fee.No more, oh Death! thy victim starts to hearChurchwarden stern, or kingly overseer;No more the farmer gets his humble bow,Thou art his lord, the best of tyrants thou!
 Now to the church behold the mourners come,Sedately torpid and devoutly dumb;The village children now their games suspend,To see the bier that bears their ancient friend:For he was one in all their idle sport,And like a monarch ruled their little court;The pliant bow he formed, the flying ball,The bat, the wicket, were his labours all;Him now they follow to his grave, and standSilent and sad, and gazing, hand in hand;While bending low, their eager eyes exploreThe mingled relics of the parish poor.The bell tolls late, the moping owl flies round,Fear marks the flight and magnifies the sound;The busy priest, detained by weightier care,Defers his duty till the day of prayer;And, waiting long, the crowd retire distressed,To think a poor man's bones should lie unblessed.


^^EOP^^
