
1 
The leaves sleeping beneath the wind:
A vessel for the wound.
Time perishing: the glory of the wound.
The trees rising among our lashes:
A lake for the wound. 
The wound lies in bridges
When the grave lengthens,
When patience stretches
Between the banks of our love and death.
The wound, a gesture, is passing. 
2 
I give the voice of the wound
To the tongue of strangled bells,
To stone approaching from afar,
To aridity and the arid land,
To time borne on a stretcher of ice,
I kindle the fire of the wound. 
When history burns in my garments,
When blue nails sprout in my book,
When I shout during the day,
Who are you? Who’s thrusting you
Into my notebooks,
Into my virgin earth?
In my notebooks, in my virgin earth,
I glimpse two eyes of dust
And hear someone say,
“I am the wound that grows
In your narrow history.” 
3 
I named you cloud,
Wound, dove of departure,
I named you quill and book.
And here I am, starting a dialogue
Between myself and the drowned tongue
On the isles of exodus,
On the archipelago of the ancient fall.
And here I am, teaching the dialogue
To the wind and palms—
Wound, dove of departure. 
4 
Had I a harbor, had I a vessel
In the land of dreams and mirrors,
Had I the remains
Of a city, had I a city
In the land of children and weeping, 
I would forge them all for the wound
Into a spear-like song
That pierces trees and stones and sky,
A song as supple as water,
Unruly and dazed, like conquest. 
5 
World adorned with dreams and yearning,
Rain down on our deserts,
Rain down, but shake us, palms of the wound,
And break two branches off for us
From the trees that love the silence of the wound,
From the trees with arched lashes and hands
That keep vigil over the wound. 
World adorned with dreams and yearning,
World falling in my brow,
Drawn like the wound,
Come no closer—the wound is closer than you.
Don’t tempt me—the wound is more beautiful,
And the wound has passed by that enchantment
Cast by your eyes
In the last kingdoms,
Passed without leaving a sail to tempt it astray,
Without leaving it an island.
 
Translated from the Arabic


^^EOP^^


We must have known,
Even as we reached
Down to touch them
Where we'd found them
 
Shut-eyed and trembling
Under a straw bale
In the haymow, that
She would move them
 
That night under cover
Of darkness, and that
By finding them
We were making certain
 
We wouldn't see them again
Until we saw them
Crouching under the pickup
Like sullen teens, having gone
 
As wild by then as they'd gone
Still in her mouth that night
She made a decision
Any mother might make
 
Upon guessing the intentions
Of the state: to go and to
Go now, taking everything
You love between your teeth.


^^EOP^^


I find the heavens beautiful,
I find the earth so too,
the seas and the ground,
the furling of water and gas,
the bright distant points
of our isolation. I take comfort
in the swinging pendant traffic lights,
the slurry of wet raw flour.
I am programmed to this language,
and can only voice my rejection of it
in the same language.
This is the power of diaspora,
the difficulty in finding alternative.
Let us send messages to the half-existent.
To excuse oneself, to claim not knowing
the future, is inhuman. I am so worthless
that my body serves as brick,
conscripted to build up my prison
until it is time to lay my own body
down for the walls. It is mechanical,
snipping into the loop of every lace,
separating from every link
the cold wrapped bud. At first the skin
is thick and bright,
then darkly collapses.
Nothing keeps its shape,
nothing stands itself upright,
we keep sliding apart into smaller
and smaller components, and it is
in the air above us now,
we do not mingle with the outcome
of ideas any longer, the energy
that knows whether cruelty
is disinterested or rightful.
They are so happy
while we laugh at them,
their eyes enthused and shining
while we trick them
into hurting themselves.
 


^^EOP^^


“I’m interested in feminist oratory,” we think
Jess should say
“Specifically that.”
 
Yellow-breasted engine sounds on the
Joshua tree
Joshua tree mid-shimmy
 
I think every bird is mad
at me. Does that make me
an alcoholic?
 
Let’s take a break, after
the great San Bernardino sculpture party
 
sparkling toilet pieces lay tiled into
the pavilion,
silver flushers too.
 
TV piles. I am
uneasy. So what?
No match for the always sand and always
 
Air. I find a pair of leather pants
Hanging in a hut & touch them.
Definitely not leather.
 
I can see the sunscreen on your face
not rubbed in,
rivulets wet
 
the under-chin. Let’s get this next pitch
right, guys,
decades left of percolation.
 


^^EOP^^


There’s coffee and pie
with a widow from church.
Why do you sit
in the back pew? she asks.
I’m close enough, I say.
Can I sit back there with you?
I’ve always sat there, I tell her,
with my same two friends,
and their clicking oxygen pumps.
One sat next to me for years,
called herself my church girlfriend,
who metastasized, telling me she was
tired of waiting to die.
Now, there’s just my 88-year-old friend,
his pump echoing in the sanctuary,
and there’s that empty
space between us.
I’d like to invite the widow to sit there,
but I miss my dead friend’s laugh,
her loving stories about her husband,
and how we were always
glad to see one another.
I tell the widow all this.
What if I just sat there? she asks.
It’s a free country, I tell her,
and she smiles.


^^EOP^^


of waves dropped into froth     Jellyfish a jar
of innards half-buried in sand     Dead nature     What are
these things and who are they for?     This blue rug
is its own genre     And these painted apples
round out the essence of what can be made
into what can be eaten     Winter interest
3.9 APR     April come     She will not
swipe the sun into sky     Limits of credentialed
credit     “At least you’re not the janitor’s
azaleas of the everyday dustpan”     There’s
the problem     It’s like a concussive
grenade at the end of the mine     Mind the
income gap     Let’s activate the fact that
every word means go back to the back of the line
because that is where the front leads     Years
of the postmodern translated by the annuity
of spring     Hello     My name
is the first person I     I am indebted     I am
indented     I insist on remaining
unidentified
 


^^EOP^^


You and me, of course, and the animals
we feed and then slaughter. The boxelder
bug with its dot of red, yeast in the air
making bread and wine, bacteria
in yogurt, carrots, the apple tree,
each white blossom. And rock, which lives
so slowly it’s hard to imagine it
as sand then glass. A sea called dead is one that
will not mirror us. We think as human
beings we deserve every last thing. Say
the element copper. Incandescence
glowing bright and soft like Venus.
Ductile as a shewolf’s eyes pigmented red
or green, exposed to acid in the air.
Copper primes your liver, its mines leach lead
and arsenic. Smelting is to melting
the way smite is to mite. A violence
of extraction. What’s lost when a language
dies? When its tropes oppose our own?
In the at-risk language Aymara
the past stretches out in front, the future
lags behind. Imagine being led
by knowing, imagine the end as clear.


^^EOP^^


like when I can’t sleep I say to myself
the the the the
the 
the
the—
each article drenched to the bone in the 
belief it attends something solid,
fond belief, always being
cut in on—the 
the
the
the the the the the the 
does the trick if I can stick with it
not get swept into narrative, that shock brigade
all tell, if by shock they mean hit 
the the the the the the the the
papers say asylum is temporary
now, true, what’s not that’s able to 
maintain its potency, you wake up
from a spell in that genre of safety, relative
safety, what saved you 
making as if the story were widely shared
until you saw them as-if otherwise and then
what saved you was seeing their look, saying 
resemblance too may be at any time revoked so
must be made the most
of, 
seeing it then, seizing
the minute dismounting with the foot
trained as a dancer to keep you traveling because 
they’d slept and, refreshed, moved the the the the
papers expired, it’s their turn now
to really live


^^EOP^^


end- and be-any, make ends hour, at the end on my haze, elf’s well
that ends well, at a fair end, an end as itself, any good must come to
an end, tie is loose ends, end on the line, defanging on the end, end
as sight, coming to a man end, end as took, hour a terrible end, to
end on the ticks, team end, on the semiotics end, light at the end of
the tunnel, choking both ends, does the end justify the bound,
short end on the brand, know which end is is, now-end, toss-end,
you haven’t heard the end on it, follow me to the ends.


^^EOP^^


A tool for piercing holes. Particularly in leather. A simple metal shaft. A knob of wood for handle, polished by its fit in the sinewy cradle of a leather-worker’s  palm. Likely the tool with which Louis Braille blinded himself as a child in France. An accident in his father’s saddle-making shop in the early years of the nineteenth century. Braille later invented a system of raised dots as a means of reading and writing for the blind. We don’t know much. Whether he was in the shop with his father or snuck in alone. Whether it was damp and rainy or whether the sun shone and brought to life the floating dust that always hung in the workshop air. Maybe it was just a little poke in the eye. A small tool, a small slip of the hand, a small injury. How a little fumble ends in blindness. It was decades before general anesthetic or antiseptics. Perhaps the doctor they rushed him to believed in the value of “laudable pus” in a wound. I don’t want to picture it. As a child, playing in his father’s saddle-making shop, did Louis Braille already know the names of the parts of a saddle—cantle, pommel, stirrup, tree? Did he know the smell and feel of each grade of leather? Of all the tools—punch and pincers, gouge and groover, chisel and awl—he chose awl. Likely the last thing he saw, a shine of metal galloping toward his eye. Is it accident that my tool for pressing hand-punched Braille is so much like a blunt, very small awl?


^^EOP^^


There is no delusion that she wants her.
Is marriage like owning a very expensive art piece? 
Your spouse the painting?
You the crooked frame that won’t fit? 
Is this how desire is born?
From having less or from wanting more? 
She wakes up calling her name.
She wakes up knowing that she doesn’t want less. 
From House of Cards she learned a new rule: “I love that
woman. I love her more than sharks love blood.” 
Or something along that line. She may have misquoted.
It came out of the pre-disgraced Kevin Spacey’s mouth. 
Her God doesn’t exercise telepathy or residence.
Hands, eyes, mouths, authenticity.
It’s a city without mirrors.
Because touch, in itself, is symmetry. 
—  
She held the woman’s face in her mind’s eye &
realized that they would never be lovers &
as soon as she let her go, mosses grew all over
the geography of her hands and the woman’s face. 
Is this because it’s a debt that must be paid for
not believing in somebody?
In herself? 
She felt the desire of desire as if it was a binchōtan
charcoal and its ash. 
Masakichi Yakitori
and the Pyramid Club. 
—  
On Easter Sunday, she sang a Christmas carol of Lao Tzu.
Lao Tzu, where is your power to persuade a tree from falling
asleep on itself? 
Does night dream of actresses sleeping on leaves?
Where is the human figure in this? 
Your Saturday is a memory without a body.
A pair of lungs that knew too much about your mother’s rape
tells you to leave reality through a threshold of a dream. 
You knew how to be authentic. How to get rid of people.
How desertion works in the wilderness.
You exclude sound from your thesis.
It’s a way for you to desert poetry without being too poetic. 
—  
There were thistles inside of your mother’s vaginal canal.
She wasn’t violated in the wilderness. He has dragged her there to
say that it was okay to want pins and needles. She wasn’t numbed
after all. Her body didn’t pretend to be a God. Just a whimpered
Lao Tzu. 
In a remote mountain, the men are smoking pipes and their vapors
smell like evergreen. 
To punctuate their desire she says: God is being difficult. But he is
not. 
I have to tell the world that I am sad and have been forgotten. Is
there a way home from not being homeless? Is there a way to swim
in an Indian reservation without being caught? 
Listen: the isotope was just a trope.
There are ways to move smoothly in and out of insincerity. 
We grow to learn how to brush melted butter
onto doughs shaped like the cavalry.
They arrive galloping on the baking
sheets without yeast in their armors. 
—  
Every Tuesday we acquire clues from the shape
of your mother’s scream.
When it was hoarse, it had the shape of a small bonsai tree. 
Your cat licks you and licks you. 
You know it’s not 300 bc.
Desire comes and goes while leaving lies to clothe themselves. 
Her anger is a troublesome candidate of sadness—
lights itself on fire.
From time to time, the cunt of that fire grows ember by ember. 
Once in a while, a house made of screams floats down a black river
on the planet Pluto.
Its chimney is not designed to ventilate silence or resilience.
It’s designed to allow screams to escape without suffocating
everyone inside it. 
Once in a while the rain arrives to suppress the anger of the
scream. 
When anger soaks like wet grasses on the house’s floorboard, the
ants come out to showcase their military might. 
They resurrected the screams from their wet ash and carry them
on their powerful backs.
The aftermath of a rape is portable and transmutable.
A possible somatic experience for the ants, but may not be for the
human or the inhuman.


^^EOP^^





^^EOP^^





                                            Is it alive?
                                                                                         —neither a head,
legs nor arms!
...................
                                                                  ... torpid against
the flange of the supporting girder         .         ?
                                          an inhuman shapelessness,
knees hugged tight up into the belly
            Egg-shaped!
—William Carlos Williams, 1950 visit to El Paso, from “Desert Music”



Yes, I am a body of rags lying
here on the bridge waiting for 
a hot rain to wash me open,
dissolve me off the bridge 
because this border is closed.
I rot on the boundary line 
and can’t enter Juarez,
pennies thrown at me 
when a drunk El Pasoan
returns in the darkness 
and sees my shape that
makes him hurry across. 
No head, decades ago they threw
it in the river without my screams. 
My arms were the first to go
when I couldn’t climb the wall. 
I can never leave this bridge.
I live on the pure line that divides 
countries and grabs my hunger
from sliding into Mexico with 
my outstretched hands.
I still have my knees. 
I used to be sold in Juarez and
smuggled into El Paso, the egg 
that floated down the Rio Grande
to break hundreds of miles away 
before being thrown back.
I stay on the bridge and can’t move. 
Do not cross to El Paso without wiping
your shoes of me, one foot on US 
concrete, the other scraping away
at my Mexican rags. 
When I struggle against the wire fence,
I make sure I salute two flags.


^^EOP^^


Before any of it, a goat appeared
in a piebald sweater, beardless
and tethered at the collar
on half a tennis court of land
up a rutted lane above the road. 
Doubtless a horse once clip-clopped there
before a trap, a whip, a tweed of farmer
with bushels and crates
of cabbages, parsnips, blue duck eggs
to pay the country doctor. 
Not now, and not then,
we drive home between the fields.
She is radioactive, or lately was,
and sleeps on the doses of nitrogen mustard
a country doctor has called for. 
Little goat forgive me. I shouldn’t do this.
All you do is munch your poxy plain of grass,
your kingdom for a caper.
If at night you sing your tired chin to sleep,
it’s not a metaphor, it’s a tragedy. 
Instead, let’s say a ship arrived one day.
Let’s say its decks were delicate, polished oak.
Let’s say happy impossible winds steered it.
Let’s say the captain, sweeping his spyglass
over the hills, after all this time, found us.


^^EOP^^


The blood of language moves through the word cell from monk’s cell to prison cell to biological cell. I don’t know why a Braille cell is called a cell. I don’t know how many blood cells Louis Braille lost when the awl he was  playing with as a small child slipped and injured his eye.

Red blood cells live some hundred days before they are worn out by their silent hustle—looping and looping, pounded through the heart’s chambered cathedral, rushing out to the farthest reaches of the body with the good news of oxygen, squeezing single file along capillaries, like anxious deer probing their tracks through the woods. Rushing, silent, looping the circuits of the body. Again, again, again. Load iron. Dump iron. Load dump squeeze hustle.

Red blood cells pushed through the capillaries that pushed through my  retinas. They broke loose to run a green swarm in the corral of my eye. But that is history. Today cells still push through the capillaries fenced off by my calloused fingerprint. This one that I run over the Braille cell, the pattern of bumps.

—

A red blood cell is measured in microns. A solitary prison cell is measured in feet. Six feet by nine feet or less. I don’t know what the unit of measure is for how living in solitary changes a person. We know that living in a confined space, without access to the long view or landscape, changes the eye. The eye, for lack of practice, loses its ability to make out what lies in the distance. I don’t have a unit of measure for what this does to the heart.

—

A Braille cell is measured in spaces in a grid—two across by three down—that can be filled with a raised dot or bump. Different combinations of dots represent different letters, punctuation, symbols, shorthand.

—

The oldest cell I find in the dictionary is the monastic cell, a place for contemplation. From the concealed place where wine was stored. As in cellar. I find Braille contemplative. I touch my index finger to a bumpy piece of paper. My hand advances slowly left to right, the touch receptors in my finger triggered by the uneven contact of paper and skin. Messages run along nerves, finger-to-brain, brain-to-finger. Cognition sizzles. Mind notices this feels different than the pathway of sound in ear to auditory processing. Listening pulls me out into the world in an infinity of directions. Touching my reading educates me on my exact location in the world, feet in shoes, weight of foot on ground, weight of bones and flesh in chair.


^^EOP^^


I hate how I can’t keep this tremor inside, this mute
matter of being made extant, this shiver in being, in
no not-being, this wild flying up from the inner surge 
and this crack in the apparatus espied around
the corner from my particular warble, this
quiver of dissolution in the pool of no single thing, 
this break in the entity of the single, of not
a mistake in being made, this suffering of trying
to contain the infinite in language, this refusal 
inextricable from its mass; this love, love of
love, this being only in your presence, this inability
not to err, rather the constitution of my broken image 
caressed by this, this permission to submerge, this bigger
and bigger being, tremor of infinite allowances, this telos
of cataloging that which can never be disappeared.


^^EOP^^


What did they desire, the dead who had returned?
The sons who had inherited their estates
pretended not to know them. The iron gates
were welded shut, but soon the dead had learned 
to hire lawyers practiced in the laws
that bound the afterlife to lesser gods.
The angels thundered on like piston rods,
denying their gold wings to either cause. 
The city streetlamps flared like learnèd ghosts.
The moon turned red. Beneath a scrim of clouds,
Spanish moss draped the myrtle trees like shrouds—
in politics the guests became the hosts. 
Those days made angels of the better sort.
The cases languished in a lower court.


^^EOP^^


Monostich: a long sentence
Sternum: a little chest
Heart: upside down 
Location of the unconscious:
Empty window seat 
Horizon: gone at night
Thought: given
Prison: a perversion 
—  
Our earth can’t live without holy rites.
You can see this from the sky. 
Lots of hills to climb up and down.
A straight ravine between. 
Snow figures engraved in stones.
Show streaks of sun gone but
The white rocks shrink and grow
Grave at sunset.   
Turn to the right
And you will fall to the left. 
One figure wears a beard
Down to his chest 
But Eros hates coverings.
And prefers to be caught naked 
With his bow and arrow. 
Embellishes
But clears the way for pathos. 
—  
From above I covet a mountain beneath my feet. 
Shrines made of dung and branches,
With berries for eyes and burlap hung with holly.
They were curled in shadows on roads
Leading to every stop we made from the Trig 
To Top Withens to Liverpool.
The white and purple mountains.
Stood over the Brontës and clusters
Of black thistles’ script. 
I remember a church (a cave supported
By old bicycle parts to keep it up)
Was bound by a broken bell and a box
Containing snapshots and trinkets.   
“We will get through this!” 
—  
Why mercy? 
Having mercy on someone is easier than forgiving them. 
That one there? 
A man limited by logic, he imprisoned the people whose thinking was infinite. 
And her, the serious one? 
Stars without light hold the others up. 
I lost you for a moment. 
Mid-sentence is darker so you can’t decipher it.
Look up. 
Oyster, shell pink, sky inside. Our prison. 
What would you tell the judge? 
The difference between a man who shoots others and then himself and one who shoots others and runs away. 
You will tell her that decisions are only guesses.
“Resentment is a weak form of suicide.” 
That’s why suicide is hard to choose even when you’re dying.
“I wish they would shoot themselves before they shot the others.” 
—  
We’ve evolved (arrived) just in time for the obsolete. 
The center that runs along the sides of the tarmac
Is a camp without a name.
A holding station. 
A glass of narcotics, a warm blanket, steam for suffocation,
For each passenger of any class. 
“Did you know a rendition is an interpretation, an
explanation of something not clear?” 
“It’s also persecution and surrender,
Translation and the handing over
Of prisoners to countries
Where detention is.”
Pass through customs in silence.
The red strings of radiation
Will only burn your bed-skins.
Do not joke or rhyme with bomb. 
“If you have a passport, bless it.” 
—  
Now the wing is whitening, its patches quiver
on the steel and fragment into petals that are either living or not.
In grade one I watched the lights of cars passing on the bedroom wall
for surely they were messages flying at the speed of light.
And aren’t they still?   
In the sky there are few signs of progress.
Tongues wag and sailors pull their beards.
Some have pictures of naked women, some have boys. 
It’s fractal, a science student whispers to nobody special. 
—  
There is a wonderful kidnapped hunted raped and betrayed girl
In fairy tales. She has a name, but the vowels and subjects
Around can’t be switched to fit. 
She wants to escape but letters won’t let her. 
She never thinks about darkness or dying because they’re natural
And don’t require thought. 
She carries her darkness everywhere.
What is not natural 
Is being here an utter stranger.
And flight being no metaphor. 
—  
What if the outcome of an act burst into color.
All that fruit skin dimpled from the touch of branches.
The oranges falling when the creatures below were hungry. 
Each wink of an eyelid presaged a long look at a winter
That would come eons later. 
What if you stood when I entered. 
What if you think of time as a long and everlasting plain,
You can pass across it any which way you turn.
And walk around the pond with your father again. 
—  
I had a garden of my own
For twenty-one years.
Seven trees times three
Planted for the first children. 
Oh its land was a meadow
And our little house, a grape arbor
And a Wampanoag
Grave in a grove of elms. 
Then a tree like an elephant
Bucked in a storm.
And its trunk broke into
A wrinkled little stump. 
Roots don’t give up. 
And stones only breathe once a year. 
Many people passed through.
We could have watered more
Or flowered a path
For the visitors. After all 
Love meant life and its shadow.
Children played and grew.
I too grew old for no reason.
Love stood at a distance. 
One day the snow will camouflage
The huddling April buds
Before a cherry-picker
Damns all but one, the littlest. 
—  
At least I know when the wild geese
Fly from Sepiessa.
They herd the future
As it approaches the bench. 
Night ... the playground
At Town Hall is creaking
And tribal members
Now numbered 
In the twos are too early for sun-up.  
We almost sit together
But our feet of shadows
Show failed land deals.
Steps lowered and slimy 
On a slip into the lagoon.
Ghoulish are the ghosts
Of time past: ancestors
With our same names. 
—   Pensées sauvages: wild pansies, like violets, have the shape of thoughts, savage thoughts, colored thoughts, sprung from a stem. 
Purple and yellow. Five petals. 
Once Cupid shot an arrow dipped in the ink of a pansy into the eyelid of a sleeping child. 
From then on the child saw cirrus colors at dawn, dawn
being where iridescence grows flowers.


^^EOP^^


So how will it end?
You want it straight?

^^EOP^^


With “Waltzing Matilda,” funnel web spiders, and echidnas out of the way, you move on to the villanelle. The alien learns quickly, and soon the rhyme scheme and refrain are being applied to whatever it encounters: moonlight filling a green bucket by the door, a dog’s tooth in furniture, the sound of a nail gun. You go to bed and dream of planets disappearing like balls in a perfect snooker clearance. In the morning you find the walls papered with villanelles, each one signed by what appears to be a bar code. When you scan one with your phone, the screen lights up with footage of a satellite flyby through the heliosphere, trailing the sound of whale song, children crying, sustained applause, and Blind Willie Johnson’s “Dark Was the Night, Cold Was the Ground.”


^^EOP^^


I fear dispersal but the resounding really sounds may be full of echo
or echolocation for the next round 
Eye rowed in the guest book of God my many sacred tongues
body and bow 
Fingers spell now all the spaces I open
You now verse now open oh pen 
Cacti quiver for a century
In the desert I swam myself earthword to know 
No time on earth and no breath no dearth
Hollowed out into architecture eternal 
Who argues with rhyme or snow
Who knows the space in your here 
The space in the storm so finely bowed
The space in snow no one nears


^^EOP^^


With my ear to the door
of my cell. And my want
like a comb in my hair. 
Like a veil where there is no
veil. With a ring in my ear.
A ring in the hole in my ear. 
I rap at the door of my will
and the door of my want
as to will them away. My 
want like a veil on the floor.
I appear at the door of my
will with a veil in my hand 
and a comb in my hair.
My want like a hole that
I bore in the floor. 
Where my will is more
feeling than veil, and my veil
is more want for a veil 
than a veil. I wear the comb
of my fear in my hair.
My veil is as thin as my want, 
and my want is as thin
as a hair. When I curl up my
want in the curl of my hair. 
When I curl up on the floor
of the cell of my want.
I bear my fear in my cells 
like I’m bearing a ring.
Like I’m curled up inside
of the ring in my ear. 
I rap at my want for a door
where there is no door.
A will where there is no will. 
At my want for unveiling.
My will to unveil it. The curve
of my will and my ear 
to the door. With the curl
of my ear to the door. Not
the door but my fear of the door.


^^EOP^^


Before you sink away
into the morphinesweet unreality of the everyday
we would like to say something
about those spasms and fasciculations of yours
as well as that bump on your back 
For years you have no doubt been googling every freckle
Just recently
you were at the doctor’s with a patch of dry skin on your leg
Diagnosis: too much shower gel
But on hearing the word chondrosarcoma
you went home and immediately unplugged your router
Do you know where your priorities lie? 
Do you know what life has to offer
or did those endless therapy sessions
and that eight-week mindfulness course
simply teach you how to tolerate suffering
that every signal in your body
can be temporarily expelled
to the rhythm of some breathing exercise? Let the pain be To be free is to be free of need
Wrong
To be free is to need some fresh air
and to be able to get up and go outside 
Don’t say we didn’t warn you
Translated from the Dutch


^^EOP^^


How do I compare the costs
Of leaving one system
Of cooperation
For another
System of cooperation?
How do I loosen the tongue
Enough to inhabit
The temple incognito?
What are the people to me
Until I condense my hesitations
And drink in stillness with
The rest of us, slightly drunk
But pacing moderately
Around the dew, dropped
To the knees at a tepid hour?
Cooperation is free, or is it
So? A refugee has no terms
Of comparison. Who really is
Aggrieved is a real fugitive
To freedom. The only enemies
Of freedom are border agents
And those dozing on one side
Of the other. The border condition
Realizes the personality.
That is why it has to be
Negotiated again in public
Houses. I tried to be loved
And everyone else failed me.
The dew is a corrosive.
It’s only obvious once
The horizon tempers
The topography again.
And this is so only when
Earthlight can be confined
By the foreground.
Allegorists are not agents
Now so much as internet vernaculars
We all get our chance to innovate.
Nations cannot be explained
Otherwise. Someone, we,
Made up the whole thing.
I want us to think we were
Liars then but are dying to
Finally grow up, no longer
Following fictions. But
Perfectly flush corroborating
Rehearsals.
The students can always
Have the data
They deserve.
What is oligarchy?
They call it up
And it clicks.
(Hear the disconsolate
fizz of epiphany
pitched out of library windows
and welfare field office exits.)
Everything can be
Said to have
Occurred. But do
They describe themselves
As belated or latent?
The reveal is just a mild
Turning in
Any case.
The air in winter
Is best for your device.
Cordon it around your
Device’s appetite.
Or there will be
A disaster
For the recollection,
Proof by perdurable
Association. (Check
the custom, or costume,
that to learn is
a bargain first fixed
in the recognition of ignorance
for which the learned refuse
to serve as models.)
Students delay excitement
Just long enough
And then they know.
You are a student
By profession.
If you insist
You deserve
A livelihood
You will be
Persecuted
For this
And that is
What has become
Of forensics.
That is the
Rootless fact.
Its reason is
Untraceable, so
Its stolid justice proffers
Souls for history’s
Paltry set of names
Of strangers. To
Assimilate novelty
Is then to obtain inventory.
What will you do
With it all?
Won’t you enjoy
The leverage it provides
So as to insist
On more?
It is not data
But esteem.
That is the remaining
Root system,
That nothing will
Have to be
Enough.


^^EOP^^


A sparrow weaves over the derelict terrace
the psychics used to meet in 
toward the snow-garnished mountains!
They brought their lozenges of grief here, 
held each other’s pallid hands and summoned
reeds of kindness into their voices! 
The men down tools, take lunch, smoke
in a row, dangle their legs from the wall! 
They’re kids mostly; a xylophone
of hard hats tuneless in the rain! 
The half-built apartment block is waiting
and they will never live there! 
I knew a boy who wanted to be a pilot
so much that he became one! 
Farewell, years of simulated taxiing
on the world’s fantastic runways! 
O night flights over the patchwork of Europe!
O unscheduled layover! O seat belt sign! 
I knew a man who hiked into the mountains!
His name was early morning light! 
His name was sunset in Libra!
Between the Scots pine and the ash 
he found the branch with his name on it
and stepped off it into the air!


^^EOP^^


The herons were no longer safe in the sky. They flew with prayer,
then fell to us. We hid them from the cats. What to do with prayer? 
Decades after the civil war, we enter the sniper’s hole, sew
the sandbags, read words for his boyfriend on the wall, true with prayer. 
Write my name & invite me to a wedding. I want a parade
of cars with flashers on, each blinking red, two times two with prayer. 
Dear Eurydice, what good a heart that can’t resist looking back?
Foolish, music-laden Orpheus. Almost saved you with prayer. 
In the museum of memory, the missing accumulate.
They shoot out of the tiles like grass blades, damp & new with prayer. 
I found a photo in a library book: lovers holding hands.
I felt chosen, then lost it. & I didn’t pursue with prayer. 
When I interviewed God, I said I moved the plants toward the light,
forgot the water. Is love a lack, always imbued with prayer? 
Tarot cards, make me beautiful. Abundance me, O Three of Cups,
spin luck O Wheel of Fortune, I’m through, I’m through, I’m through with prayer.


^^EOP^^





For Kazim



Sunrise ocher marks
the river’s forehead, 
wet dhotis betray supplicants
bare as opaque windows, 
their secrets. It’s no secret,
my petals wreath 
my crown in marigold, a glow
I’ve nursed into nova 
when I cracked, from drought,
my pericarp, thirsty for God. 
I have always been
a honey man, 
coat of a langur, pilgrim-
body of fruit- 
offering cast onto the tongue
of deity I prayed would move 
in me. No sweetmeat
to sugar the idol 
carved of me. The devout
fill brass kettles, 
fill God with God,
to offer running water to Sun, 
as mantras insist
from the temples; 
the adhan’s pollen drifts—
yes, God is great. 
Along the ghats
umbrellas bloom in red, 
I breathe into nostrils of marble: The name of God is Truth— 
vendors hawk neem branches
to scour mouths in bitter.


^^EOP^^


It’s so flat here you can see everything. It’s not romantic. Nobody can slip in or out in secret, and who among us has pumped the last worry through her heart?

Collapsing into shade, I wish for more sons, endless daughters: a higher ratio of my people to other people. Why not want what I want; since we used all the air conditioning it’s become impossible to think things through.

Can you believe your ears? All the electric music in the world has been turned into handbells. I wish I had a cushion for my knees instead of gloves to keep the handbells pure. We can get used to anything. That doesn’t mean we should.

I went to a wedding where everything was outrageous but trying to act  modest by including very goofy elements, such as people in bear costumes and gold nuggets descending from the ceiling, only to be jerked back up out of reach when people tried to grab them.

Long ago, a matrimonial family collected a few eggs from each household in the village to contribute to the wedding cake. A pig for the dinner: a gift from a rich great-uncle. Shortly after, there was a period of department store gift services and electro-synth harps for hire.

But now we pick dandelions to make wine, and pluck chickens to make fine the groom’s cloak. He wants large brown wings; he wants wolf pelt for his loins. He wants he wants he wants. There is no end to that.

The bride is someone who has only ever served. No use asking someone who’s once had a true taste of freedom, whose eyes widened and whose pelvis thrust up unbidden. Better she be someone who might never know what she lost.

It is as it ever was. How many centuries have brides been made and used in this way?

How few centuries have let women be girls first, swirling as long as they wanted into their sweetness and sharpening to ripeness, only becoming women once full heavy love was their desire inside and out. Maybe one. Maybe not quite one full century.


^^EOP^^


There is no act of forgiveness,
only the redeeming light on
the shoulders dancing in
tall weeds, cigarettes gone
and the girls slapping free. 
The tortilla cart burns against
the wall because Jesus called
my brother who was acquired
by whistling gangs of men
under the hanging arch. 
There can be no night without
the wind on shoulders exhausted
by games and messages my brother
lost between the darkness and
the bridge into Juarez, Mexico, 
where no crows caw because
the buildings are torn and
flashlights are narrow in
their beaming stumble,
my thoughts the last ones
on this side of the river, 
my sudden happiness hidden
in celestial light without being
appalled at what I see, my ears
to the ground listening to weeds
overrun by boys who can’t spell
and are waiting for me without
knowing pilgrims are on the border. 
Whatever kills them spares me
the journey to beg for purity
among unspoken Spanish
everyone fears in their greed.
The group doesn’t know it is
what the river stones teach,
though I can’t speak of them 
because faith is prehistoric and
my brother is pursued by dust
storms that erase his footprints
across the back roads where he
loses his language of need.


^^EOP^^


because we know distance too well
because the blood bank didn’t have enough blood for nana & her new knee
because I see your car a car like yours parked across the street from my apartment
because the same night awaits us all
because arizona & the drought & I was seven when it started
because nana used to sleep with a belt tied around her waist so tight to wake like an hourglass
because I wait on you
because I want to know the antonym to every word
because we speak to each other in our sleep
because I do my best thinking in the shower so I take long showers
because you kiss the parts of my body I hate most
because you can love someone & not remember their birthday
because sometimes I want the wind & it is impossible
because from the airplane I can see both oceans & where they meet


^^EOP^^


If you go to bed hungry, your soul will get up and steal cold rice from the pot.
Stop playing with fire before the moon rises or you’ll pee in your sleep. 
Sweeping the floor after dark sweeps wealth and good fortune out the door.
Fork dropped: a gentleman will visit. Spoon: a bashful lady. 
Bathing after you’ve cooked over a hot stove makes the veins swell.
For safe passage to the guest who leaves mid-meal: turn your plate. 
The adage goes: coffee stunts growth. Twelve grapes on New Year’s: the opposite.
Advice from the learned: hide a book under your pillow. Never step on. Never drop. 
Every rice grain that remains on your plate you’ll meet again on the footpath
to heaven. You’ll have to stoop to pick each one of them up.


^^EOP^^





For Alexander Moysaenko



The black heart of the moon’s visible
through the trees from here. 
Where are you? 
I’m alone on the road
with a dead phone. 
The birds are flapping overhead
but there’s not much light to be guided by. 
If any horizon becomes visible enough to follow. 
Forget the rain’s smear,
the chafe of fabric at the calf. 
The money ran out. The diners are stuffed
and back for more. 
Each terrible thing I said to the child
will get repeated hopefully as a joke. 
And like language, these gestures, or a certain way of nodding
one’s head, it all eases in with less than a breath. 
Forget the song’s words, the order of the band’s set tonight. 
The black moon’s heart’s
got that sinister bent
and I want to get
touched at by the snakes. 
One of the students in my class
used to go bear hunting with his two uncles. 
They played recordings of distressed animals
to lure in tentative animals to kill. 
This practice is illegal in many places.
Because it’s so very effective. 
I split open the apple
and hand the good half to a child on the bus
nestled in under the arm of her sleeping mother. 
Love from here is a long way to go. 
Get on your bike and ride
through the lights.


^^EOP^^


   i want ! to be friends ! with katya ! i want
  to dress ! how i want to dress ! like a gale !      full of glitter ! and back alleys ! a seagull
laugh ! to shake our being ! whose secret lies !
  perhaps ! in kicking legs upwards in delight !
       painted ! an omnivorous harpy ! goofy !
  loving our friends ! lighting up around them !
  what a man ! unstoppable ! they’ll say, why !
 they’re the perfect woman ! (now that’s me !)
    judy jetson ! enraged ! with a penis ! and
obsessed with Contact too ! in every situation !
       a little Jodie Foster ! o dear role model for my role model ! find meaning ! play parts !
  everything real ! happens ! behind the eyes !
 all those things we cannot prove ! like love !
  like the world ! is just ! what we make of it   
 


^^EOP^^





Translation: “I won’t forget.”



my father: sideburns down the length of his face my age now & ripe my age now & alive his husky voice’s crackle like the night’s wind through corn fields of bell-bottoms fields of pomade my mother’s overlarge sunglasses crowded on her face crowded in the only english movie theater that plays amitabh bachchan my mother watching the blown-out screen the smoke spilling from light how he is able to be in all places at once all the places she can’t be the man on the screen a kind of god maybe a kind of god maybe my grief at all places at once replaying their every story a kind of god maybe my father’s nazar his long look his luck-laced lungs breathing my mom’s hands in the theater as they whisper next to my father’s the almost touch blood electric my father watching her his sideways glance on her thick eyelashes so long it’s as if she never blinks my father’s stomach blinks & blinks and a thousand amitabh bachchans blink his insides his heart pumps main na bhoolunga on beat main na bhoolunga in chorus main na bhoolunga the theater singing my mother’s ghost fingers on his palm & maybe this is what falling in love is like: a more handsome man jumbling the intestines a more handsome man belting the song to the woman with the long eyelashes in the theater & you—afraid to blink in case she disappears in case it was smoke this whole time.


^^EOP^^


Canary-yellow dice
aren’t what you think, 
seller said in their shop
where they sold
    all things
      canary— 
            whistles,
    sweets, frills, perfumes, with hints
     of cherry chance, 
a throw of canary.  
Much hinges
on
    canary, 
Canary said
       in
        their
    shop where they sold sunny
vanes
on canary die. 
    Forgive me for
showing
        myself a composed canary, live
or not.


^^EOP^^


my mother
asking how
to open a tab
on her laptop,
to email a photo,
calling to ask— can you change
the lightbulb
at the top of the stairs?

^^EOP^^


In the other world we use other words, painting
them with water on the desert’s sidewalk under • unwaver
ing / the / sky’s gaze, meant to be eaten up immediate
ly by our nearest star: we know we’re brief, a flash
of the magnesium bulb’s Lichtenberg lace or
in the hardpan land we inhabit, unwilling / it’s /
to unloosen • Edenic ancestry to us, to unearth / un
couth / the • treasure which lies (we believe) like an ocean
of luminous fish with their wayfinder’s lanterned
faces beneath us, sufficiently gilded to wake the dead
 ’s memory of what they no longer own: a form
for the nation-state to take, to write its penal colony’s
penalties upon, or hold, same as we hold our own
souls, which wager against us as soon as they’re able.


^^EOP^^


“It took the herd six hours,”
the Blue Planet voiceover explains,
orcas pushing a blue whale calf
under. Keet, our son points
at the screen, naming them all
one whale, from the greek kētos,
water-monster, “The seas bathed
in calf’s blood.” More, our son
asks, More okean, watches the red
beneath them spreading, More ocean.
“Killer whales,” the voice reminds,
the blue calf’s heart bigger
than all three of ours, its blood could fill
our son’s bathtub for weeks. The orcas
only eat the head, let the rest sink
to the ocean floor, but no, the voice
points out how body born six thousand pounds
lands on the skeleton of a full grown blue,
“Nothing gets wasted in the water.” Look, our son staring, Look,
learning how the deep devours,
blubber separates from bone,
even bone won’t survive long,
eaten by water worms and salt.
Spicy, our son calls any intense
flavor, tears in his mouth, but no,
not over this, the calf’s
blood or its bones, the orcas
swimming through reddened salt,
but over desire, he wants
what he cannot have
or doesn’t want what he is
given, a calf’s heart
in the teeth of a hungrier mammal,
because what else is worth
that much salt?
 


^^EOP^^


& no it’s not a landscape painting
I’m talking about a prospect wherein 
vision gets unhooked from the sockets. & no it’s not
a love song about blindness or the way 
she moves. rather it is standing
in the midst of nothing & the wind passing 
since seeing was always a curse, the boundary
between things floating 
up to foil how anyone might touch
or travel. unless we can find a non- 
delineated dance proliferating otherwise
in the unhasty unfolding of we’re already there 
à la Hegel re: Kant, & not like
that Caspar David Friedrich painting either 
(some solitary man-figure surveying
what was already his so it becomes his again) 
but instead unvisioning the world, not like
Heidegger, obviously, not the thing at hand 
but like the hand repeating a motion
forever, writing her beloved like this is politics  this is the end of all endings
& the wind


^^EOP^^


by this point you must be hungry
for God not the real thing only
flecks of gold paint the marble bust
of a half-bull half-man 
today I took a visit to the only
museum and every last gallery was
packed with snow I mean this
literally the whole place 
frozen I didn’t stay long
I was worried about melting
the art I touched my eyes lightly
to each flake and when I left 
the museum I believed a bit more
in God the strangest thing was
I never shivered I knew love
the whole time


^^EOP^^


I’ve never seen pigeons argue
I only see them soar
I don’t know if a pigeon is naïve or worldly
I just know it has no past to make it toil through life 
Maybe they’re the tongues of the air
Lazily expressing cars’ sighs
Maybe they’re lined up on the roof
Vying to perform snow’s wedding 
One day I stick my head out the window
And realize their nation is the act of soaring
Soaring makes my silence meaningless
Thank god, they’ve taught me how to talk about nations! 
Standing under a flock of pigeons, I think oh People aren’t even worth one flower blooming toward them Translated from the Chinese


^^EOP^^


Exodus is a traffic jam,
and traffic jams are dangerous. 
Ahead of us, armed with sticks and rakes,
a child’s brigade does battle 
on this doomed track hourly blown to dust.
To occupy themselves, they race a tank. 
Dust is faster. Tattered surveillance blimps
yank against steel tethers over the saltlick plain. 
The road goes boom again. The flimsy means
by which we try to distance war 
don’t matter anymore. Disguise your car,
your hair, take to the air, stare down 
on the terrible mirror of the ground
where those who didn’t qualify 
for tickets to the sky
wave goodbye, goodbye.


^^EOP^^


Fucked art thou, with luck, o reader within the palace within the palette within the impatience within, who tilts his letters into the light of the mind’s muttering unto itself, releasing their sounds to the whirlpool fierce of an ear to draw creations in—
Who brings forth a kiss of circumference, the glyphs hooked and loosened and linking, as though they were dancing through moths of minutes and months like wind—out of a god whose name is Gone ...
Fukkit and lukky art thou in the wind moving marjoram into the mint, the fuzz and down of the former grazing the raised ribs of the other, the essences borne—
Pheromones suddenly wafting, your eye catching the gradient greens and vein-like patterns, the gray stubble of sage’s tongue, thick oregano’s glister and whorl, stalks of thyme spiking the air on a kitchen porch or Sikinos slope with its lavender flower, lit up, still, in June;
The blue film of night’s end rolling into white near dawn, the light by which you know a friend, the ancients explain, from six feet off—or, a wolf from a dog;
The glow of morning bougainvillea, its papery bracts in a breeze like prayer, its bezeled ruby beginnings morphing into pinks- and magentas-to-come, cream-tipped corollas on perfect display, style and stigma sheathing the anther;
Then creeping Christians’ dusky luster, in the shade at noon;
Almonds swelling jade drupes into the sinking summer, encoding spring’s initial explosion;
Pomegranate’s garnet, pendant, containing—against the green of its arch and stretch—six hundred seeds dark with light, glinting in its skin;
Fucked, art thou, and lucky, who translates it into the day as blessed—
So blessèd as in blasted art thou, in a way, in whom this knowing is strengthened in bringing you down to the cords of arthritic knees,  wrestling the gust of a given moment’s giving—like vapor—and  strangely grateful;
Blessèd art thou whose petitions are curses, whose fuck touches the  innermost chamber, waking the king and queen in their slumber;
Blessèd the consonants funneling vowels,
In Scripture’s offering—a dove’s neck wrung, cakes unleavened and  mingled with oil;
Blessèd the spirit’s meniscus within a letter typed or scrawled, as  not-quite-deciphered codes of soul—
A pupil’s reaching through a sentence, slipping and reaching again, and again, a teacher tracing the shape of her thinking;
Blessèd even the stink and politic rot of the day’s pronouncements on high, Liver of the blaspheming Jew, gall of goat, and slips of yew—
in action as Evil: the concrete Lego-like bunker and tower, bunker and tower, barbwired cabbage and vines, shadows gliding as crows fly across the road to the holy of hills and prefab huts, from which goat-like thugs emerge, watching and then descending through a glowering slope- stepping prance, tribal fringes trailing—their dance sick with a stiffened faith, wicking and blotching their map of state, like a cancered scan,  eating away at its language and letters, as Gone yields goon, or gun, or bone, where lips meet and part in the “b” of all that’s brutal and also insidious, pointed to and taken on, in the maybe pointless battle—
Evoking the hundred blessings the rabbis say need to be uttered daily, reading the number—me’ah (hundred)—into the word for what, or mah: “What does Becoming your God ask of you?” (Deuteronomy, 10:12);
And blessèd is never quite knowing, exactly, what those blessings should be.


^^EOP^^


In order to see the world’s evils clearly
They redden their eyes on the branch
Until they believe the warm wind’s praise
In order to become waves in our blood
They offer their lives to the wine cellar 
In my glass, the blood of their youth
Tries to send waves through my heart
It’s a jockey riding my bloodstream
Loosening age’s reins— 
I used dirty words I don’t normally use
Nearly scaring awake my dead relatives
I fell fast asleep with my arms around love
And, waking, couldn’t find my lover 
I fit right in at a banquet in the city
And finally realize, love is wine’s tax
High taxes make wine noble 
A crate of red wine
Is a crate of Van Goghs—do you believe that?
A crate of red grapes
Is a crate of nipples—do you believe that?
Translated from the Chinese 


^^EOP^^


This disease has come back With frills and furbelows.  You must give your whole life to poetry Only a few survive if that— 
Poems I mean, paper crumpled Shades of another water— 
Far springs are what you long for, Listening for the slow drip of chemicals 
Through a hole in your chest.  If you were torn from me I could not bear what the earth had to offer.

^^EOP^^


What happened when he grabbed me at the root?
I stopped. It all stopped: spirals fought to win
My spiral life (from an unspiraled root— 
From thick cigar stubbed in my young tongue’s root—
(Heart beating uncle lifetimes through my skin)).
What happened, when he grabbed me at the root 
Where women come to starve, our ready root?
My broken body (one more), broken in?
My spiral life from an unspiraled root- 
Fed pomegranate? (in the basement: root-
Husked hell of seed as if seed could have been
What happened.) When he grabbed me at the root, 
Did ancestors throw chains down through our root
To rot and winnow, with their pain and sin,
My spiral life? From an unspiraled root? 
Oh sisters, keen our sisters! Till the root
Of loving! burns! (but not! from! foreign kin!)
WHAT happened (when) (he) (grabbed) me at the root?
Our spiral life! From an unspiraled root!


^^EOP^^


Grain by grain, salt’s frozen tears
Help me count history’s disasters
I can’t blame salt for telling food You’re full of wounds 
Salt misses the freedom of the ocean
Remembering waves, salt jumps into a soup
But it finds there only my reflected face
It hides by making itself too soft to chew 
Sometimes, salt follows a cold sweat
Waking me from a nightmare
Dreamed blood tastes like salt
As if in human failure lay the silence of God 
Having swum in the ocean
Salt considers soup a shallow pond
For salt, every meal is a jail 
One day, an extra salty flavor
Makes me cough and cough
It feels like cold fish bones scraping my throat
Maybe it’s salt telling me I’m going to prison in your body
Don’t ever forget who I am!

^^EOP^^


A crow perches inside me. 
Actually, it is a whale. It is hard to tell
by touch alone. Nothing I own ever looks
me properly in the eye. Sometimes 
a loud caw at dusk feels
like the largest mammal on Earth. 
A deep breath out the blowhole 
into my stomach. One second it swims
and the next it is a small extension
of a tree. This is a kind of beginning— 
a finger puppet show. The light
dancing around my hands. 
Me dancing alone on a stem. 
A persimmon blooms.
A boy learns a song and plants it
in an orchard. Inside of me 
the large creatures change their shapes
to fit. A blackbird. An organ. 
Animals with no names. I send them off
into the world daily. Little sadness
takes flight. Love is a brave child. 
These things take the shape
of their containers. 
I don’t have to do anything to hold them.


^^EOP^^


The soldiers are afraid
of the camera. Are you shooting the souk?
The photographer says No no, just her.
I say Just me, just me.
My black dress, a little above the knee, helps.
A girl learns to spectacle enough.
The soldier nods, lowers his head.
The crew remind me to say  Not from here, to say Half-half,
to speak English, mostly. Everyone is always kinder to strangers.
The city will devour its children,
unless she doesn’t recognize them. 
And so I, of this city,
I who stand on stages and name this city,
deny this city in the heart of the city,
deny this city at the old gate of the city.
I say Bonjour, I say Thank you, I undo
my accent and put on the colonizer’s tongue.
When you say hometown, what do you mean? 
The crew comment on the quality
of the light through the tin roofs,
they say Pretend no one is looking.
But the guy with the espresso and cigarette is looking,
and the teenager who sells batteries is looking,
and the man with the shisha is looking, and the woman
in the clothes shop, his wife perhaps, is looking.
The photographer says Beautiful, says Try
to keep your shoulders even.

^^EOP^^


I was walking through a vast darkness
in a dress studded with diamonds, the cloth
under them like chain mail—metallic,
form fitting like the sea to its horizon. I could
hear waves breaking on the shore and far off
concertina music drifting over the dunes. What
was I doing in high heels in sand in a diamond-studded 
dress that had to be stolen? Fear washed
through me, as if one of those waves had
risen up and, against all the rules of waves,
splashed me from the shoulders
down. I was wet with diamonds and fear.
A small boat held offshore with its cold
yellow light pointing a long watery finger at me 
while the stolen feeling of the dress sparkled
my location out into the universe. Thief! Thief!
came an interplanetary cry, causing me to
gaze up into the star-brilliant firmament,
for it wasn’t just a sky anymore. It had
taken on biblical stature. How had I
gotten into this dress, these unruly 
waves, this queasy feeling I would be
found out? Time to run! my heart said,
pumping away under its brocade
of diamonds. Strange vacancies had
accumulated after all my sleep-plundered
nights. Thief! came the cry again, as if
I should recognize myself. And I did. 
I flung those high heels into the depths,
took up my newfound identity, and without
the least remorse, began to run those diamonds
right out of this world.


^^EOP^^


I am thinking that
to make thinking new again
is torch-lit work, subterranean 
and exalted. Antarctica, Goethe,
Methuselah. Seven hills of Rome.
An advertisement for a summer farming gig 
on a homestead in Alaska puzzles me:
imagine harvesting kale through days
of unrepentant 24-hour sunlight, 
covered in mosquitoes. How do you do
the things in the dark when there is no dark?
I want now to tell you abt my love 
for my whip, for killing the engine and sitting
in the garage. This is also an ancient
practice.


^^EOP^^


Thinking.
Wondering if
my trot to Paris
to suffer you
wasn’t all wrong.
My amour fou 
precise as a shark
collecting scents
miles off,
exact as a saint
cowed before
invisible wings 
rustling
abstract sheets?
Your eyes
green, and red
your hair,
iconic in this 
television universe
of one man
let nothing on,
no “real” Twitter feed
surrendering candid
portraits of what 
you believe,
what you love.
And I sit, subtracted,
before my love.
Wondering.
Subjected 
as I was
to plural echoes nth parts sensual, nth parts trust,
and to hear there
a call 
to illegitimate Paris
where I fit
right in,
Jacques Brel songbook,
ukulele, bread
and wine, simulacral  maudit bohemian
pelted by Polanski-ish
rain, but happy
away from Los Angeles
where you fit in,
being able, in one city, 
to drive for hours
and never leave home.
My choked voice grumbled
“de chrysanthèmes ...”
(Brel song) as
I sought the streets 
of Apollinaire’s “Zone”
on Google maps
(which I paid dearly
for)
still hearing the
angel 
even as
you were angry with me
who nearly destroyed
your apartment’s electricity
plugging in some idiotic
gadget of mine 
and leaving it smoking
drunk on uke, bread and wine.
Hard not to think
this symbolic
or a great way to pep
up an episode 
of Friends, or an ancient
Merchant Ivory film.
If I were Anne Carson
you’d be translation
and I
an impotent scholar 
before the Greek,
drawn by love
to the undecided
omnivorous Word
that paints travelogue,
that shields Earth, 
begging
this word side with me
when I touch down in Paris,
that it’s you who’d
ground this polysemous
text 
with a kiss, or touch
puppyish, unambiguous.
Oh, that Anne
Carson, such a genius.
She makes
me think. 
I’ve never been
so wrong, and in
the wrong place,
a foreigner, foreigned
in my own goddamned
country 
by double negation
fitting right
in (as I’ve
said) and you
a Mediterranean accent
amidst the stones 
of French abstraction,
pride, often cruelty, noirs désirs
circling like bats
who’ve read too much Saint-Just
and mistaken it for Sade. 
(That sounds quite important.
I’m afraid it’s not.)
It rained. I wrote
a pining song
in a hotel room
refusing your offer 
to stay with you
and your boyfriend
(quelle horreur)
who spoke no French
while I
conducted vertiginous conversations 
with a curator
at the Musée Gustave Moreau
pinning my hopes
on words like “Gautier” (Théophile)
“Mallarmé” and “Rimbaud”
(who didn’t come up 
of course),
and marred the language
even further with the help
of Google translate
in my letters to you
in the guise of, who? 
it wasn’t Baudelaire
(I can’t remember who,
maybe Marat,
and you, Charlotte Corday).
I liked the pining song,
in the end, 
it’s Morrissey-esque, funny
but grim, slippery
and only incomplete
without (or with) you.
Here I do not
go again, 
merely think
flat-footed
on my horizon
(scratching
my itchy head, I
think I have dandruff) 
while you
sleep
in a Westwood Airbnb
lyrically, so
I am drawn
shark-angelly 
down Hollywood Blvd.
on the 302
to an American-style aperitivo
with sliders instead
of funicular olives 
again with you
talking,
and I gazing deep
into your colors,
reading your Tweets
but never commenting. 
Such lovely olives.
It’s a beautiful evening.


^^EOP^^





For Juan Felipe Herrera



In the town of frijoles,
men eat their meals without
washing their hands, wanting
to bless their mothers’ food
with soil from the fields. 
In the town of frijoles,
boys beat on hollow pots,
the last wiping of their sides
with a piece of tortilla as
holy a moment as taking
the wafer in church. 
In the town of frijoles,
women undress to keep
their babies warm, stories
whispered into bald heads
revealed as poems decades
later, when it is early. 
In the town of frijoles,
old men cry for their
fathers and mothers,
tombstone ranches dotting
the night moon where
the pinto aromas extend
beyond the bowl of the sun.


^^EOP^^





^^EOP^^


So I entered suffering. A room with dazzling walls, starched drapes, a bed with the coverlet turned down just so. Shirred bed skirts. The pillowcase crisp, bearing the marks of the iron. A low wrought iron table with a pitcher and its glass of water. Curtain half cinched.

Was anyone else ever here? Not a trace of a prior occupant. No candy wrapper. No smudge on the high-gloss sheen. Yet I marvel at the labor that must have gone into all those preparations: someone lifting the mattress, twice, as you must, and adding the final touches; smoothing away all traces of a final touch, filling the glass precisely, so the camber of water fits like a seal over the rim.

A radio on the nightstand. It lights up, and there’s the very voice in my mind, arguing with itself, trying to convince itself that it suffers. Why so many hypnotic cadences, so many rhetorical flourishes—anaphora, chiasmus, parataxis—such subtle case logic, Rogerian argument, appeals to so many arbiters: God, reason, justice, twilight?

Search from station to station, and the white noise in between. On fm, am, and shortwave, the same rapt monologue. That marshaling of precedent, scientific data, illustrations from the history of medicine, the Upanishads, the Vedas, the sutras and suras, the Sermon on the Mount. But what is  suffering? Is it true that it requires my consent?

In a shaft of evening, the trillion worlds collide.

The rose in the vase grows whiter in darkness.


^^EOP^^


I rocked in a chair of charred Grand Dragon’s bones,
legs silent as molasses drooling from a cloud of linen. 
My fat white maid in her potholder hat
did not watch me watch her sons 
molt like dandelions in la-di-da noon
standing squarely on the blacks of their own shadows as they willed. 
She crushed lemons in her bear claw fists
and pushed a sugar dust around the pitcher. 
The mister started in on the mare,
phantasm of a centaur where it splinters. 
Three latticed glasses harmonized on the platter: 
my quiet kindness to the albess
for where I sent her daughter. 
It was Saturday. There was salt in his seams
and the slip between my knees slumped with heat 
and sheets jedidiah-teething the clothesline already.
Followed hours full of our trying to be full of each other 
and sunlight yearning like egg white through
the cracked curtains 
and the usual evidence of bluegrass his shoulders shed
beneath my nails, the rooms in me he could not enter 
branching annexes: my elderberry privacies.
Out of the yard’s farthest hem, darkness 
from the world’s first days braided into the tobacco 
and I could only imagine tomorrow
if I expected to be slaughtered in my sleep.


^^EOP^^


All my life I’ve asked my master
Why I am unable to choose
This sweet man or fancy shoes
Over this stranger, more difficult lover
And these expensive but practical loafers 
And why I am unable to author
A book exhibiting my full potential
And have focused instead on inconsequential
Letters to strange and difficult lovers
Who by my letters were never changed. 
I certainly haven’t been constrained
By terrible parents or trauma or poverty
And even if I had it wouldn’t explain
My propensity for misery
Anymore than it would my
Propensity for joy. 
Maybe I’m just a procrastinator
As life is a procrastination of death
And each breath just a procrastination of breath
And friends a procrastination of work
And work a procrastination of love
And love a procrastination I’m just not above.


^^EOP^^


Grab lunch
Polish your silver
Try a new flavor of yogurt
Burn in a lake of fire
Smoke some weed
Overeat 
Finally understand some things
Talk to Steve
Cry out breathlessly
Pay the electric bill
Go to the aquarium in the mall
Worry over the shape and color of your moles 
Sell out the people you used to call friends
Learn how to bake bread
Feed the ducks at the lake by the highway
Exaggerate your earnings
Get elected
Mull things over 
Attend a livestock auction
Pull down the statues of people who tortured your ancestors
Seek employment
Knit
Regret mostly everything
Paint the windows shut 
Pull down the statues of your ancestors
Get down on your knees
Read Kierkegaard
Pick the kids up from Montessori
Lose your appetite
Linger 
Imagine that hell is only an abstraction
DVR Homeland
Take another free breath mint
Cry out endlessly
Blame those closest to you
Love even the barest light pissing through the trees 


^^EOP^^


I will donate my head
I will uncover the seams
I will acknowledge my dust
           as silver elixir
to be fed to the masses 
I’ve never been more dead than now
more a product of misspent music
         halted at the border
                     flicking seeds sent
through a blister in the wall 
I plant movements
that carry all the king’s men
through a crack in the planet
where monkeys sink into
a song their fathers grew
           on filaments of language
& certain birds
are mad to hunt a spectrum
          of only one meaning
where handmade clouds sound    
free from ligament
                      released beyond bounds
offering steam to relax gem 
I can float here combing my hair into waterfall
I am a human fly
wings slick with telepathic goo
an archive of earth piled on my back 
This is theater ...
so please assume the role of curtain
I am the director of this fuzz
a tardy imago: the result of clandestine flare
When we returned to your house
we noticed that it wasn’t there
so we built a human pyramid
without flesh
without internal radar or private song
           a formation known to drain the color of black suns
and toward this stone we lean
where birds are higher
than sapphire mammatus
where we speak of things mouth-less, bare


^^EOP^^


The commentator's rabbiting on and on
about how it's so easy for Roger, resentment
thick as butter still in a box. Yet word
from those who've done their homework
is how the man loves to train—how much
he relishes putting in the hours
just as magicians shuffle card after card,
countless to mere humans
but carefully all accounted for.
At hearing "luck" again, I stop
until my hands relax their clutch
on the cone from which a dozen more
peonies are to materialize. I make it look easy
to grow a garden on top of a sheet
of fondant, and that's how it should appear:
as natural and as meant-to-be
as the spin of a ball from the sweetest spot
of a racquet whisked through the air like a wand.


^^EOP^^


The stone dolls, found in an Egyptian tomb,
are eyeless, armless, heavy for a child 
to hold. Not like the dolls that lined the room
my sister and I shared, their bodies light 
and made for being bent, their eyelids mobile,
hair that tangled with our own. "At night," 
our father winked at us, "they come to life."
We never pressed our cheeks against cold stone 
as pharoah's daughters did. The doctor's knife
could not have caught my sister more off-guard 
or left me less alone; I had my dolls.
Though, soon, they lay on tables in the yard 
with price tags. Even then they looked alive,
survivors with no sickness to survive.


^^EOP^^


Somewhere recently
I lost my short-term memory.
It was there and then it moved
like the flash of a red fox
along a line fence.
 
My short-term memory
has no address but here
no time but now.
It is a straight-man, waiting to speak
to fill in empty space
with name, date, trivia, punch line.
And then it fails to show.
 
It is lost, hiding somewhere out back
a dried ragweed stalk on the Kansas Prairie
holding the shadow of its life
against a January wind.
 
How am I to go on?
I wake up a hundred times a day.
Who am I waiting for
what am I looking for
why do I have this empty cup
on the porch or in the yard?
I greet my neighbor, who smiles.
I turn a slow, lazy Susan
in my mind, looking for
some clue, anything to break the spell
of being lost in plain sight.


^^EOP^^


Even now it idles outside the houses
where we failed to get better at piano lessons,
visits the parking lot of the ballet school
 
where my sister and I stood awkwardly
at the back. My mother's van was orange
with a door we slid open to reveal
beheaded plastic dragons and bunches
 
of black, half-eaten bananas; it was where
her sketchbooks tarried among
abandoned coffee cups and
 
science projects. She meant to go places
in it: camp in its back seat
and cook on its stove while
 
painting the coast of Nova Scotia,
or capturing the cold beauty of the Blue Ridge
mountains at dawn. Instead, she waited
behind its wheel while we scraped violins,
 
made digestive sounds
with trumpets, danced badly at recitals
where grandmothers recorded us
 
with unsteady cameras. Sometimes, now,
I look out a window and believe I see it,
see her, waiting for me beside a curb,
 
under a tree, and I think I could open the door,
clear off a seat, look at the drawing in her lap,
which she began, but never seemed to finish.


^^EOP^^


When they entered the house, which was a very large house
the way a cloud is large, the pages of their story
seemed like cracks in the earth, a man's shirt, or a woman's
blouse, and the stranger in the house told them to make
themselves at home in the house that was not their house,
and told them to write down the three most important gifts
in each of their lives, and then continued to explain how
there were three doors in the house and at each door they must
forfeit one of these gifts, and how the real story always begins
at the third door, where each of them will pause and begin
to crawl, leaving the field of time, where now you pause,
touching the door of this page, wiping away each word, waiting to enter.
 


^^EOP^^


I sit with my thermos of coffee on the mall:
a mile-long promenade, arcades of elms
flanking a generous aliquot of benches.
 
But at this early hour it starts to dawn:
I am the only one without a dog.
So, a witness to an ancient symbiosis,
as it's evolved within a modern city:
 
The dogs, I note, are smaller, the owners
less ferocious. The former sniff then poop,
the latter, like potty-training parents, pat their heads,
gather it in plastic doggy-bags.
 
It's no longer for the hunt or for protection;
both species have adapted to survive
hard loneliness inside a small apartment.
 


^^EOP^^


The toy
become the aesthetic archetype 
As if
some patient peasant God
had rubbed and rubbed
the Alpha and Omega
of Form
into a lump of metal 
A naked orientation
unwinged unplumed
the ultimate rhythm
has lopped the extremities
of crest and claw
from
the nucleus of flight 
The absolute act
of art
conformed
to continent sculpture
—bare as the brow of Osiris—
this breast of revelation 
an incandescent curve
licked by chromatic flames
in labyrinths of reflections 
This gong
of polished hyperaesthesia
shrills with brass
as the aggressive light
strikes
its significance
The immaculate
conception
of the inaudible bird
occurs
in gorgeous reticence


^^EOP^^


Little tapers leaning lighted diagonally
Stuck in coffin tables of the Café du Néant
Leaning to the breath of baited bodies
Like young poplars fringing the Loire
 
Eyes that are full of love
And eyes that are full of kohl
Projecting light across the fulsome ambiente
Trailing the rest of the animal behind them
Telling of tales without words
And lies of no consequence
One way or another
 
The young lovers hermetically buttoned up in black
To black cravat
To the blue powder edge dusting the yellow throat
What color could have been your bodies
When last you put them away
 
Nostalgic youth
Holding your mistress's pricked finger
In the indifferent flame of the taper
Synthetic symbol of LIFE
In this factitious chamber of DEATH
The woman
As usual
Is smiling as bravely
As it is given to her to be brave
 
While the brandy cherries
In winking glasses
Are decomposing
Harmoniously
With the flesh of spectators
And at a given spot
There is one
Who
Having the concentric lighting focussed precisely upon her
Prophetically blossoms in perfect putrefaction
Yet there are cabs outside the door.
 


^^EOP^^


The Normal Monster
sings in the Green Sahara
 
The voice and offal
of the image of God
 
make Celtic noises
in these lyrical hells
 
Hurricanes
of reasoned musics
reap the uncensored earth
 
The loquent consciousness
of living things
pours in torrential languages
 
The elderly colloquists
the Spirit and the Flesh
are out of tongue
 
The Spirit
is impaled upon the phallus
 
Phoenix
of Irish fires
lighten the Occident
 
with Ireland's wings
flap pandemoniums
of Olympian prose
 
and satinize
the imperial Rose
of Gaelic perfumes —
England
the sadistic mother
embraces Erin
 
Master
of meteoric idiom
present
 
The word made flesh
and feeding upon itself
with erudite fangs
The sanguine
introspection of the womb
 
Don Juan
of Judea
upon a pilgrimage
to the Libido
 
The press
purring
its lullabies to sanity
 
Christ capitalized
scourging
incontrite usurers of destiny
in hole and corner temples
 
And hang
The soul's advertisements
outside the ecclesiast's Zoo
 
A gravid day
spawns
gutteral gargoyles
upon the Tower of Babel
 
Empyrean emporium
where the
rejector-recreator
Joyce
flashes the giant reflector
on the sub rosa
 


^^EOP^^


I
 
Spawn of fantasies
Sifting the appraisable
Pig Cupid his rosy snout
Rooting erotic garbage
"Once upon a time"
Pulls a weed white star-topped
Among wild oats sown in mucous membrane
I would an eye in a Bengal light
Eternity in a sky-rocket
Constellations in an ocean
Whose rivers run no fresher
Than a trickle of saliva
 
These are suspect places
 
I must live in my lantern
Trimming subliminal flicker
Virginal to the bellows
Of experience
Colored glass.
 
 
 
II
 
At your mercy
Our Universe
Is only
A colorless onion
You derobe
Sheath by sheath
Remaining
A disheartening odour
About your nervy hands
 
 
 
III
 
Night
Heavy with shut-flower's nightmares
---------------------------------------------
Noon
Curled to the solitaire
Core of the
Sun
 
 
 
IV
 
Evolution fall foul of
Sexual equality
Prettily miscalculate
Similitude
 
Unnatural selection
Breed such sons and daughters
As shall jibber at each other
Uninterpretable cryptonyms
Under the moon
 
Give them some way of braying brassily
For caressive calling
Or to homophonous hiccoughs
Transpose the laugh
Let them suppose that tears
Are snowdrops or molasses
Or anything
Than human insufficiences
Begging dorsal vertebrae
 
Let meeting be the turning
To the antipodean
And Form a blur
Anything
Than to seduce them
To the one
As simple satisfaction
For the other
 
 
 
V
 
Shuttle-cock and battle-door
A little pink-love
And feathers are strewn
 
 
 
VI
 
Let Joy go solace-winged
To flutter whom she may concern
 
 
 
VII
 
Once in a mezzanino
The starry ceiling
Vaulted an unimaginable family
Bird-like abortions
With human throats
And Wisdom's eyes
Who wore lamp-shade red dresses
And woolen hair
 
One bore a baby
In a padded porte-enfant
Tied with a sarsenet ribbon
To her goose's wings
 
But for the abominable shadows
I would have lived
Among their fearful furniture
To teach them to tell me their secrets
Before I guessed
-- Sweeping the brood clean out
 
 
 
VIII
 
Midnight empties the street
--- --- --- To the left a boy
--- One wing has been washed in rain
The other will never be clean any more ---
Pulling door-bells to remind
Those that are snug
To the right a haloed ascetic
Threading houses
Probes wounds for souls
--- The poor can't wash in hot water ---
And I don't know which turning to take ---
 
 
 
IX
 
We might have coupled
In the bed-ridden monopoly of a moment
Or broken flesh with one another
At the profane communion table
Where wine is spill't on promiscuous lips
 
We might have given birth to a butterfly
With the daily-news
Printed in blood on its wings
 
 
 
X
 
In some
Prenatal plagiarism
Foetal buffoons
Caught tricks
--- --- --- --- ---
From archetypal pantomime
Stringing emotions
Looped aloft
--- --- --- ---
For the blind eyes
That Nature knows us with
And most of Nature is green
--- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- ---
 
 
 
XI
 
Green things grow
Salads
For the cerebral
Forager's revival
And flowered flummery
Upon bossed bellies
Of mountains
Rolling in the sun
 
 
 
XII
 
Shedding our petty pruderies
From slit eyes
 
We sidle up
To Nature
--- --- --- that irate pornographist
 
 
 
XIII
 
The wind stuffs the scum of the white street
Into my lungs and my nostrils
Exhilarated birds
Prolonging flight into the night
Never reaching --- --- --- --- ------ --- ---


^^EOP^^


I love you, rotten,
Delicious rottenness.
 
I love to suck you out from your skins
So brown and soft and coming suave,
So morbid, as the Italians say.
 
What a rare, powerful, reminiscent flavour
Comes out of your falling through the stages of decay:
Stream within stream.
 
Something of the same flavour as Syracusan muscat wine
Or vulgar Marsala.
 
Though even the word Marsala will smack of preciosity
Soon in the pussy-foot West.
 
What is it?
What is it, in the grape turning raisin,
In the medlar, in the sorb-apple,
Wineskins of brown morbidity,
Autumnal excrementa;
What is it that reminds us of white gods?
 
Gods nude as blanched nut-kernels,
Strangely, half-sinisterly flesh-fragrant
As if with sweat,
And drenched with mystery.
 
Sorb-apples, medlars with dead crowns.
I say, wonderful are the hellish experiences,
Orphic, delicate
Dionysos of the Underworld.
 
A kiss, and a vivid spasm of farewell, a moment’s orgasm of rupture,
Then along the damp road alone, till the next turning.
And there, a new partner, a new parting, a new unfusing into twain,
A new gasp of further isolation,
A new intoxication of loneliness, among decaying, frost-cold leaves.
 
Going down the strange lanes of hell, more and more intensely alone,
The fibres of the heart parting one after the other
And yet the soul continuing, naked-footed, ever more vividly embodied
Like a flame blown whiter and whiter
In a deeper and deeper darkness,
Ever more exquisite, distilled in separation.
 
So, in the strange retorts of medlars and sorb-apples
The distilled essence of hell.
The exquisite odour of leave-taking. Jamque vale!
Orpheus, and the winding, leaf-clogged, silent lanes of hell.
 
Each soul departing with its own isolation.
Strangest of all strange companions,
And best.
 
Medlars, sorb-apples
More than sweet
Flux of autumn
Sucked out of your empty bladders
And sipped down, perhaps, with a sip of Marsala
So that the rambling, sky-dropped grape can add its music to yours,
Orphic farewell, and farewell, and farewell
And the ego sum of Dionysos
The sono io of perfect drunkenness
Intoxication of final loneliness.
                                                                                  San Gervasio
 


^^EOP^^


Would you like to throw a stone at me?
Here, take all that’s left of my peach.
 
Blood-red, deep:
Heaven knows how it came to pass.
Somebody’s pound of flesh rendered up.
 
Wrinkled with secrets
And hard with the intention to keep them.
 
Why, from silvery peach-bloom,
From that shallow-silvery wine-glass on a short stem
This rolling, dropping, heavy globule?
 
I am thinking, of course, of the peach before I ate it.
 
Why so velvety, why so voluptuous heavy?
Why hanging with such inordinate weight?
Why so indented?
 
Why the groove?
Why the lovely, bivalve roundnesses?
Why the ripple down the sphere?
Why the suggestion of incision?
 
Why was not my peach round and finished like a billiard ball?
It would have been if man had made it.
Though I’ve eaten it now.
 
But it wasn’t round and finished like a billiard ball;
And because I say so, you would like to throw something at me.
 
Here, you can have my peach stone.
                                                                                  San Gervasio
 


^^EOP^^


You tell me I am wrong.
Who are you, who is anybody to tell me I am wrong?
I am not wrong.
 
In Syracuse, rock left bare by the viciousness of Greek women,
No doubt you have forgotten the pomegranate trees in flower,
Oh so red, and such a lot of them.
 
Whereas at Venice,
Abhorrent, green, slippery city
Whose Doges were old, and had ancient eyes,
In the dense foliage of the inner garden
Pomegranates like bright green stone,
And barbed, barbed with a crown.
Oh, crown of spiked green metal
Actually growing!
 
Now, in Tuscany,
Pomegranates to warm your hands at;
And crowns, kingly, generous, tilting crowns
Over the left eyebrow.
 
And, if you dare, the fissure!
 
Do you mean to tell me you will see no fissure?
Do you prefer to look on the plain side?
 
For all that, the setting suns are open.
The end cracks open with the beginning:
Rosy, tender, glittering within the fissure.
 
Do you mean to tell me there should be no fissure?
No glittering, compact drops of dawn?
Do you mean it is wrong, the gold-filmed skin, integument,
            shown ruptured?
 
For my part, I prefer my heart to be broken.
It is so lovely, dawn-kaleidoscopic within the crack.
 
                                                                          San Gervasio in Tuscany
 


^^EOP^^


Who gave us flowers? Heaven? The white God?
 
Nonsense!
Up out of hell,
From Hades;
Infernal Dis!
  Jesus the god of flowers—?
Not he. Or sun-bright Apollo, him so musical?
Him neither.
  Who then? Say who.
Say it—and it is Pluto,
Dis
The dark one
Proserpine’s master.
  Who contradicts—?
 
When she broke forth from below,
Flowers came, hell-hounds on her heels.
Dis, the dark, the jealous god, the husband,
Flower-sumptuous-blooded.
  Go then, he said.
And in Sicily, on the meadows of Enna,
She thought she had left him;
But opened around her purple anemones, 
Caverns,
Little hells of color, caves of darkness,
Hell, risen in pursuit of her; royal, sumptuous
Pit-falls.
 
All at her feet
Hell opening;
At her white ankles
Hell rearing its husband-splendid, serpent heads,
Hell-purple, to get at her— Why did he let her go?
So he could track her down again, white victim.
 
Ah mastery!
Hell’s husband-blossoms
Out on earth again.
 
Look out, Persephone!
You, Madame Ceres, mind yourself, the enemy is upon you.
About your feet spontaneous aconite,
Hell-glamorous, and purple husband-tyranny
Enveloping your late-enfranchised plains.
 
You thought your daughter had escaped?
No more stockings to darn for the flower-roots, down in hell?
But ah my dear!
 
Aha, the stripe-cheeked whelps, whippet-slim crocuses, At ’em, boys, at ’em! Ho golden-spaniel, sweet alert narcissus, Smell ’em, smell ’em out!
Those two enfranchised women.
 
Somebody is coming! Oho there!
 
Dark blue anemones!
Hell is up!
Hell on earth, and Dis within the depths!
  Run, Persephone, he is after you already.
  Why did he let her go?
To track her down;
All the sport of summer and spring, and flowers snapping
               at her ankles and catching her by the hair!
Poor Persephone and her rights for women.
  Husband-snared hell-queen, It is spring.
 
It is spring,
And pomp of husband-strategy on earth.
  Ceres, kiss your girl, you think you’ve got her back. The bit of husband-tilth she is, Persephone!
 
Poor mothers-in-law!
They are always sold.
 
It is spring.
 
                                                                                                     Taormina
 


^^EOP^^


When he pushed his bush of black hair off his brow:
When she lifted her mop from her eyes, and screwed it
            in a knob behind
            —O act of fearful temerity!
When they felt their foreheads bare, naked to heaven,
            their eyes revealed:
When they left the light of heaven brandished like a knife at
            their defenceless eyes
And the sea like a blade at their face,
Mediterranean savages:
When they came out, face-revealed, under heaven, from
            the shaggy undergrowth of their own hair
For the first time,
They saw tiny rose cyclamens between their toes, growing
Where the slow toads sat brooding on the past.
 
Slow toads, and cyclamen leaves
Stickily glistening with eternal shadow
Keeping to earth.
Cyclamen leaves
Toad-filmy, earth-iridescent
Beautiful
Frost-filigreed
Spumed with mud
Snail-nacreous
Low down.
 
The shaking aspect of the sea
And man’s defenceless bare face
And cyclamens putting their ears back.
 
Long, pensive, slim-muzzled greyhound buds
Dreamy, not yet present,
Drawn out of earth
At his toes.
 
Dawn-rose
Sub-delighted, stone engendered
Cyclamens, young cyclamens
Arching
Waking, pricking their ears
Like delicate very-young greyhound bitches
Half-yawning at the open, inexperienced
Vistas of day,
Folding back their soundless petalled ears.
 
Greyhound bitches
Bending their rosy muzzles pensive down,
And breathing soft, unwilling to wake to the new day
Yet sub-delighted.
 
Ah Mediterranean morning, when our world began!
Far-off Mediterranean mornings,
Pelasgic faces uncovered
And unbudding cyclamens.
 
The hare suddenly goes uphill
Laying back her long ears with unwinking bliss.
 
And up the pallid, sea-blenched Mediterranean stone-slopes
Rose cyclamen, ecstatic fore-runner!
Cyclamens, ruddy-muzzled cyclamens
In little bunches like bunches of wild hares
Muzzles together, ears-aprick
 
Whispering witchcraft
Like women at a well, the dawn-fountain.
 
Greece, and the world’s morning
While all the Parthenon marbles still fostered the roots of the cyclamen.
Violets
Pagan, rosy-muzzled violets
Autumnal
Dawn-pink,
Dawn-pale
Among squat toad-leaves sprinkling the unborn
Erechtheion marbles.
 
                                                                                                     Taormina 
 


^^EOP^^


Man of absolute physical equilibrium
You stand so straight on your legs
Every plank or clod you plant your feet on
Becomes roots for those limbs
 
Among the men you accrete to yourself
You are more heavy
And more light
Force being most equitably disposed
Is easiest to lift from the ground
So at the same time
Your movements
Unassailable
Savor of the airy-fairy of the ballet
The essence of a Mademoiselle Genée
Winks in the to-and-fro of your cuff-links
 
Your projectile nose
Has meddled in the more serious business
Of the battle-field
With the same incautious aloofness
Of intense occupation
That it snuffles the trail of the female
And the comfortable
Passing odors of love
 
Your genius
So much less in your brain
 
Than in your body
Reinforcing the hitherto negligible
 
Qualities
Of life
Deals so exclusively with
The vital
That it is equally happy expressing itself
Through the activity of pushing
THINGS
In the opposite direction
To that which they are lethargically willing to go
As in the amative language
Of the eyes
 
Fundamentally unreliable
You leave others their initial strength
Concentrating
On stretching the theoretic elastic of your conceptions
Till the extent is adequate
To the hooking on
Of any — or all
Forms of creative idiosyncrasy
While the occasional snap
Of actual production
Stings the face of the public.
 


^^EOP^^


A snake came to my water-trough
On a hot, hot day, and I in pyjamas for the heat,
To drink there.
 
In the deep, strange-scented shade of the great dark carob tree
I came down the steps with my pitcher
And must wait, must stand and wait, for there he was at the trough
            before me.
 
He reached down from a fissure in the earth-wall in the gloom
And trailed his yellow-brown slackness soft-bellied down, over
            the edge of the stone trough
And rested his throat upon the stone bottom,
And where the water had dripped from the tap, in a small clearness,
He sipped with his straight mouth,
Softly drank through his straight gums, into his slack long body,
Silently.
 
Someone was before me at my water-trough,
And I, like a second-comer, waiting.
 
He lifted his head from his drinking, as cattle do,
And looked at me vaguely, as drinking cattle do,
And flickered his two-forked tongue from his lips, and mused
             a moment,
And stooped and drank a little more,
Being earth-brown, earth-golden from the burning bowels
            of the earth
On the day of Sicilian July, with Etna smoking.
 
The voice of my education said to me
He must be killed,
For in Sicily the black, black snakes are innocent, the gold
            are venomous.
 
And voices in me said, If you were a man
You would take a stick and break him now, and finish him off.
 
But must I confess how I liked him,
How glad I was he had come like a guest in quiet, to drink
            at my water-trough
And depart peaceful, pacified, and thankless,
Into the burning bowels of this earth?
 
Was it cowardice, that I dared not kill him?
Was it perversity, that I longed to talk to him?
Was it humility, to feel so honoured?
I felt so honoured.
 
And yet those voices: If you were not afraid, you would kill him!
 
And truly I was afraid, I was most afraid,
But even so, honoured still more
That he should seek my hospitality
From out the dark door of the secret earth.
 
He drank enough
And lifted his head, dreamily, as one who has drunken,
And flickered his tongue like a forked night on the air, so black,
Seeming to lick his lips,
And looked around like a god, unseeing, into the air,
And slowly turned his head,
And slowly, very slowly, as if thrice adream,
Proceeded to draw his slow length curving round
And climb again the broken bank of my wall-face.
 
And as he put his head into that dreadful hole,
And as he slowly drew up, snake-easing his shoulders,
            and entered farther,
A sort of horror, a sort of protest against his withdrawing into
            that horrid black hole,
Deliberately going into the blackness, and slowly drawing
            himself after,
Overcame me now his back was turned.
 
I looked round, I put down my pitcher,
I picked up a clumsy log
And threw it at the water-trough with a clatter.
 
I think it did not hit him,
But suddenly that part of him that was left behind convulsed
            in an undignified haste,
Writhed like lightning, and was gone
Into the black hole, the earth-lipped fissure in the wall-front,
At which, in the intense still noon, I stared with fascination.
 
And immediately I regretted it.
I thought how paltry, how vulgar, what a mean act!
I despised myself and the voices of my accursed human education.
 
And I thought of the albatross,
And I wished he would come back, my snake.
 
For he seemed to me again like a king,
Like a king in exile, uncrowned in the underworld,
Now due to be crowned again.
 
And so, I missed my chance with one of the lords
Of life.
And I have something to expiate:
A pettiness.
 
                                                                                                     Taormina
 
 


^^EOP^^


Cyclones
of ecstatic dust
and ashes whirl
crusaders
from hallucinatory citadels
of shattered glass
into evacuate craters
 
A flock of dreams
browse on Necropolis
 
From the shores
of oval oceans
in the oxidized Orient
 
Onyx-eyed Odalisques
and ornithologists
observe the flight
of Eros obsolete
 
And "Immortality"
mildews
in the museums of the moon


^^EOP^^


It’s like touching without touching,
except when there is, also, touching. 
We pull the bowstrings back
and parallel together,
aiming a handsbreadth higher
than we believe we intend,
and let the glove move where we draw the wire, 
scared that the machinery
will misinterpret us,
that we may not stop trembling, that we may lose
our belief in ourselves
before anything is released, or shared, or sent. 
And yet we trust the notch to know
the whereabouts of the bow,
and trust the tail or fletching
of each salvo to astonish
the target as soon as it gets there, to make its point
within its nest of Os and Os and Os. 
Our belts and buckles try to keep the secrets
we have begun to decide
that, later, we want to expose. 
There is the rest of our group, and there is the river,
and that is called the kisser, the stabilizer
on your shoulder. Do what I do. You have time.
Put your hand over my hand. That feels nice. 
No longer too young
to participate in this activity, we have become
the elevated counselors
of the air, which will not take
anything but our most forceful advice.


^^EOP^^


I know something about godforsaken places.
Walking on the beach alone, far from the Dead Sea,
I thought I saw a horseshoe crab crawling slowly—
it was a Gideon Society, black Bible cover.
Another time, washed up on a Montauk dune,
I found a Chianti wine bottle
with a letter in it. I read to myself
a child’s handwriting: “Hello,
let’s make friends. Please call,” she gave her phone number.
I held the bottle a week before calling, then asked
for Mary Jane, in my best Portuguese accent, I am Pessoa. I’m calling from Por-tu-gal.
I’ll be your friend.

^^EOP^^


             every part
             down to gristle   
             where meat attaches
             to bone—leaves hollow 
                          having pushed the world away, we call it back through language 
                                                                                                                               love thyself
              thy sternum tight like a cage 
                                                                        W., R. & T. drop acid and go to a
                                                                            bar inside a grocery store 
                                                                                   I absorb this information neutrally 
                                                                                           move toward the scary  
                          We slipped
               into the crowd escaping. We were first in line to escape. We were trying to fit inside coolers or buckets, get lifted out. 
                                                                            They mandate
                                                                            show us a video
                                                                            try to prepare us
                                                                            (we are teachers)
                                                                            to respond first. 
                                                                            I know I must not be the only 
                Saw it coming and didn’t say anything—why?  
                You should always strive to emit positive vibrations to others, earth, and self.    
                                                    sun-filled 
mouth breathing
woodpecker
in our bed  
                                                                            and I think he is those things   
last                                living form
on earth    
                                                                                      (Hard to write a poem and let it fail)   
What kind of life to not be engaged with desire up to the very end. Isn’t that what dying is—to no longer be in proximity to want? 
                                                                                     I wrote, trees and non-binary (it was a typo)  
                                                                                             & source of positive vibration. 
                                                                                                     hear flower say no
                                                                                                     accept and do not pick it
                                                                                                     bringing back the dead 
First it was the leg bone. Then dark wet owl pellets, fur and bone, tiny skull with bone so fragile it flaked into bone ... dust—bone, soaked
in bleach, bone on the back porch, bone of water, bone of light, good boy bone, bone I asked permission for, may I always be ready to
hear no:        I offer bone as offering, I shake bone around to anyone good who may be listening.   
             What’s mine is yours even if it’s only bone dust.
                                               We live openhearted and without fear.  
         In the triple-X fantasies,
I’m the puppy. I bring back the dead
          a sign of—what?
Surrender? Having, out in the wilderness,
         thought of you?   
Invoke your
proximate sanctuary, string antidotes together like beads. 
             cat piss—rancher—rearview spider—wasp nest
             dead dad blanket for the coldest nights—mountain pass—
             antelope—taking a shit under a rainbow in a field of ponies, in Oregon           (how that actually happened)     
I know your secret
I too have dropped entire         days into my thigh
Nights and galaxies, termites     of testosterone week after
week slow as money even slower when it               crystallizes. I think you are
            beautiful                                                         in me
                                             small shocks I did not know I’d                    bottom for, 
                                             which is not a secret.      Sometimes I imagine shapes behind
                                             my head pouring me into wood chips: me alive, me proximate
                                             to want, useful as a body for some animal part unashamed by its own rage. 
                                             Why your pouch fit my jaw like that, why you only smell like that after lightning?
                                             Way it sometimes hurts how bad—desire to be bred.
                                             I close a motionless fist, forget to call you by your other name—
                                                       small pink flag waving in the wind.


^^EOP^^


Whose branch this is I think you know.
By how my (question-marks as) claws inscritch the bark.
How my worry-work along this bough
runs back and forth (and copper-keen) and evermore;
I got mocked and nicked No-Fly Bird  
not for nothing.  
Not for nothing have I picked this oak.
Though not thicktrunk-ancient as some angel-oak,
it’s sure the highest of our high so suits my lack.
—Charred wings won’t lift; I’ve got no glide
nor span to speak of. Ain’t this my beat : my usual limb.
Ain’t this pecking (carking) pulse  
my far and wide.


^^EOP^^


Magic rain magic mist magic dew magic hail
Magic darkness magic sea magic waves magic
River magic fountain magic well magic spring
That bursts forth when a magic spear pierces
Rock magic oak tree magic ash magic lime tree
Magic bough magic yew magic hawthorn magic
Tree to make you young again magic tree to
Prevent hunger magic thorn magic ivy magic
Fern magic blossom, mistletoe and mandrake
Magic wild grasses magic wheat magic breath
Magic blood magic feather magic dung magic
Piss magic mantle magic trousers magic veil
Magic hat magic chain magic sword magic
Shield magic hearth magic bench magic door
Magic cry of a deer or cry of a magic deer;
Seven as a magic number magic the human
Head for divination magic also the head of
A dog, magic too vessels that burst in the fire
To uncover disobedience magic the river
That rises to drown liars magic the stone
That causes silence magic the deep lake
That causes forgetfulness magic the hazelnut
That makes a lover foolish magic the stone
That banishes sorrow magic the charm bought
Cheaply in the form of small poetry books,
Or nine the magic number and the magic
Number seven again and the magic twelve also
And green as that magic color violet as magic
Red as magic black as magic white as magic
Purple also as a magic hue and also red again;
Magic also the felling of two oak trees in a wood
And the magic wand used by the Druids to
Find your beloved carried away by fairies—
And, when all else fails, magic the new-fangled
Blessings of Christians swarming into our oak
Wood now, making even the disappeared speak.


^^EOP^^


Damn, son      he      grunted holding  his    falling      jeans    and      sprinting  sideways   in    high    hay      and
concatenation      He  didn’t      even   want       to   chase      the       favor      he   hadn’t     planned    to   live   forever   he
didn’t    know    he    had    a      fever      thought      it      was     a    true    love   shopping   spree      thought      the cotton
needle    was      a      vaccine      thought      the      Visine      was       tiny      water       and        the     eye       a    reliable
bank       in    the   space     between       seeing        and       being     seen           and     plenty     quenched      and      hesitant
and      addicted      to     fickle    sonance     and    espionage      fake  Prada     real     caught     up      ketchup packets
spilling   from   his   pockets      Dexter    Gordon      flickering      in     his    locket     on      grin       on      roar        on
dimples     and     porridge       this     is     your     typical      roll     out      strategy     pretend      to    shift    into    helpless
chaos     and    laugh           when     they      fall      for       it       such      tall      grass      in       Ole    Miss       such    that
mystery   of    the  body     of     the    boy     of      the      ball               is     leaping      violently         into      pinstripes— 
He      was      isolated      yes      but    he   never     made     us     nervous       he    was  never    convicted         he      never
took      the      backpack             he never  made   it  to Rikers      he      never      did   come   back


^^EOP^^


Who cares about the redbud tree, its flowers
half-black, half-pink, from winter’s April freeze;
who cares who lives halfway or dies too soon,
the blue jay’s baby squirming on bare ground,
the agonies of blood, the frigid breeze
shaking the fragile sense of April showers;
who cares who craves the heated pools of June,
the lake of boaters buzzing by or drowned.
Two vultures meet me at my open door,
scanning for carrion, the stink of spasms,
the sky-gods pecking rotting flesh for food;
who cares if this strange order ends in good,
or if the chickadee lands in the chasms
of endless carelessness forevermore.


^^EOP^^


                    
                    
                    1. they were a kind of solution

Say one Spaceman, when she lands, will touch
down in a human sentence, speaking Dutch,
a dialect of Mentalese. Her torch-

songs (loosely rendered from the Arcturan): “Baby
Let’s Get Square with Pi,” or, “You’re the Apple
of My Eye,” or “Boola Theta Babel

Bye-Bye.” It might make sense. This is a heady
thought. The traditional verse, viz. “Who’s Your Daddy,”
as sung in The War of the Worlds, and signaled Mayday,

mayday—a little like Beethoven’s 4th in digital
redaction—may underpin what limbic Dutch
must once upon a time have bloomed beneath the sagittal
crest of Homo—

Who? What? This news just in!—the starry
sky is empty. Spacemen are out. Sorry.


2. exo-statisticians change minds, cite insufficiency of planetary bodies of right type

What, no aliens? Or, with greater dignity,
life elsewhere in the universe? That window’s
shut, we learn. Astronomers, indignant

desert birds, eyes screwed to the long cinder-
scuttles of their telescopes, will voice some doubt,
one hopes! This is too lonely. Heliocentric

humility’s a habit hard to shake. Endowed
with what we’ve called “intelligence,” or “powerful
intelligence,” like-minded creatures, each an end-

point in a home-world’s evolutionary raffle,
well, just must across the vasty deeps of space
and time yearn forth to find each other with awful

big radios. That’s how the Book of Revelations
we knew used to read, rephrased so, pi be praised.


3. binary

My friend the geometer, when asked if pi
were in the sky or in the skull, replied

pi’s the pontification of a ratio.
Bisected, so, the circle: pi. To show

that in a well-formed sentence, well, that’s human, sure.
All language is. So ever since that fateful shore

of Lake Turkana where tongue forked, where first
flaking syntax split the atom into force

and mass, thing and verb, the copula
has groped to reanneal it: this opulence

is equal to the sum of those simplicities ...
So here’s the mystery: across the placid

surface of the water a salt of stars
once scattered, hissing. Caliban stammered Are

stars. Then, Look, look up at the stars!


4. prose obtrusions concerning the keats equation

Hold it there.

Would you say truth’s a property of sentences, but beauty’s not?

So that mysterious predictive gift of mathematics is precisely that of  sentences like I predict the sun will rise tomorrow?—isn’t that the leap that left the chimpanzees behind?—and adding time of sunrise just adds  increment to the precision?

So that Platonic realm where Mathematics must exist to be discovered by Ramanujan or Hardy or Arcturans tucked in anywhere in time or space is just that space where earlier equations live, like love’s a rose or tears are rain, which Hardy’s and Ramanujan’s respective ancestors discovered independently?

That if in England two men feed a horse, the horse stays thin, the axiom would hold as well for two Tibetan yaks or fat Jurassic stegosaurs (assuming less that that’s what the Arcturans use to carry mail than that, like us, they pinch their pence)—

That that’s the realm where poems and equations likewise lie unspoken,  quietly awaiting their discovery?

And so those famous instances where mathematics efflorescing on some blackboard purely for the play of it turn out to have a shocking congruence with patterns in the world is just exactly like the case where poetry is news before the news it stays?

That hadn’t the acclaimed predictive potency of mathematics best be cast as a reminder of forgotten shock—the shock our shaggy kind must once have felt, framing for the first time well-formed sentences about the world that was, and then about the world about to be, and so extended human sensibility  and thrust it forth as backward through the night of time?

Yes, if diffidently.


5. postscriptum

The aliens are back, incidentally. Astral
systems dropping planets like nuts in May. Exo-
biology leaps again into likelihood. A straw
poll proves the numbers may be multiplex.

No small relief for this slow versifier,
who, peering through this poem’s decades-long zoom-
lens has seen what changes?—sapphire
heaven bleached of all biology?—shazam!—

and then revivified, less abruptly,
with a thought. In the same blink of the clock
the pupil of a black hole was seen to matter,
some dinosaurs grew feathers, and (this one for Ripley’s)
Pluto got demoted from a planet to a rock.
Also my family died. Also I had a daughter.
                

^^EOP^^


Just like  Jesus     I   am   a time   machine     I   go   away  I   come   back     they won’t   let   me   watch    things   die
and     the  spy   in   the   spine     a   hearse   of  sense  and  rumors     a bundle      of   all   that’s    possible    in     a body
tied  to   its      back    with   the  babble    of    hypocrites        and    dirty   rivers          if    you    fall   asleep    in yellow
and    awake      in     a  bed   of   cotton  wool   with    a  star   of   nails   where     your   heart   should   go     and   the
cosmetics     of     wartime     blood  lipping wax     in    a   factory     basement    attached   to  a   slab   of   maple      you
do   not  have   to  love  that man      to  slice   his lips      and   scream        what   divination  turned  into   demon   by
ignoring    you    alone    can    remember     and      revert     to    God     I   give    the   woven   whisper   of   a kid   to
her    first   brown   doll    mounted     to     a   branch     of     song       she    sings       reasons     that   we   fear      our feelings—   To   the  dice   in   the  tree    she  is   singing    as   the   torches   come   up  throbbing    and    grinning
a crimson  minnow   in   her   last est  lap


^^EOP^^


Father Lear the king so shaped his bairns
with the wand’s upper hand
the fire’s swanny wing
smooth tippet of the spider 
In the very kingdom of herbs and servants
he shaped them
from peace vessels of the animals
from toil of the flesh
from milk horses and the birds of sighed mercy
and the tongue undone 
He shaped his bairns
in night’s long harm and in day’s bright psalter
in the seven courts of the north
and with the mild birch of the paternoster 
From his ploughing fields and his sweat
his toothèd heart and his waxing wit
Father Lear the king shaped his bairns
for good or ill           this he did


^^EOP^^


It broke the dog’s leg
when you were reversing for me          on the slope at home.  Racing green it sits for scrap now 
on the tow truck. 
Majestic as a king
on his lectica the ratchets click the blue straps tighten  before the final journey  out the gates 
through which it once  first drove 
purchased from our savings  when we were told we were having twins. 
Ground-in chocolate, mud, crumbs
infant seats all straps and buckles  the roof rack bars were your horizontal 
handles when you’d stand and, like the Hulk, begin to shake 
us when you’d come to say goodbye. 
And the strapped-in children would shout as if they were about to be tipped 
out, and when you stopped, their laughter turned to Do it again! Go on, do it again!  I once knew a woman who drove a convertible: 
metallic navy, white leather interior, gloss veneer
fabric, reclining roof.  A thing of  vehicular beauty. 
When she sold it she never wrote a poem.

^^EOP^^


6. 
A rabbit hides in the wheel arch on a flight to hawaii
and arrives alive a poem stops a tank long enough
for a picture to be taken I myself have become more
fearful of heights the question is then what happens
the eye of jupiter is growing smaller but also colder 
7. 
The movie is better than the book
which is better than the experience
silver is better than gold (it doesn’t infect piercings)
a fake masterpiece is better than a real one because at least it’s affordable
permadeath in virtual warfare is better than actual death in actual warfare
imitation is better because it’s sincere
whereas innovation seeks to impress
and anyway is never what it says it is
the second time is better than the first, as you well know!
the remake is self-conscious and therefore more morally alert
this sentiment is better than the other times it has been expressed
because in the past it was expressed more forcefully and now it can relax
even thinking that Salinger meant David Copperfield the 1980s magician
who made real cars and buildings disappear
is better than knowing he meant Dickens
but only because others have thought this before you
and written about their mistake with winning modesty
or honesty or both
a cat hunting a bird is better now
because of cartoons
just as the cat that lives next door
is a better cat because it is not your cat anymore
a rhyme is better the more times it has been used
cliché is better than truth
truth is just something that hasn’t become a cliché yet
but inevitably will
(then you can put it in your pocket
and no one can put the truth in their pocket)
and any king or queen or president or prime minister
is better than all previous kings or queens or presidents or prime ministers
any poem is better than all the poems that precede it
that say essentially the same thing
which means new is better than old
but only if it looks or sounds or otherwise seems somehow old
being in a simulation is better than being in reality
watching the simulated stars set to ambient music created by a gifted  recording artist
is better than watching real stars set to dismal sounds from real life
derivative beauty is better than any other kind
(here we are surrounded by all this derivative beauty—imagine!)
however the audience will still say “nah”
however many times you say
the cover version is better than the original
but the cover version is always better than the original
I know that the cover version is always better than the original
and the reason I know the cover version is always better than the original
is that I’ve never heard the original 
41. 
You’re not the capital’s purveyor of inclement art
traversing the pale river with a glass of equally pale sulphur
on a trip in search of black ice cream
or whatever it is the russians are buying
nor an idle dealer who sports a crown of vegetables
in your self-deprecating portrait
(a little fancy commissioned
not to be indiscreet but
in the fantasy
at “some” expense)
not even the owner in your wildest dreams of a kept viper
but more a kind of overlarge boy who somehow drags out a salary
on the halved lunches of interns
hoarse from smoking
not thy powerful talk
you stay in the shop to keep in the shade that’s all
you are not the best urban poet
but this gallery has a heartless master on six figures
who likes to say he’s all mouth and isn’t
and even asks after your finances
the bastard
and why look up from your phone
at your desk at reception
when it seems you’re the only one the satire on the walls this month has seen
(it can’t cut both ways, can it?)
and nobody has ever penetrated the depths of the mercedes that waits
like a black moon
or a scoop of something poisoned
melting on the curb outside
ignored by wardens as if they can’t perceive the gleaming anomaly
so great is it
and you with your “I always had a good nose for it”
you with your aquiline sophistication and games of insolence
their verve dulling let’s be fair in these conditions
and your brochures
your spelling
just enough bait 
55. 
If you want to know my wishes briefly Mark,
famous host, bright ornament, OK then, pronto—
I ask to be the master of a great rural cultivator
of the soil, a small tribe used to the easiness of dirt.
I do. And to worship the cold painted rocks at dawn
with an unfit “hello.” And later when the presents
are in stockings crowded by the chimney breast,
to remember the lead-haired fisherman I was then,
waiting a year for the prize of a red honey jar,
at a sagging table eating my eggs among ashes—
whoever does not love this does not love this life!
I hope that you live, and the city, amid duties. 
57. 
What kind of life is called a healthy life...?
I don’t ask that it’s too easy or too hard.
I’d like something in between the two ... 
At the same time I don’t want to know,
even if it is my call ... I know you know
I don’t wish to shave my head again
or work the funerals ... the center of attention ... 
At the same time I don’t want to be bored!
Underneath the veil ... in gloves and pearls ... 
W/r/t life ... that’s my prerogative ... bitches ...  
61. 
Love’s syllables scroll.
Tag them, Verona.
May is a happy man.
Consider pressed his tiny region.
Place the stars or less.
Fragrant hues applaud the Nile.
One tree sounds.
Love, the two unique dogs.
He speaks fluent hearts.
A dog can enjoy his humorous letter.
No one has bought cilantro, my arse.
Your lie, my boast.
I will not keep silent in the lawsuit, Bilbo. 
63. 
In general I hate discussing my poetry
so I always ask questions
there’s a kind of writer/artist though
and you meet them all the time now
who only talks about their “practice”
without anyone caring or asking
(it isn’t connected to success)
and shows no flicker of interest
in anything anyone else does
if the choice is between talking about me
when I don’t want to talk about me
or talking about you
when you only want to talk about you
then let’s talk about me
by the way if you don’t know
this type of artist you probably are it sorry


^^EOP^^


Had it had good tang to it or even a cell’s cell of succulence 
he’d have squirreled the day away 
to paw and 
tongue.


^^EOP^^


Too busy peddling my fire and trying to keep the mouths fed
and packing up belongings of the recent dead right now to access
your luxurious philosophy, though one looks forward to a time 
when the universe permits, I said to my electric correspondent
who came at me puffed pink in thoughtfulness when what I needed
then as now was a quiet high enough to envision a half-gallon 
brick of all-natural vanilla ice cream softening on the hot hood
of an idling cop car: the earliest rivulets, a slow loss of strict
rectangularity, then the wild gliding around on the beautiful bleak 
enamel paint job as its sweet fragrance fills the air like a gift
from Madagascar I can breathe. Rapt Cortés transported cuttings
of vanilla across the Atlantic during his plunder of the Aztecs; 
the Aztecs themselves fell captive to its magic after vanquishing
its first cultivators the Totonacs, who paid their conquerors tributes
of baskets stacked to heaven with cured vanilla pods like long 
sentences of salutiferous essence. This is one of those instances
history likes to push your face into to try to stir your appetite
for cruelty a little, or at least make you covet the perks of it: I too 
want vanilla in quantity. I want it all around me, like a fortress
of mellow dangles. It will move with me as I move and it will ward
hateful people off. For centuries Europeans tried to cultivate it 
outside its native Mexico and failed. They could get the vine
to flower, but in the absence of ancestral pollinators, specifically
hummingbirds and a stingless bee, the flowers dropped off podless. 
Meanwhile, Edmond Albius—born into slavery on an island
east of Madagascar known then as Bourbon, lush French colony
and home to roses, one active volcano, one dormant, and one 
arena-like caldera that holds the record for most rainfall shed
in one location by a single tropical cyclone ever, namely Hyacinthe—
knew enough from orchids at age twelve in 1841 to think to lift 
with a bamboo splint the flap of the rostellum dividing the pollen-
heavy male anther from the female stigma in order to rub the pollen
on the stigma’s eager wand. Within weeks the pods had begun 
to form and lengthen into joyous beanlike squiggles laden with
tiny seeds like secrets of the universe as Albius at the shore and under
bright southern stars breathed out I hope in a kind of enlargement 
akin to liberty from time, so that on that occasion he might feel
briefly as if his own, even as his method of vanilla pollination
belonged first to his master, then Madagascar, and then the world, 
with nearly all vanilla produced today as Albius taught us, including
the kind in Breyers since 1866, fourteen years before Albius died
unrecognized, in poverty, in misery to be exact, while everyone white 
around him grew rich with vanilla, adding it to candy, Coca-Cola,
Chanel No. 5, and even in effigy to the air freshener dangling
down in my Uber, its waves whispering Albius, Albius, but inaudibly.


^^EOP^^



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


^^EOP^^


fine parchment     face
suddenly     chantilly
lace    his torso     a doily
perforated     twinkling
with sweet     patient   fungus
shiny maggot-
milled    one old gold trinket    slipped
between two ribs
his legs  folded  and cold 
he   too   was somebody’s
honeybunch    and heartleap
his jaw an ox-bone
his eyes full     of lake
his burring voice    booming  out
bold songs     like john bro-own’s    body
da-da da-da  da  da    da

^^EOP^^





[ Johnny Pep, P.O.W. ]



When they flang me down that hole I clawed for home—  
When they sealed the seam with clay : sucked roots and ore—  
When my gut would grind would groan of lack I ’voked some meat—  
When I was blindered underground I seen our creek—  
When stench would stain the mind the mind would branch—  
When I got stripped & roped to stand for sleep I reined my hoss—  
When cane-straps flogged us cross the field we’d call a tune—  
( When rows of welts ( still ) grave the mind the mind will climb. )

^^EOP^^


                    
                    
                    A man I loved  kept a  folded square
of    masking   tape   in   his   pocket    
He  did   this      / only   for   a   year    
His    masking    tape   was     bright
orange and fraying    As evidence  /
coroners   had   used   it   to   attach
to   his    father’s    calf     the     rope
his   father’d   used       /   This  man
planted    the   tape     in   our   yard
when   the    year   was    done   and
from  it  grew  thirteen  beams      /
From   these   beams    rafters   grew    
Ropes uncurled   from  these  rafters
and fathers  hanged  from the ropes    
/      Over    the    fathers     a     roof
blossomed        like         a       shield
and against it a ladder leaned  / The
ladder            was            so         tall
the  man   I    loved    said    it  must
have  ended in  heaven     And down    
/  from the ladder an angel  scurried
while    we    slept       In  its   mouth
it  carried   torn   strips     / of    tape    
The    angel     pressed      this    tape
on the  calves  of  the  man  I   loved
like   bandages       /  Each  morning
I removed the tape     I  was   careful
not to wake him     Each morning  /
he’d    walk    through   the    garden
of   swaying   fathers      He’d   kneel
beside  our rosemary bush     / He’d
rub its leaves in his hands  He’d ball
his hands in his hair to scent it   He
wanted           /   just      to       keep
his earthliness with him      / In hell
this is the only prerequisite
                

^^EOP^^


Where there’s blood, there are birds. 
After the war, many of the men’s faces are missing parts: an eye, a nose, a mouth. 
One doctor uses a man’s own rib to construct a new jaw. 
They call him the-man-who-fixes-faces. 
A body might stay whole in the trench, but who can resist looking up, sometimes, at the birds? 
You get out alive, maybe, but your face wears forever the look of what’s lost. 
The-man-who-fixes-faces might give you something like a face. 
Now all you see are faces turning away. 
A bullet wounds in a straight line, but shrapnel is feathery: it picks up dirt. 
The birds, it’s easy to forget, are filthy; a little bird in the blood can kill you. 
A square within a circle, the golden ratio, symmetry, they say, makes a face beautiful. 
Birds have two eyes, two legs, and two wings, but the soldier’s face is half here, half in the air. 
Mirrors can be psychologically damaging to birds. 
Birds are territorial. 
Birds keep going back to the fountain to check on that one bird beneath the water. 
In the park near the hospital, the-man-who-fixes-faces paints some of the benches blue. 
The blue benches are for the men whose faces are unrecognizable. 
I’ve seen a bird attack a window. 
If you don’t want to see a man healing, look up at the sky. 
Why is the sky blue? 
Symmetry: a line drawn from the sun through the zenith to the “anti-sun.” 
Like shrapnel, light scatters.


^^EOP^^





[ Tetsu schools her son ]



Bloomed no intention not no notion  of  a child but out you came. 
What some got natural mothery  know-to-do unborn in me. 
I been brought from cross the water far—  every bone a alien never not. 
(No soil no roots yall clinch so hard  for home gon’ be my home.) 
My flint mama was no lamp to me  nor well my name she gave means iron. 
Long nights back home we boiled our sea  for salt to sell the salt. 
On me mongst moss and spruce the uncles  and the sofu took their turns. 
Time and tide I’d had to burn  to (cauldron) boil the sea and eat the salt. 
Himself  who was your seed he called me  Steel when he would call me liked my sharp. 
Yes once you heard him down the  telephone (some breaths) the line broke off—


^^EOP^^


I gave up the pencil, the walk in woods, the fog
     at dawn, a keyhole I lost an eye to. 
And the habit of early, of acorn into oak—
      bent   tangled   choked because of ache or greed,
      or lousy light deemed it so. 
So what. Give up that so what. 
O fellow addicts of the arch and the tragic, give up
     the thousand-pound if and when too.
     Give up whatever made the bed or unmade it. 
Give up the know thing that shatters into other things
     and takes the remember fork in the road. 
The remember isn’t a road. 
At noon, the fog has no memory of fog, the trees I walked
      or wanted to. Like the pencil never recalls its least
      little mark, the dash loved, the comma which can’t, 
cannot dig down what its own brief nothing
      means on the page. I don’t understand death either. 
By afternoon, the brain is box, is breath let go, a kind of
    mood music agog, half emptied by the usual
    who am I, who are you, who’s anyone. 
Truth is, I listen all night for morning, all day
      for night in the trees draped like a sound I never quite
        
get how it goes. There’s a phantom self, nerved-up
      as any arm or leg. 
Of  course I was. Of course I stared from the yard,
      my mother at the window 
rinsing knife and spoon and the middle of her life. 
In drawing class, all eyes fix on the figure gone
       imaginary, thinning to paper. Not the wind or a cry
       how the hand makes, our bent to it— 
              pause and rush, rush and pause— 
small animals heard only at dark, spooked in the leaves.


^^EOP^^


Aba says in a blizzard, fill the bathtub.
With firewood. Aba says a leaky roof 
is a blessing. Provided
the bucket. To melt 
snow. With fire. We gather.
All the trees in Queens. Shake 
& shiver. My axe
cannot approximate. 
My axe is a plastic bottle. Filled with club 
soda. I wonder
when it unfreezes, 
will it explode. Aba says: Light
of my eyes, 
where are you getting your science. 
I no longer know. I used to believe
in string theory. But the field 
breaks. Too many. Rules. 
& you can’t quantify nor quantum
even a drop of rain—everything’s just 
too damn big. For models that would prove. The rules. Tried & still
not true. The roof is always leaking. The bathtub is a mass 
grave of trees. Aba says go outside
before it’s too late. But I have. I’ve seen. 
In a public bathroom I hide
with many other women 
from a storm. The leaky roof
fills with cinders & once more. 
A dead bird. One of us screams.
They all scream. When I pick him 
up off the slimy floor. Pick
the maggots from his body. 
Soon. I have the bathroom. To myself.
In public. I have an entire sanctuary. 
Of sorts. To mourn. When I bring the dead
home. Aba tears at his clothes & covers 
the mirrors. Won’t let me burn
the body. Says even birds died 
in the Shoah’s desperate, hungry hands.
Days before the bodies were turned 
to ash. Perhaps this bird too descends
from a lone survivor. We cry for 
his mother. We cry for my grandmother.
Free up the bathtub & flood our home. 
With rainwater. Float
a burning, empty pyre. 
I say: Aba, this isn’t what we do
either. Aba says: It’s too late 
to go outside. Which I do. I try.
I dig & dig. 
For dirt, defying
my father. 
I lose
the feeling 
in my hands. In snow
that doesn’t quite stick 
to the ground. Night falls
& his body stays warm 
under my layers
drenched. From 
sleet & sweat.
I won’t give 
in. Birds gather around me. Dark lights
against blue cement. They wait it out. 
They stay perfectly still.
Right out in the open.


^^EOP^^





What can you see elsewhere that you cannot see here? ... Had you never gone out and listened to idle talk, you would the better have remained perfectly at peace.
—Thomas à Kempis, The Imitation of Christ



The Queen of Sheba packed fenugreek,
turmeric, milled cardamom, desiccated
coconut, sweet almond oil, figs, fat
amber dates, green lemons, and mint,
onto a dozen knobbly camels. Let’s see,
Poetaster, how your sinuses like these!

^^EOP^^


I must be the heavy globe
of hydrangea, always bowing
by summer’s end. Must be salt,
like sadness at a burning city,
an ethical disobedience. I must be
a violet thorn of fire. These days
I don’t taste good, but I must
be singing and boneless, a lily.
I must beg for it, eyes flashing
silver as a fish. Must be a rosary
of listening. This is how I know
to love. I must hide under desks
when the forecast reads: leaves red
as meat, sleeping lions, chandelier
of bone, moon smooth as a worry
stone. I must want my life and fear
the thin justice of grass. Clouds
hunt, wound the rising tide. I must
be paradised. On my knees again.


^^EOP^^


One of the first I learned was the trinity, three persons in one
God: father, son, and holy spirit, née ghost. Then I started writing
JMJ on all my homework and tests, for good luck, but also because 
My ballpoint’s blue ink looked pretty beside the paper’s purple
Ink, like the inside of a clamshell when I teared up or squinted
From the smell. Sometimes the sheets were wet and curled like 
Petals reeking of gin, which is why it was called spirit duplication,
After the nonflammable alcohol used in the process. Jesus, Mary,
And Joseph, is what the three initials meant. I’d draw a cross from 
The descending caret of the M and think of Mary, the mother,
And of the other Mary, not, weeping at the limp feet of the crucified
Jesus. Where was Joseph, I wondered, but never asked. We seemed 
To pity him a little, for reasons I couldn’t name, like my father,
Who was both my father and a son, and soon to be the son of
His father’s ghost. When my grandmother was dying, she asked 
Her only child, my mother, to go with her. Mom waited decades
To obey, but she finally went. Together in one grave now, they are
Two Marys, maybe with the Jesus of their most solitary prayers, 
Petals littering their one stone’s four corners. Being motherless,
Like being childless, is both good and bad, I think,
And it is a third thing, too, that is neither of these.
 


^^EOP^^


I do kind gestures. Remove my appendix.
I put my ear to a flat shell and—nothing.
I play the lottery ironically. Get married.
Have a smear test. I put my ear to the beak
of a dead bird—nothing. I grow wisdom
teeth. Jog. I pick up a toddler’s telephone,
Hello?—No answer. I change a light bulb
on my own. Organize a large party. Hire
a clown. Attend a four-day stonewalling
course. Have a baby. Stop eating Coco Pops.
I put my ear right up to the slack and gaping
bonnet of a daffodil—. Get divorced. Floss.
Describe a younger person’s music taste as
“just noise.” Enjoy perusing a garden center.
Sit in a pub without drinking. I stand at the
lip of a pouting valley—speak to me!
My echo plagiarizes. I land a real love plus
two real cats. I never meet the talking bird
again. Or the yawning hole. The panther
of purple wisps who prowls inside the air.
I change nappies. Donate my eggs. Learn
a profound lesson about sacrifice. Brunch.
No singing floorboards. No vents leaking
scentless instructions. My mission is over.
The world has zipped up her second mouth.


^^EOP^^


The story tells us Sisyphus is being punished.
Over and over he has to push that boulder 
up and up. The mountain and God glaring.
And you, you have 
your avalanche of moods.
Pills the size of stars to nearly quell 
cascade and tumult.
And still you step 
gravity amplified by incline, each hazard
in the way of the boulder a reminder 
it should be easier. There should be
a hot fudge sundae at the top. A long nap in the shade. 
The story forgot to tell us, though, Sisyphus thrived. 
He learned to guide his wrists
and shoulder girdles safely to protect himself. 
And later he worked to safeguard every insect
from here to the crest. Considers this his calling. 
Even as the sun and the weight of time bears down.
Your strength is kingly.


^^EOP^^





After Cai Guo-Qiang



Quick, before the sun
rises, get up one more
time, my grandmother.
The artist won’t mind
if you borrow
his sky ladder.
Place your foot
on the bottom rung
and keep climbing,
even though
you’re a skeleton
with a broken neck
from falling downstairs
on Guy Fawkes night.
The ladder is wrapped
in gunpowder, and he’s
lit the touchpaper.
Your bones are ascending
firecrackers.
You’re half a kilometer
high now, halfway
to the universe,
my joy-gardener.
I hope you find a
garden with rich black
soil for your black
roses, hybrids like you—
half white half Indian,
half woman half flower,
their roots twined
through your skull,
you who were transplanted
among the pale roses
of a British family.
Your skin now a mix
of photons and soot.
What do you find up there?
Is there a hothouse?
Are there alien hands
with deft brushes
pollinating stars?
Remember how
your tomatoes kept
yielding more planets?
Are there constellations
of exotic fruit now
you’ve reached the top?
Have you gone back
enough in space-time
to when you were alive?
The ladder is charred,
the hot air balloon
that held it up
is about to collapse.
The explosions are over.
Cai showers his head
with champagne, as his
100-year-old granny
watches on her cell phone. Did you see it? He asks, did you hear the whoosh,
the rat-tat-tat
at the starry door?
You can go back
to sleep now

^^EOP^^


... who spoke late
echolalic, then in similes,
by the lake,
where the sticks were her
long mosquitoes, her lava
pyramid brown rice. Got a crush on a suffix,
giggled, blushed,
at every -tion. And there were
many, in conversation,
flirting with her.
Pre-dejection.
Pseudoabstraction. As she grew into
orchestration, a white
sport coat and a pink
carnation, crenellation,
inhalation—
had I known
too much lamentation? I, who have lived
isolation, seen sun
as lion,
its mane’s
diffusion; offered her
a turnip moon,
close-shaven.
Parental anomaly,
weird shared ions.
A word-prescription.
A nerve-ending infatuation. I’m blessed
she’s the termination of me,
last blood relation.
Daughter, if you follow land
to its suffix, there’s ocean,
which I know your toes,
bare, still-growing, slim,
will never shun.


^^EOP^^


One figure is female, the other is male.

Both are contained.

One figure is mythical, the other historical.

To the extent that one can be said to have existed at all, they occupy different millennia, different continents.

But, to the extent that one can be said to have existed at all, both figures are considered Asian—one from Colchis, one from Korea.

To mention the Asianness of the figures creates a “racial marker” in the poem.

This means that the poem can no longer pass as a white poem, that different people can be expected to read the poem, that they can be expected to read the poem in different ways.

To mention the Asianness of the figures is also to mention, by implication, the Asianness of the poet.

Revealing a racial marker in a poem is like revealing a gun in a story or like revealing a nipple in a dance.

After such a revelation, the poem is about race, the story is about the gun, the dance is about the body of the dancer—it is no longer considered a dance at all and is subject to regulation.

Topics that have this gravitational quality of aboutness are known as “hot button” topics, such as race, violence, or sex.

“Hot button” is a marketing term, coined by Walter Kiechel III, in a September 1978 issue of Fortune magazine.

The term evokes laboratory animals and refers to consumer desires that need to be slaked.

The term “hot button” suggests not only the slaking of such desires but also a shock or punishment for having acted on those desires, a deterrent to further actions pursuing such desires, and by extension, a deterrent to desire itself.

Violence and sex are examples of desires and can be satisfied, punished, and deterred.

Race is not usually considered an example of desire.

Both the female and the male figures are able to articulate their desires with an unusual degree of candor and specificity.

Both are responsible for many sexual deaths.

The male figure says, “When anger grips me, I cannot contain myself. Only after I kill something—a person, perhaps an animal, even a chicken—can I calm down.... I am sad that Your Majesty does not love me and terrified when you criticize me. All this turns to anger.” “Your Majesty,” here, refers to the king, his father.

The female figure is never directly quoted, but Pseudo-Apollodorus writes that she casts a spell upon the king her husband so that when he has sex with another woman, he ejaculates wild creatures into the woman’s vagina, thereby killing her. Although the punishment is enacted on the body of the woman, this punishment is meant to deter the king from slaking his desires.

Both figures, royal themselves, are angry at the king, but neither attempts to kill the king—which would be political. Instead they displace this anger onto other unnamed deaths, which are considered sexual but not political.

Both figures have spouses known for strategy, for self-preservation in  politically tumultuous times, times of many unnamed deaths.

Both figures are counterfoils to their strategizing spouses, figures of excessive  desire, requiring containment.

Both containers are wooden.

Both containers are camouflaged with a soft, yielding substance—one with grass, one with fur.

Both containers are ingenious solutions to seemingly intractable problems.

One problem is political. One problem is sexual.

They are both the same problem.

They have the same solution.

The male figure waits in the container for death to come. He waits for eight days. His son will live. This ensures the succession, the frictionless transfer of power.

The female figure waits in the container for the generation of a life. We do not know how long she waits. Her son will die, after waiting in his own wooden container. This ensures the succession, the frictionless transfer of power.

There are many artistic representations of both containers.

The male figure’s container is blockish, unadorned, a household object of standard size and quotidian function. Tourists climb into it and pose for photos, post them online. The cramped position of their bodies generates a combination of horror and glee. This, in turn, creates discomfort, the recognition that horror and glee should not be combined, that such a combination is taboo.

The female figure’s container is customized, lushly contoured. Its contours are excessively articulated to the same degree that her desire is excessively articulated. Artists depict the container in cutaway view, revealing the female figure within, awaiting the wild creature. The abject position of the female figure—on all fours, pressing her genitalia back against the hollow cow’s genitalia—generates a combination of lust and revenge. This, in turn, creates discomfort—the recognition that lust and revenge should not be combined, that wild creatures and female figures should not be combined, that these combinations are taboo.

Hot button topics are taboo because they generate discomfort.

The male figure slakes his violent desires and is punished. The male figure also functions as a hot button, a means whereby the violent desires of tourists  are slaked, while generating discomfort in these tourists.

The female figure slakes her sexual desires and is punished. The female  figure also functions as a hot button, a means whereby the sexual desires of artists are slaked, while generating discomfort in these artists.

The tourist can climb into the rice chest. The tourist can pose for a photo in the rice chest. Then the tourist can climb out of the rice chest and walk away.

The artist can look into the hollow cow. The artist can render the contours of the hollow cow, the contours of the female figure. Then the artist can walk away.

Both containers allow the tourist and artist to touch the hot button, the taboo.

The desire and the discomfort remain contained.

Both containers allow the tourist and the artist to walk away.

The male and female figures remain contained.

Neither container—the rice chest, the hollow cow—appears to have any necessary connection to race.

To mention race where it is not necessary to mention race is taboo.

I have not mentioned the race of the tourist or the artist.

The tourist and the artist are allowed to pass for white.

The tourist and the artist are not contained.

I have already mentioned the race of the poet.

But to the extent that the poet is not contained, the poet is allowed to pass for white.

I have already mentioned the race of the male and female figures.

The male and female figures are contained.

The rice chest and the hollow cow are containers.

The rice chest and the hollow cow are not the only containers in this poem.

Colchis and Korea are containers in this poem.

Asianness is a container in this poem.

Race is a container in this poem.

Each of these containers contains desire and its satisfaction.

Each of these containers contains discomfort and deterrence.

Each of these containers contains a hot button, a taboo.

The tourist and the artist can enter each of these containers.

The tourist and the artist can touch the hot button and walk away.

Each of these containers separates the slaking of desire from the punishment of desire.

Each of these containers is an ingenious solution to a seemingly intractable problem.

They are the same problem.

They have the same solution.

Each of these containers ensures the frictionless transfer of power.

Each of these containers holds a male or female figure.

The name of the male figure can be translated as “Think of me in sadness.”

The name of the female figure can be translated as “I shine for all of you.”


^^EOP^^


I hold two fingers to my head,
trigger my thumb, I say pow.
I slice my throat with a single stroke,
pull an invisible blade
vertically along my vein.
Remember the deaths we did together?
Twiddling oven knobs in the air
then thrusting our chins to inhale?
I loved you so much
during that experimental play
when you slowly leant forward to nick
your femoral artery then quietly
bled out in your seat until curtain call,
blood only we saw.
As well as death, we’d mime marriage.
I’d slide on a spectral ring
and you’d shiver at the thrill
of my thumb and fingertip
sealing the deal for a second till
the thought melted back into your skin.
I am proficient at beginnings,
the Air Year: the anniversary prior to paper
for which ephemeral gifts are traditional.
Only after our rings became solid
silver did they truly disappear.
Now the house is a mime scene.
Mime blood all over the floor,
trodden into carpet fibers,
shirts, bras, dried to an airy crust
under my nails. I slit
my neck at the traffic lights,
pow on the train, I suspend
my non-knife above my head,
“see what you’re making me do.”
Red whirls rise from the cuts.
All these huge thoughts come to
nothing. My shadow is
the chalk outline of a woman
who did not jump.


^^EOP^^


On this night
             I remember Nachshon
             who was not Moses who
                         walked into the Red Sea
                         and called for God
                                                  to meet him there
On this night
             I am only a body and you
                                                  are only a body
On this night
                         nothing is hidden
                         only the afikomen
On this night
                         God was here and I
                                                            I knew it


^^EOP^^


my mouth hurts / i’m still dreaming / of hamburgers / of childhood / of the delicate clacking / of baby teeth / it’s foreign / even when i hold / myself /  i keep tonguing my toothache / ripping the grass from the dirt / and trying to tie the blades in knots / again / the irritation / the bottle full of milk / that will always spill / or spoil / sometimes i’m a lover / of my own dysfunction / sometimes / i list out all the sharp spots / try to floss them out / mop the spill with paper towel / mail you a postcard / from my mouth / inscribe it with a paradox / is being full / of cavities / the same as being empty / or just another iteration / of the holy body


^^EOP^^


The fools nearly killed me trying to make me one of them:
a loaded word of  bond with dress codes and penal codes,
postured allegiant to the culture as with the flying of flags
from knots tied on the back of  head wraps worn hoods over. 
I can’t gunpoint when the life of this alter ego began though
the possibility can’t be dismissed it began at gunpoint in a way,
with an icy pressure against the temple, the mind splitting into two
tracks while a circus of peers clowned. Going back far too long
now, the camera has blurred my edges in the suggestion of motion
even if  I stood as still as the air does before shit really hits the fan. 
I truly went ass-first into fronting indifference, forbade my happy
teeth from public reveal lest they pop the balloon of my perfectly
round face, baby-angled, already read as kind or innocent or soft
from the jump when I wanted respect on my name and women on
my lap like it was said I should. And, shamefully, I did. Several
sistas come to mind here and this doesn’t make me feel good;
a tender touch in the moonlight goes only so far for a shadow. 
I had to break it down for myself that being down represented
the fear of having fear. I still shake when the wind blows,
scary as ever, thespian as always in all ways toward the ghost
of a threat or disrespect passed through me then through me,
through a thin skin then through the skin. So, to compensate—
a mask, what Dunbar’s bars beat home way back when about
standing in the presence of the pale folks, only that idea flipped
upside down, what’d be a forced smile slicing the face open like
some summertime melon instead setting scowl folds into smooth
forehead, brown eyes set at the mouth’s corners, fixing it in the
position of silence like rusty nails. If carrying nothing else,
I learned to bring this exact look to the danger because being me
to the fullest would be a liability, provide a sharper image for the
hidden cameras to home in on; yes, just that fast—a certified blue,
strolling up to the screen door with a heavy hand for knocking and
his true hand resting so sweetly on his gun. My gun, I should say,
since in this case the cop is also me, like that little angel or devil
used as sitcom trope. Just imagine the person coming for you
being  you every time: don’t trip, you’d say, unless into the fight.


^^EOP^^





We shelter an angel whom we never cease to offend. We ought to be the guardians of that angel.
—Jean Cocteau



A scherzo of thumbnail butterflies, white ones,
Covers the hillside. God is more
Adorable than music. Nevertheless,
On a given morning, as the wind drops,
Music pries Heaven apart from itself,
Like flowers beneath the wings unfolded on them. 
Every breeze is self-registering.
This morning, I walked deeper into the hill,
Free of the sun. Midway up the tallest trees,
One leaf alone would stir while all the leaves
On the very same branch remained stock-still.
Apart from itself, Heaven signaled to me. 
William Blake was no romantic. He was,
Beyond the arsons of levity and his toe,
The final bulwark of the baroque.
He was the last to oppose, “almost
Successfully,” rebirth on all the wrong terms.
He saw the leaf alone where no light was. 
Infinite variation plays against
A steadfast variety. The butterfly
Knows the difference in its wings, even
As the flower she alights upon darkens
Beneath her weight. The sun goes deeper
Into the hill. Root systems and riot shine. 
Did you think for a moment Earth
Was aware of itself? Never. Its adoration
Persists altogether elsewhere from
The very beginning, beginning again
Just at that moment one leaf all alone
Spins into the baroque, a scherzo of one note. 
The hillside is covered with little doors,
And the wind rises out of them, returning,
When the music is spent, with all the news
Of the unaware, unreflecting, nearly perfect
Hours blindly about the business of perfection.
Hence the tiny eyes on a butterfly’s wing. 
Rebirth is an idiot. Isolated
Each into its own eternity,
Like every pain, birth continues out of mind
Deeper into the hill. Earth riots
With levity. Darkness swims into light.
Flowers begin to imagine the life of flowers. 
Heaven signals to me, pouring down shade
Out of the canopy of trees, prying
The sunlight apart from itself. Darkness
And light are the same thing. Music moves
Effortlessly between the two, made of nothing
But wings, wings with eyes, no end in sight.


^^EOP^^


 the unknown has hold of me and its grip is strong as honey on the underside of a spoon   
 
the unknown i mean is not the usual one the future the tomorrow of survival         
 
but the past and what happened in the name of the name after mine and in the name of the name before mine     
 
i do not know enough to speak i do not know enough to remain silent        
 
there is a fear that holds me and it sounds like wind it sounds like katydids in catalpa        
 
ah the tall grass of the days before i knew there was a before me    
 
where do i live if there’s no home remaining
 
where do i live if the home i helped build can never be mine and the one i was born into never was         
 


^^EOP^^


Part of suffering is the useless urge to announce that you’re suffering.
 
There is no other way to say it: I’m suffering. Just to say “I suffer”
helps.
 
I read somewhere, “we become lyrical when we suffer.”
 
Happiness is suffering for the right reasons.
 
First-order suffering is second-order happiness.
 
You have to suffer for beauty? Because you have to suffer.
 
We pride ourselves on a high quality of suffering.
 
Turgenev was born in 1818 in the Province of Orel, and suffered
during his childhood from a tyrannical mother.
 
In the past their suffering was less absurd.
 
The problem is, everything’s worse. Like, paper or plastic? We’re all
still going to die suffering.
 
I value being alone with my thoughts, but it’s weird to say, “This
thing that makes us suffer less, we have to stop doing it.”
 
Isn’t it kind of the point of culture to assuage our feeling needless
and alone?
 
How does one suffer “gladly,” exactly?
 
At least the rich get to suffer in comfort.
 
It makes the life feel longer. Live to suffer another day.
 
One’s past suffering can be a great source of comfort. A torturous
luxury. Velvet upholstery.
 
Suffering is happiness, after forty minutes of desolate shuffling. The
point is, life is suffering.
 
About suffering, no one is ever wrong.
 


^^EOP^^


I pass a woman on the beach.
We both wear graying hair,
feel sand between our toes,
hear surf, and see blue sky.
I came with a smile.
She came to get one. 
No.  I'm wrong. 
She sits on a boulder
by a cairn of stacked rocks.
Hands over her heart,
she stares out to sea.
Today's my turn to hold the joy,
hers the sorrow.


^^EOP^^





what is at first a bodily impression turns out to be a condition of knowing
—Judith Butler



    in the airport terminal I sit down in a row of chairs without looking at the man in the chair beside me… my chair is adjacent to a narrow formica table where I set the coffee and muffin I’ve bought… I’m tempted to look at the man sitting on the other side of the formica table but I do not want to take a chance and meet his eyes… a familiar animosity must be what warns me off… warnings that I realize are chewable I’m learning are better swallowed… I watch how this man expresses affront toward me without interrupting his focus on his cell phone… the formica table between us isn’t wide enough for him to have the distance from me he requires… this next  sensation has nothing to do with what he knows… though I react as if it could… his disgust is my own as I lie on my side my knees to my chest… in a bed I am a child with my mother her body moving… her body wrapped too close around me… nothing about this should surprise me… nothing is the space between one breath and the next… even if the space is decades long…


^^EOP^^


magnolias & forsythia blossom
from yr Sugar Hill/ Ray Drummond
plays nasty riffs & i imagine
alla the Palm Cafe turns out
when you glow at dusk on
Convent Avenue/ slidin easily by
the just-for-us propositions Gylan Kain
fashioned at every other Harlem corner/
we usedta leave deluxe issues of
love potions/ remedies even insinuations
danglin from Baptist steeples/ Methodist steps
jump back/ jump up/ beatin down/ flyin
yng wenches whose skirts still
tease solos over to the Savoy/
 
        (you cd make yrself irresistible/ be my
            Willis Avenue Bridge/ floatin/ Rican wet
               su lengua dulce/ over an East River of
                 gardenias/ remember the minor sixth)
you hummed to me while I was
reachin for the/ ceilin/ where our
folks was carryin on before Michelangelo
or Lionel Richie/ some where round there
where you brush up gainst baobabs/ well
                 (you know where my beauty marks are/ all
over
HARLEM)
we sing like flowers/ i see
round brown honies giggle at us/ the
silly/ niggahness of yr quick light
kisses/ cómo fresh/ mi chabalo negro/ mi propio Tito
Puente/
       my own rhythm section/ that petal
   opening every time yr lips/ let
love/ cada vez / yr lips
let love fall/ all
over
Sugar Hill
        


^^EOP^^





(for gail, tracie & viola)



whatever shall i do with my dead
my tombs & mausoleums
these potted plants tended by strangers
over yr eyes        closed
maybe dreaming      dead/ loved
so particularly       i dont know
what to do with you
 
shall i see you dancin/
hold yr child askin/       what’s mammy like
should i sleep with yr husband
who sees yr childself in my memories
yr mother       will she bosom talk me to death with you
pretend she has been no mother
our smokey robinson fantasies set aside
recollections comin to no good end
 
grandma/ grandma
must i ride with yr daughters to sit
in the cemetery on sunny days/ weedin
yr womb/ wdnt it be better if i stayed
in my kitchen/ makin gumbo/ codfish cakes
watchin edge of nite/
rubbin me hands of my apron/ hummin
his eye is on the sparrow
yr photograph at 25 is on my wall
awready you had given yr woman over/
no one wd know you/ only mama is remembered
when waz there more
i shall not lie fondling a dead man’s love
bakin apples for a locket jammed with hair from
a head no longer arrogant
but what shall i do
with my dead/ loved so particularly
leavin me/ specifically
 
some never stop breathin
wantin kisses
some disappear/ slammin the door
bangin the phone
one went off in a VW bus/ another
stole my sleep
 
i sit here drinking memories
entertainin ghosts/ longin for arms
no longer warm/ too enchanted
to tend the pulse pushin me on
to go off from you/ my dead & loved ones
 
when i meet a someone/ i must know
i place you round me like a court of holy seers
if this stranger is to have a space in my life
she must pull yr spirits to her own
for i wander regularly in moments of the dead
if you wd have me speak
you must learn the tongue of my dead & loved ones
i have been left behind
a survivor
holdin out for more
 


^^EOP^^


it hasnt always been this way
ellington was not a street
robeson no mere memory
du bois walked up my father’s stairs
hummed some tune over me
sleeping in the company of men
who changed the world
 
it wasnt always like this
why ray barretto used to be a side-man
& dizzy’s hair was not always grey
i remember            i was there
i listened in the company of men
politics as necessary as collards
music even in our dreams
 
our house was filled with all kinda folks
our windows were not cement or steel
our doors opened like our daddy’s arms
held us safe & loved
children growing in the company of men
old southern men & young slick ones
sonny til was not a boy
the clovers no rag-tag orphans
our crooners/ we belonged to a whole world
nkrumah was no foreigner
virgil aikens was not the only fighter
 
it hasnt always been this way
ellington was not a street
 


^^EOP^^





(for david)



these kisses are clandestine
no one can see them
i hold them in my hand
shd i be discovered/
i stick them in my hair & my head gets hot
so i haveta excuse myself
 
under no circumstances
can the legs that slip over my hips
leave tellin marks/ scents
of love/ this wd be unpardonable
so i am all the time
rubbin my arms/ exposing myself
to river mists/ to mask the sweetness
you leave me swillin in
 
i cant allow you to look at me
how you do so i am naked & wantin
to be explored like a honeysuckle patch
when you look at me how you do so
i am all lips & thigh/
my cover is blown & the kisses
run free/ only to hover sulkin over
yr cheek/ while i pretend
they are not mine
cuz its happenin/ but you dont know abt it
 
this kisses they take a slow blues walk
back to me
in the palm of my hand
they spread out/ scratch kick curse & punch
til my skin cries/
kisses raisin hell/ in my fists/
they fly out mad & eager
they’ll fly out mad & eager
if you look at me how you do so i am naked
& wantin/ if you look at me how you do so
i am all lips & thigh/
they gonna fly out mad & eager
they fly out & climb on you
the kisses/ they
flyin
if you look at me
how you do so
 


^^EOP^^


      st. louis/ such a colored town/ a whiskey
black space of history & neighborhood/ forever ours/
      to lawrenceville/ where the only road open
to me/ waz cleared by colonial slaves/ whose children never
moved/ never seems like/ mended the torments of the Depression
the stains of demented spittle/ dropped from lips of crystal women/
still makin independence flags/
      from st. louis/ on a halloween’s eve to the veiled prophet/
usurpin the mystery of mardi gras/ made it mine tho the queen
waz always fair/ that parade/ of pagan floats & tambourines/
commemoratin me/ unlike the lonely walks wit liberal trick or
treaters/ back to my front door/ bag half empty/
      my face enuf to scare anyone i passed/ a colored kid/
whatta gas                      1) here                        a tree                       wonderin the horizon                       dipped in blues &                       untended bones                       usedta hugs drawls                       rhythm & decency                       here a tree                       waitin to be hanged
 
       sumner high school/ squat & pale on the corner/ like
our vision/ waz to be vague/ our memory
of the war/ that made us free to be forgotten
becomin paler/ a linear movement from south carolina
to missouri/ freedman/ landin in jackie wilson’s yelp/ daughters of
the manumitted swimmin in tina turner’s grinds/ this is chuck
berry’s town/ disavowin misega-nation/ in any situation/ & they let
us be/ electric blues & bo diddley’s cant/ rockin pneumonia &
boogie-woogie flu/ the slop & short-fried heads/ running always to
the river
 
               / from chambersbourg/ lil italy/ i passed everyday
at the sweet shoppe/ & waz afraid/ the cops raided truants/
regularly/ after dark i wd not be seen/ wit any other colored/
sane/ lovin my life/
            in the 'bourg/ seriously expectin to be gnarled/
hey niggah/ over here/
             & behind the truck lay five hands claspin chains/
round the trees/ 4 more sucklin steel/
                                                                   hey niggah/ over here/
this is the borderline/
a territorial dispute/
 
                                                                   hey/ niggah/
over here/
               cars loaded wit families/ fellas from the factory/ one or two
practical nurses/ black/ become our trenches/ some dig into cement
wit elbows/ under engines/ do not be seen/ in yr hometown/ after
sunset we suck up our shadows/ 
              2) i will sit here
                   my shoulders brace an enormous oak                          dreams waddle in my lap                          round to miz bertha’s where lil richard                          gets his process                          runs backwards to the rosebushes/ a drunk man/ lyin                          down the block to the nuns in pink habits                          prayin in a pink chapel                          my dreams run to meet aunt marie                          my dreams draw blood from ol sores                                     these stains & scars are mine                                                 this is my space                                                          i am not movin
 
 


^^EOP^^


A bed sheet hung out to dry
became a screen for shadow animals.
But of all laundry days in the neighborhood
the windy ones were best,
the clothespins like little men riding
lines that tried to buck them off.
One at a time we ran down the aisles
between snapping sheets
that wanted to put us in our place.
Timing them, you faked and cut
like famous halfbacks. But if a sheet
tagged you it put you down, pinned
by the whiteness floating
against a sky washed by the bluing
our mothers added to the wash water.
Could anyone make it through those days
untouched? You waited for
your chance, then jumped up and finished
the course, rising if you fell again.
Later, let the sky darken suddenly
and we'd be sent out to empty the lines.
All up and down the block, kids
running with bed sheets in their arms,
running like firemen rescuing children.
All night those sheets lay draped
over furniture, as though we were leaving
and would not return for a long time.


^^EOP^^


my grandpa waz a doughboy from carolina
the other a garveyite from lakewood
i got talked to abt the race & achievement
bout color & propriety/
nobody spoke to me about the moon
 
daddy talked abt music & mama bout christians
my sisters/ we
always talked & talked
there waz never quiet
trees were status symbols
 
i’ve taken to fog/
the moon still surprisin me
 


^^EOP^^


In zero cold the engine's slow
to turn over, coughing
awake like my father sitting on the edge
of the bed staring at the blue linoleum floor,
coughing again, lifting his heavy body
into another day on the railroad section gang,
the icy wind through Lehigh Gap blasting
down on him as he raises the sledge hammer
and strains against the crowbar.
But now he's drinking coffee,
looking toward the dark window,
thinking of what?
Maybe watching Friday Night Fights
or ordering tomato seeds,
maybe the ghostly face in the window
staring back at him.


^^EOP^^





(for beverly)



when i write    i think of my friends
the people of my visions
but how cd i presume to think of men
who leave so little behind     i find them
in my wash cloth    in the dirty dishes
by my unmade bed
when i write i erase these dark halls
lone subway stops   the car followin
too closely    how cd i presume
to address my self
to men
they leave so little behind
& still i dont remember.
 
once a poet
delivered valentino
on a tie-dyed sheet w/
tequila passion
the sheik gallopin a desert for me
another sketched me
in the midst of bougainvillea
another saturated my basement with painted skeletons
long ago a poet
telephoned from ny
to have breakfast
in seattle
 
i’ve waded in hidden creeks
with the men i remember
the others had no sense of humor
 


^^EOP^^


Abandoned house roofless three walls
no floor a ruin if you think house—
 
to brown towhees a place to scratch
in the leaves for bugs and worms,
 
for the male to sing a territorial song
from what remains of the chimney—
 
an imagination problem like the time
friends said we must be very happy
 
in the beautiful house we built because
they couldn't see the ruins inside us.


^^EOP^^


The storm was headed in our direction—
big loom of gray like the absolute West
leaned over us. Reports of damage
in the neighboring counties—a silo unfurled
and took wing, a house trailer
twisted loose. On the Doppler screen
the storm looked alive, yellow and green
at the fringes, with a fierce red heart
trending to violet. Sirens swept over
to scare it away, like songbirds
grow strident, circle and bluff
at the sight of an owl.
When the rain came in sheets,
I regretted my sins. When lightning
cracked the red pine's half-rotted heart,
I wished the world more joy
in general. When the worst was over
and the grass lay flat, but alive,
and the sky was a waning bruise,
I thought of that silo, how it wasn't mine,
and all that grain cast back into the world's
wind, maybe some of it still flying.


^^EOP^^


Where in the world
does my mother go, eyes
shut so tight her lower lashes
curl in toward a view
that's hers alone?
Yesterday she told
me—after the rains, the winds came, and this morning
that's what they do.


^^EOP^^


First day of February,
and in the far corner of the yard
the Adirondack chair,
blown over by the wind at Christmas,
is still on its back,
the snow too deep for me
to traipse out and right it,
the ice too sheer
to risk slamming these old bones
to the ground.
In a hospital bed in her room
where her bed used to be,
and her husband,
my Aunt Millie keeps reaching up
for the far corner of the room,
whispering That is so interesting. I will go now.
In April
I will walk out
across the warming grass,
and right the chair
as if there had never been anything
to stop me in the first place,
listening for the buzz of hummingbirds
which reminds me of how fast
things are capable of moving.


^^EOP^^


       Thus, weary of life, in view of the great consummation which awaits us — tomorrow, we rush among our friends congratulating ourselves upon the joy soon to be. Thoughtless of evil we crush out the marrow of those about us with our heavy cars as we go happily from place to place. It seems that there is not time enough in which to speak the full of our exaltation. Only a day is left, one miserable day, before the world comes into its own. Let us hurry ! Why bother for this man or that ? In the offices of the great newspapers a mad joy reigns as they prepare the final extras. Rushing about, men bump each other into the whirring presses. How funny it seems. All thought of misery has left us. Why should we care ? Children laughingly fling themselves under the wheels of the street cars, airplanes crash gaily to the earth. Someone has written a poem.
 
       Oh life, bizarre fowl, what color are your wings ? Green, blue, red, yellow, purple, white, brown, orange, black, grey ? In the imagination, flying above the wreck of ten thousand million souls, I see you departing sadly for the land of plants and insects, already far out to sea. (Thank you, I know well what I am plagiarising) Your great wings flap as you disappear in the distance over the pre-Columbian acres of floating weed.
 
       The new cathedral overlooking the park, looked down from its towers today, with great eyes, and saw by the decorative lake a group of people staring curiously at the corpse of a suicide : Peaceful, dead young man, the money they have put into the stones has been spent to teach men of life’s austerity. You died and teach us the same lesson. You seem a cathedral, celebrant of the spring which shivers for me among the long black trees.


^^EOP^^


Before man came to blow it right
     The wind once blew itself untaught,
And did its loudest day and night
     In any rough place where it caught.
 
Man came to tell it what was wrong:
     It hadn’t found the place to blow;
It blew too hard—the aim was song.
     And listen—how it ought to go!
 
He took a little in his mouth,
     And held it long enough for north
To be converted into south,
     And then by measure blew it forth.
 
By measure. It was word and note,
     The wind the wind had meant to be—
A little through the lips and throat.
     The aim was song—the wind could see.
 


^^EOP^^


 I burned my life, that I might find
A passion wholly of the mind,
Thought divorced from eye and bone,
Ecstasy come to breath alone.
I broke my life, to seek relief
From the flawed light of love and grief.
 
With mounting beat the utter fire
Charred existence and desire.
It died low, ceased its sudden thresh.
I had found unmysterious flesh—
Not the mind’s avid substance—still
Passionate beyond the will.
 
 


^^EOP^^


All in green went my love riding
on a great horse of gold
into the silver dawn.
 
four lean hounds crouched low and smiling
the merry deer ran before.
 
Fleeter be they than dappled dreams
the swift sweet deer
the red rare deer.
 
Four red roebuck at a white water
the cruel bugle sang before.
 
Horn at hip went my love riding
riding the echo down
into the silver dawn.
 
four lean hounds crouched low and smiling
the level meadows ran before.
 
Softer be they than slippered sleep
the lean lithe deer
the fleet flown deer.
 
Four fleet does at a gold valley
the famished arrow sang before.
 
Bow at belt went my love riding
riding the mountain down
into the silver dawn.
 
four lean hounds crouched low and smiling
the sheer peaks ran before.
 
Paler be they than daunting death
the sleek slim deer
the tall tense deer.
 
Four tall stags at a green mountain
the lucky hunter sang before.
 
All in green went my love riding
on a great horse of gold
into the silver dawn.
 
four lean hounds crouched low and smiling
my heart fell dead before.
 


^^EOP^^


In the moonlight
I met Berserk,
In the moonlight
On the bushy plain.
 
Oh, sharp he was
As the sleepless!
 
And, “Why are you red
In this milky blue?”
I said.
“Why sun-colored,
As if awake
In the midst of sleep?”
 
“You that wander,”
So he said,
“On the bushy plain,
Forget so soon.
But I set my traps
In the midst of dreams.”
 
I knew from this
That the blue ground
Was full of blocks
And blocking steel.
I knew the dread
Of the bushy plain,
And the beauty
Of the moonlight
Falling there,
Falling
As sleep falls
In the innocent air.
 


^^EOP^^


Within this black hive to-night
There swarm a million bees;
Bees passing in and out the moon,
Bees escaping out the moon,
Bees returning through the moon,
Silver bees intently buzzing,
Silver honey dripping from the swarm of bees
Earth is a waxen cell of the world comb,
And I, a drone,
Lying on my back,
Lipping honey,
Getting drunk with that silver honey,
Wish that I might fly out past the moon
And curl forever in some far-off farmyard flower.
 


^^EOP^^


You have put your two hands upon me, and your mouth,
You have said my name as a prayer.
Here where trees are planted by the water
I have watched your eyes, cleansed from regret,
And your lips, closed over all that love cannot say,
 
         My mother remembers the agony of her womb
         And long years that seemed to promise more than this.
         She says, “You do not love me,
         You do not want me,
         You will go away.”
 
         In the country whereto I go
         I shall not see the face of my friend
         Nor her hair the color of sunburnt grasses;
         Together we shall not find
         The land on whose hills bends the new moon
         In air traversed of birds.
         
What have I thought of love?
I have said, “It is beauty and sorrow.”
I have thought that it would bring me lost delights, and splendor
As a wind out of old time. . .
 
But there is only the evening here,
And the sound of willows
Now and again dipping their long oval leaves in the water.
 


^^EOP^^


the bigness of cannon
is skilful,
 
but i have seen
death’s clever enormous voice
which hides in a fragility
of poppies. . . .
 
i say that sometimes
on these long talkative animals
are laid fists of huger silence.
 
I have seen all the silence
filled with vivid noiseless boys
 
at Roupy
i have seen
between barrages,
 
the night utter ripe unspeaking girls.
 


^^EOP^^


Before the unseen cock had called the time,
     Those workers left their beds and stumbled out
Into the street, where dust lay white as lime
     Under the last star that keeps bats about.
Then blinking still from bed, they trod the street,
     The doors closed up and down ;  the traveller heard
Doors opened, closed, then silence, then men’s feet
     Moving to toil, the men too drowsed for word.
The bean-field was a greyness as they passed,
     The darkness of the hedge was starred with flowers,
The moth, with wings like dead leaves, sucked his last,
     The triumphing cock cried out with all his powers ;
His fire of crying made the twilight quick,
Then clink, clink, clink, men’s trowels tapped the brick.
 
I saw the delicate man who built the tower
     Look from the turret at the ground below,
The granite column wavered like a flower,
     But stood in air whatever winds might blow.
Its roots were in the rock, its head stood proud,
     No earthly forest reared a head so high ;
Sometimes the eagle came there, sometimes cloud,
     It was man’s ultimate footstep to the sky.
And in that peak the builder kept his treasure,
     Books with the symbols of his art, the signs
Of knowledge in excitement, skill in pleasure,
     The edge that cut, the rule that kept the lines.
He who had seen his tower beneath the grass,
Rock in the earth, now smiled, because it was.
 
How many thousand men had done his will,  
     Men who had hands, or arms, or strength to spend,
Or cunning with machines, or art, or skill !
     All had obeyed him, working to this end.      
Hundreds in distant lands had given their share
     Of power, to deck it ;  on its every stone
Their oddity of pleasure was laid bare,
     Yet was the tower his offspring, his alone.
His inner eye had seen, his will had made it,
     All the opposing army of men’s minds
Had bowed, had turned, had striven as he bade it,
     Each to his purpose in their myriad kinds.
Now it was done, and in the peak he stood
Seeing his work, and smiled to find it good.
 
It had been stone, earth’s body, hidden deep,
     Lightless and shapeless, where it cooled and hardened.
Now it was as the banner on man’s keep
     Or as the Apple in Eden where God gardened.
Lilies of stone ran round it, and like fires
     The tongues of crockets shot from it and paused,
Horsemen who raced were carven on’t, the spires
     Were bright with gold ;  all this the builder caused.
And standing there, it seemed that all the hive
     Of human skill which now it had become,
Was stone no more, nor building, but alive,
     Trying to speak, this tower that was dumb,
 Trying to speak, nay, speaking, soul to soul
With powers who are, to raven or control
 


^^EOP^^


I came an errand one cloud-blowing evening
To a slab-built, black-paper-covered house
Of one room and one window and one door,
The only dwelling in a waste cut over
A hundred square miles round it in the mountains:
And that not dwelt in now by men or women.
(It never had been dwelt in, though, by women,
So what is this I make a sorrow of?)
I came as census-taker to the waste
To count the people in it and found none,
None in the hundred miles, none in the house,
Where I came last with some hope, but not much,
After hours’ overlooking from the cliffs
An emptiness flayed to the very stone.
I found no people that dared show themselves,
None not in hiding from the outward eye.
The time was autumn, but how anyone
Could tell the time of year when every tree
That could have dropped a leaf was down itself
And nothing but the stump of it was left
Now bringing out its rings in sugar of pitch;
And every tree up stood a rotting trunk
Without a single leaf to spend on autumn,
Or branch to whistle after what was spent.
Perhaps the wind the more without the help
Of breathing trees said something of the time
Of year or day the way it swung a door
Forever off the latch, as if rude men
Passed in and slammed it shut each one behind him
For the next one to open for himself.
I counted nine I had no right to count
(But this was dreamy unofficial counting)
Before I made the tenth across the threshold.
Where was my supper? Where was anyone’s?
No lamp was lit. Nothing was on the table.
The stove was cold—the stove was off the chimney—
And down by one side where it lacked a leg.
The people that had loudly passed the door
Were people to the ear but not the eye.
They were not on the table with their elbows.
They were not sleeping in the shelves of bunks.
I saw no men there and no bones of men there.
I armed myself against such bones as might be
With the pitch-blackened stub of an ax-handle
I picked up off the straw-dust covered floor.
Not bones, but the ill-fitted window rattled.
The door was still because I held it shut
While I thought what to do that could be done—
About the house—about the people not there.
This house in one year fallen to decay
Filled me with no less sorrow than the houses
Fallen to ruin in ten thousand years
Where Asia wedges Africa from Europe.
Nothing was left to do that I could see
Unless to find that there was no one there
And declare to the cliffs too far for echo,
“The place is desert, and let whoso lurks
In silence, if in this he is aggrieved,
Break silence now or be forever silent.
Let him say why it should not be declared so.”
The melancholy of having to count souls
Where they grow fewer and fewer every year
Is extreme where they shrink to none at all.
It must be I want life to go on living. 


^^EOP^^


 
                                 i          The World without Imagination 
Nota: man is the intelligence of his soil,
The sovereign ghost. As such, the Socrates
Of snails, musician of pears, principium
And lex. Sed quaeritur: is this same wig
Of things, this nincompated pedagogue,
Preceptor to the sea? Crispin at sea
Created, in his day, a touch of doubt.
An eye most apt in gelatines and jupes,
Berries of villages, a barber's eye,
An eye of land, of simple salad-beds,
Of honest quilts, the eye of Crispin, hung
On porpoises, instead of apricots,
And on silentious porpoises, whose snouts
Dibbled in waves that were mustachios,
Inscrutable hair in an inscrutable world. 
One eats one paté, even of salt, quotha.
It was not so much the lost terrestrial,
The snug hibernal from that sea and salt,
That century of wind in a single puff.
What counted was mythology of self,
Blotched out beyond unblotching. Crispin,
The lutanist of fleas, the knave, the thane,
The ribboned stick, the bellowing breeches, cloak
Of China, cap of Spain, imperative haw
Of hum, inquisitorial botanist,
And general lexicographer of mute
And maidenly greenhorns, now beheld himself,
A skinny sailor peering in the sea-glass.
What word split up in clickering syllables
And storming under multitudinous tones
Was name for this short-shanks in all that brunt?
Crispin was washed away by magnitude.
The whole of life that still remained in him
Dwindled to one sound strumming in his ear,
Ubiquitous concussion, slap and sigh,
Polyphony beyond his baton's thrust. 
Could Crispin stem verboseness in the sea,
The old age of a watery realist,
Triton, dissolved in shifting diaphanes
Of blue and green? A wordy, watery age
That whispered to the sun's compassion, made
A convocation, nightly, of the sea-stars,
And on the cropping foot-ways of the moon
Lay grovelling. Triton incomplicate with that
Which made him Triton, nothing left of him,
Except in faint, memorial gesturings,
That were like arms and shoulders in the waves,
Here, something in the rise and fall of wind
That seemed hallucinating horn, and here,
A sunken voice, both of remembering
And of forgetfulness, in alternate strain.
Just so an ancient Crispin was dissolved.
The valet in the tempest was annulled.
Bordeaux to Yucatan, Havana next,
And then to Carolina. Simple jaunt.
Crispin, merest minuscule in the gates,
Dejected his manner to the turbulence.
The salt hung on his spirit like a frost,
The dead brine melted in him like a dew
Of winter, until nothing of himself
Remained, except some starker, barer self
In a starker, barer world, in which the sun
Was not the sun because it never shone
With bland complaisance on pale parasols,
Beetled, in chapels, on the chaste bouquets.
Against his pipping sounds a trumpet cried
Celestial sneering boisterously. Crispin
Became an introspective voyager. 
Here was the veritable ding an sich, at last,
Crispin confronting it, a vocable thing,
But with a speech belched out of hoary darks
Noway resembling his, a visible thing,
And excepting negligible Triton, free
From the unavoidable shadow of himself
That lay elsewhere around him. Severance
Was clear. The last distortion of romance
Forsook the insatiable egotist. The sea
Severs not only lands but also selves.
Here was no help before reality.
Crispin beheld and Crispin was made new.
The imagination, here, could not evade,
In poems of plums, the strict austerity
Of one vast, subjugating, final tone.
The drenching of stale lives no more fell down.
What was this gaudy, gusty panoply?
Out of what swift destruction did it spring?
It was caparison of mind and cloud
And something given to make whole among
The ruses that were shattered by the large.
 
                                  ii Concerning the Thunderstorms of Yucatan 
In Yucatan, the Maya sonneteers
Of the Caribbean amphitheatre,
In spite of hawk and falcon, green toucan
And jay, still to the night-bird made their plea,
As if raspberry tanagers in palms,
High up in orange air, were barbarous.
But Crispin was too destitute to find
In any commonplace the sought-for aid.
He was a man made vivid by the sea,
A man come out of luminous traversing,
Much trumpeted, made desperately clear,
Fresh from discoveries of tidal skies,
To whom oracular rockings gave no rest.
Into a savage color he went on. 
How greatly had he grown in his demesne,
This auditor of insects! He that saw
The stride of vanishing autumn in a park
By way of decorous melancholy; he
That wrote his couplet yearly to the spring,
As dissertation of profound delight,
Stopping, on voyage, in a land of snakes,
Found his vicissitudes had much enlarged
His apprehension, made him intricate
In moody rucks, and difficult and strange
In all desires, his destitution's mark.
He was in this as other freemen are,
Sonorous nutshells rattling inwardly.
His violence was for aggrandizement
And not for stupor, such as music makes
For sleepers halfway waking. He perceived
That coolness for his heat came suddenly,
And only, in the fables that he scrawled
With his own quill, in its indigenous dew,
Of an aesthetic tough, diverse, untamed,
Incredible to prudes, the mint of dirt,
Green barbarism turning paradigm.
Crispin foresaw a curious promenade
Or, nobler, sensed an elemental fate,
And elemental potencies and pangs,
And beautiful barenesses as yet unseen,
Making the most of savagery of palms,
Of moonlight on the thick, cadaverous bloom
That yuccas breed, and of the panther's tread.
The fabulous and its intrinsic verse
Came like two spirits parlaying, adorned
In radiance from the Atlantic coign,
For Crispin and his quill to catechize.
But they came parlaying of such an earth,
So thick with sides and jagged lops of green,
So intertwined with serpent-kin encoiled
Among the purple tufts, the scarlet crowns,
Scenting the jungle in their refuges,
So streaked with yellow, blue and green and red
In beak and bud and fruity gobbet-skins,
That earth was like a jostling festival
Of seeds grown fat, too juicily opulent,
Expanding in the gold's maternal warmth.
So much for that. The affectionate emigrant found
A new reality in parrot-squawks.
Yet let that trifle pass. Now, as this odd
Discoverer walked through the harbor streets
Inspecting the cabildo, the façade
Of the cathedral, making notes, he heard
A rumbling, west of Mexico, it seemed,
Approaching like a gasconade of drums.
The white cabildo darkened, the façade,
As sullen as the sky, was swallowed up
In swift, successive shadows, dolefully.
The rumbling broadened as it fell. The wind,
Tempestuous clarion, with heavy cry,
Came bluntly thundering, more terrible
Than the revenge of music on bassoons.
Gesticulating lightning, mystical,
Made pallid flitter. Crispin, here, took flight.
An annotator has his scruples, too.
He knelt in the cathedral with the rest,
This connoisseur of elemental fate,
Aware of exquisite thought. The storm was one
Of many proclamations of the kind,
Proclaiming something harsher than he learned
From hearing signboards whimper in cold nights
Or seeing the midsummer artifice
Of heat upon his pane. This was the span
Of force, the quintessential fact, the note
Of Vulcan, that a valet seeks to own,
The thing that makes him envious in phrase. 
And while the torrent on the roof still droned
He felt the Andean breath. His mind was free
And more than free, elate, intent, profound
And studious of a self possessing him,
That was not in him in the crusty town
From which he sailed. Beyond him, westward, lay
The mountainous ridges, purple balustrades,
In which the thunder, lapsing in its clap,
Let down gigantic quavers of its voice,
For Crispin to vociferate again.                                   iii                  Approaching Carolina 
The book of moonlight is not written yet
Nor half begun, but, when it is, leave room
For Crispin, fagot in the lunar fire,
Who, in the hubbub of his pilgrimage
Through sweating changes, never could forget
That wakefulness or meditating sleep,
In which the sulky strophes willingly
Bore up, in time, the somnolent, deep songs.
Leave room, therefore, in that unwritten book
For the legendary moonlight that once burned
In Crispin's mind above a continent.
America was always north to him,
A northern west or western north, but north,
And thereby polar, polar-purple, chilled
And lank, rising and slumping from a sea
Of hardy foam, receding flatly, spread
In endless ledges, glittering, submerged
And cold in a boreal mistiness of the moon.
The spring came there in clinking pannicles
Of half-dissolving frost, the summer came,
If ever, whisked and wet, not ripening,
Before the winter's vacancy returned.
The myrtle, if the myrtle ever bloomed,
Was like a glacial pink upon the air.
The green palmettoes in crepuscular ice
Clipped frigidly blue-black meridians,
Morose chiaroscuro, gauntly drawn. 
How many poems he denied himself
In his observant progress, lesser things
Than the relentless contact he desired;
How many sea-masks he ignored; what sounds
He shut out from his tempering ear; what thoughts,
Like jades affecting the sequestered bride;
And what descants, he sent to banishment!
Perhaps the Arctic moonlight really gave
The liaison, the blissful liaison,
Between himself and his environment,
Which was, and is, chief motive, first delight,
For him, and not for him alone. It seemed
Elusive, faint, more mist than moon, perverse,
Wrong as a divagation to Peking,
To him that postulated as his theme
The vulgar, as his theme and hymn and flight,
A passionately niggling nightingale.
Moonlight was an evasion, or, if not,
A minor meeting, facile, delicate. 
Thus he conceived his voyaging to be
An up and down between two elements,
A fluctuating between sun and moon,
A sally into gold and crimson forms,
As on this voyage, out of goblinry,
And then retirement like a turning back
And sinking down to the indulgences
That in the moonlight have their habitude.
But let these backward lapses, if they would,
Grind their seductions on him, Crispin knew
It was a flourishing tropic he required
For his refreshment, an abundant zone,
Prickly and obdurate, dense, harmonious
Yet with a harmony not rarefied
Nor fined for the inhibited instruments
Of over-civil stops. And thus he tossed
Between a Carolina of old time,
A little juvenile, an ancient whim,
And the visible, circumspect presentment drawn
From what he saw across his vessel's prow. 
He came. The poetic hero without palms
Or jugglery, without regalia.
And as he came he saw that it was spring,
A time abhorrent to the nihilist
Or searcher for the fecund minimum.
The moonlight fiction disappeared. The spring,
Although contending featly in its veils,
Irised in dew and early fragrancies,
Was gemmy marionette to him that sought
A sinewy nakedness. A river bore
The vessel inward. Tilting up his nose,
He inhaled the rancid rosin, burly smells
Of dampened lumber, emanations blown
From warehouse doors, the gustiness of ropes,
Decays of sacks, and all the arrant stinks
That helped him round his rude aesthetic out.
He savored rankness like a sensualist.
He marked the marshy ground around the dock,
The crawling railroad spur, the rotten fence,
Curriculum for the marvellous sophomore.
It purified. It made him see how much
Of what he saw he never saw at all.
He gripped more closely the essential prose
As being, in a world so falsified,
The one integrity for him, the one
Discovery still possible to make,
To which all poems were incident, unless
That prose should wear a poem's guise at last.                               iv                The Idea of a Colony 
Nota: his soil is man's intelligence.
That's better. That's worth crossing seas to find.
Crispin in one laconic phrase laid bare
His cloudy drift and planned a colony.
Exit the mental moonlight, exit lex,
Rex and principium, exit the whole
Shebang. Exeunt omnes. Here was prose
More exquisite than any tumbling verse:
A still new continent in which to dwell.
What was the purpose of his pilgrimage,
Whatever shape it took in Crispin's mind,
If not, when all is said, to drive away
The shadow of his fellows from the skies,
And, from their stale intelligence released,
To make a new intelligence prevail?
Hence the reverberations in the words
Of his first central hymns, the celebrants
Of rankest trivia, tests of the strength
Of his aesthetic, his philosophy,
The more invidious, the more desired.
The florist asking aid from cabbages,
The rich man going bare, the paladin
Afraid, the blind man as astronomer,
The appointed power unwielded from disdain.
His western voyage ended and began.
The torment of fastidious thought grew slack,
Another, still more bellicose, came on.
He, therefore, wrote his prolegomena,
And, being full of the caprice, inscribed
Commingled souvenirs and prophecies.
He made a singular collation. Thus:
The natives of the rain are rainy men.
Although they paint effulgent, azure lakes,
And April hillsides wooded white and pink,
Their azure has a cloudy edge, their white
And pink, the water bright that dogwood bears.
And in their music showering sounds intone.
On what strange froth does the gross Indian dote,
What Eden sapling gum, what honeyed gore,
What pulpy dram distilled of innocence,
That streaking gold should speak in him
Or bask within his images and words?
If these rude instances impeach themselves
By force of rudeness, let the principle
Be plain. For application Crispin strove,
Abhorring Turk as Esquimau, the lute
As the marimba, the magnolia as rose. 
Upon these premises propounding, he
Projected a colony that should extend
To the dusk of a whistling south below the south.
A comprehensive island hemisphere.
The man in Georgia waking among pines
Should be pine-spokesman. The responsive man,
Planting his pristine cores in Florida,
Should prick thereof, not on the psaltery,
But on the banjo's categorical gut,
Tuck tuck, while the flamingos flapped his bays.
Sepulchral señors, bibbing pale mescal,
Oblivious to the Aztec almanacs,
Should make the intricate Sierra scan.
And dark Brazilians in their cafés,
Musing immaculate, pampean dits,
Should scrawl a vigilant anthology,
To be their latest, lucent paramour.
These are the broadest instances. Crispin,
Progenitor of such extensive scope,
Was not indifferent to smart detail.
The melon should have apposite ritual,
Performed in verd apparel, and the peach,
When its black branches came to bud, belle day,
Should have an incantation. And again,
When piled on salvers its aroma steeped
The summer, it should have a sacrament
And celebration. Shrewd novitiates
Should be the clerks of our experience. 
These bland excursions into time to come,
Related in romance to backward flights,
However prodigal, however proud,
Contained in their afflatus the reproach
That first drove Crispin to his wandering.
He could not be content with counterfeit,
With masquerade of thought, with hapless words
That must belie the racking masquerade,
With fictive flourishes that preordained
His passion's permit, hang of coat, degree
Of buttons, measure of his salt. Such trash
Might help the blind, not him, serenely sly.
It irked beyond his patience. Hence it was,
Preferring text to gloss, he humbly served
Grotesque apprenticeship to chance event,
A clown, perhaps, but an aspiring clown.
There is a monotonous babbling in our dreams
That makes them our dependent heirs, the heirs
Of dreamers buried in our sleep, and not
The oncoming fantasies of better birth.
The apprentice knew these dreamers. If he dreamed
Their dreams, he did it in a gingerly way.
All dreams are vexing. Let them be expunged.
But let the rabbit run, the cock declaim. 
Trinket pasticcio, flaunting skyey sheets,
With Crispin as the tiptoe cozener?
No, no: veracious page on page, exact.                                  v                  A Nice Shady Home 
Crispin as hermit, pure and capable,
Dwelt in the land. Perhaps if discontent
Had kept him still the pricking realist,
Choosing his element from droll confect
Of was and is and shall or ought to be,
Beyond Bordeaux, beyond Havana, far
Beyond carked Yucatan, he might have come
To colonize his polar planterdom
And jig his chits upon a cloudy knee.
But his emprize to that idea soon sped.
Crispin dwelt in the land and dwelling there
Slid from his continent by slow recess
To things within his actual eye, alert
To the difficulty of rebellious thought
When the sky is blue. The blue infected will.
It may be that the yarrow in his fields
Sealed pensive purple under its concern.
But day by day, now this thing and now that
Confined him, while it cosseted, condoned,
Little by little, as if the suzerain soil
Abashed him by carouse to humble yet
Attach. It seemed haphazard denouement.
He first, as realist, admitted that
Whoever hunts a matinal continent
May, after all, stop short before a plum
And be content and still be realist.
The words of things entangle and confuse.
The plum survives its poems. It may hang
In the sunshine placidly, colored by ground
Obliquities of those who pass beneath,
Harlequined and mazily dewed and mauved
In bloom. Yet it survives in its own form,
Beyond these changes, good, fat, guzzly fruit.
So Crispin hasped on the surviving form,
For him, of shall or ought to be in is. 
Was he to bray this in profoundest brass
Arointing his dreams with fugal requiems?
Was he to company vastest things defunct
With a blubber of tom-toms harrowing the sky?
Scrawl a tragedian's testament? Prolong
His active force in an inactive dirge,
Which, let the tall musicians call and call,
Should merely call him dead? Pronounce amen
Through choirs infolded to the outmost clouds?
Because he built a cabin who once planned
Loquacious columns by the ructive sea?
Because he turned to salad-beds again?
Jovial Crispin, in calamitous crape?
Should he lay by the personal and make
Of his own fate an instance of all fate?
What is one man among so many men?
What are so many men in such a world?
Can one man think one thing and think it long?
Can one man be one thing and be it long?
The very man despising honest quilts
Lies quilted to his poll in his despite.
For realists, what is is what should be.
And so it came, his cabin shuffled up,
His trees were planted, his duenna brought
Her prismy blonde and clapped her in his hands,
The curtains flittered and the door was closed.
Crispin, magister of a single room,
Latched up the night. So deep a sound fell down
It was as if the solitude concealed
And covered him and his congenial sleep.
So deep a sound fell down it grew to be
A long soothsaying silence down and down.
The crickets beat their tambours in the wind,
Marching a motionless march, custodians. 
In the presto of the morning, Crispin trod,
Each day, still curious, but in a round
Less prickly and much more condign than that
He once thought necessary. Like Candide,
Yeoman and grub, but with a fig in sight,
And cream for the fig and silver for the cream,
A blonde to tip the silver and to taste
The rapey gouts. Good star, how that to be
Annealed them in their cabin ribaldries!
Yet the quotidian saps philosophers
And men like Crispin like them in intent,
If not in will, to track the knaves of thought.
But the quotidian composed as his,
Of breakfast ribands, fruits laid in their leaves,
The tomtit and the cassia and the rose,
Although the rose was not the noble thorn
Of crinoline spread, but of a pining sweet,
Composed of evenings like cracked shutters flung
Upon the rumpling bottomness, and nights
In which those frail custodians watched,
Indifferent to the tepid summer cold,
While he poured out upon the lips of her
That lay beside him, the quotidian
Like this, saps like the sun, true fortuner.
For all it takes it gives a humped return
Exchequering from piebald fiscs unkeyed.                                 vi            And Daughters with Curls 
Portentous enunciation, syllable
To blessed syllable affined, and sound
Bubbling felicity in cantilene,
Prolific and tormenting tenderness
Of music, as it comes to unison,
Forgather and bell boldly Crispin's last
Deduction. Thrum, with a proud douceur
His grand pronunciamento and devise. 
The chits came for his jigging, bluet-eyed,
Hands without touch yet touching poignantly,
Leaving no room upon his cloudy knee,
Prophetic joint, for its diviner young.
The return to social nature, once begun,
Anabasis or slump, ascent or chute,
Involved him in midwifery so dense
His cabin counted as phylactery,
Then place of vexing palankeens, then haunt
Of children nibbling at the sugared void,
Infants yet eminently old, then dome
And halidom for the unbraided femes,
Green crammers of the green fruits of the world,
Bidders and biders for its ecstasies,
True daughters both of Crispin and his clay.
All this with many mulctings of the man,
Effective colonizer sharply stopped
In the door-yard by his own capacious bloom.
But that this bloom grown riper, showing nibs
Of its eventual roundness, puerile tints
Of spiced and weathery rouges, should complex
The stopper to indulgent fatalist
Was unforeseen. First Crispin smiled upon
His goldenest demoiselle, inhabitant,
She seemed, of a country of the capuchins,
So delicately blushed, so humbly eyed,
Attentive to a coronal of things
Secret and singular. Second, upon
A second similar counterpart, a maid
Most sisterly to the first, not yet awake
Excepting to the motherly footstep, but
Marvelling sometimes at the shaken sleep.
Then third, a thing still flaxen in the light,
A creeper under jaunty leaves. And fourth,
Mere blusteriness that gewgaws jollified,
All din and gobble, blasphemously pink.
A few years more and the vermeil capuchin
Gave to the cabin, lordlier than it was,
The dulcet omen fit for such a house.
The second sister dallying was shy
To fetch the one full-pinioned one himself
Out of her botches, hot embosomer.
The third one gaping at the orioles
Lettered herself demurely as became
A pearly poetess, peaked for rhapsody.
The fourth, pent now, a digit curious.
Four daughters in a world too intricate
In the beginning, four blithe instruments
Of differing struts, four voices several
In couch, four more personæ, intimate
As buffo, yet divers, four mirrors blue
That should be silver, four accustomed seeds
Hinting incredible hues, four self-same lights
That spread chromatics in hilarious dark,
Four questioners and four sure answerers. 
Crispin concocted doctrine from the rout.
The world, a turnip once so readily plucked,
Sacked up and carried overseas, daubed out
Of its ancient purple, pruned to the fertile main,
And sown again by the stiffest realist,
Came reproduced in purple, family font,
The same insoluble lump. The fatalist
Stepped in and dropped the chuckling down his craw,
Without grace or grumble. Score this anecdote
Invented for its pith, not doctrinal
In form though in design, as Crispin willed,
Disguised pronunciamento, summary,
Autumn's compendium, strident in itself
But muted, mused, and perfectly revolved
In those portentous accents, syllables,
And sounds of music coming to accord
Upon his law, like their inherent sphere,
Seraphic proclamations of the pure
Delivered with a deluging onwardness.
Or if the music sticks, if the anecdote
Is false, if Crispin is a profitless
Philosopher, beginning with green brag,
Concluding fadedly, if as a man
Prone to distemper he abates in taste,
Fickle and fumbling, variable, obscure,
Glozing his life with after-shining flicks,
Illuminating, from a fancy gorged
By apparition, plain and common things,
Sequestering the fluster from the year,
Making gulped potions from obstreperous drops,
And so distorting, proving what he proves
Is nothing, what can all this matter since
The relation comes, benignly, to its end? 
So may the relation of each man be clipped.


^^EOP^^


Life contracts and death is expected,
As in a season of autumn.
The soldier falls.
 
He does not become a three-days personage,
Imposing his separation,
Calling for pomp.
 
Death is absolute and without memorial,
As in a season of autumn,
When the wind stops,
 
When the wind stops and, over the heavens,
The clouds go, nevertheless,
In their direction.
 


^^EOP^^


Euclid alone has looked on Beauty bare.
Let all who prate of Beauty hold their peace,
And lay them prone upon the earth and cease
To ponder on themselves, the while they stare
At nothing, intricately drawn nowhere
In shapes of shifting lineage; let geese
Gabble and hiss, but heroes seek release
From dusty bondage into luminous air.
O blinding hour, O holy, terrible day,
When first the shaft into his vision shone
Of light anatomized! Euclid alone
Has looked on Beauty bare. Fortunate they
Who, though once only and then but far away,
Have heard her massive sandal set on stone.


^^EOP^^


                                    I
You may have all things from me, save my breath,
The slight life in my throat will not give pause
For your love, nor your loss, nor any cause.
Shall I be made a panderer to death,
Dig the green ground for darkness underneath,
Let the dust serve me, covering all that was
With all that will be? Better, from time’s claws,
The hardened face under the subtle wreath.
 
Cooler than stones in wells, sweeter, more kind
Than hot, perfidious words, my breathing moves
Close to my plunging blood.    Be strong, and hang
Unriven mist over my breast and mind,
My breath! We shall forget the heart that loves,
Though in my body beat its blade, and its fang.
 
                                    II
I erred, when I thought loneliness the wide
Scent of mown grass over forsaken fields,
Or any shadow isolation yields.
Loneliness was the heart within your side.
Your thought, beyond my touch, was tilted air
Ringed with as many borders as the wind.
How could I judge you gentle or unkind
When all bright flying space was in your care?
 
Now that I leave you, I shall be made lonely
By simple empty days, never that chill
Resonant heart to strike between my arms
Again, as though distraught for distance,­–only
Levels of evening, now, behind a hill,
Or a late cock-crow from the darkening farms.
 


^^EOP^^


Why make so much of fragmentary blue
In here and there a bird, or butterfly,
Or flower, or wearing-stone, or open eye,
When heaven presents in sheets the solid hue?
 
Since earth is earth, perhaps, not heaven (as yet)—
Though some savants make earth include the sky;
And blue so far above us comes so high,
It only gives our wish for blue a whet.
 


^^EOP^^


Spades take up leaves
No better than spoons,
And bags full of leaves
Are light as balloons.
 
I make a great noise
Of rustling all day
Like rabbit and deer
Running away.
 
But the mountains I raise
Elude my embrace,
Flowing over my arms
And into my face.
 
I may load and unload
Again and again
Till I fill the whole shed,
And what have I then?
 
Next to nothing for weight,
And since they grew duller
From contact with earth,
Next to nothing for color.
 
Next to nothing for use,
But a crop is a crop,
And who’s to say where
The harvest shall stop?
 


^^EOP^^


Here, in this darkened room of this old house,
     I sit beside the fire.     I hear again,
Within, the scutter where the mice carouse,
     Without, the gutter dropping with the rain.
Opposite, are black shelves of wormy books,
     To left, glazed cases, dusty with the same,
Behind, a wall, with rusty guns on hooks,
     To right, the fire, that chokes one panting flame.
Over the mantel, black as funeral cloth,
     A portrait hangs, a man, whose flesh the worm
Has mawed this hundred years, whose clothes the moth
     A century since, has channelled to a term.
I cannot see his face :  I only know
He stares at me, that man of long ago.
 
I light the candles in the long brass sticks,
     I see him now, a pale-eyed, simpering man,
Framed in carved wood, wherein the death-watch ticks,
     A most dead face :  yet when the work began
That face, the pale puce coat, the simpering smile,
     The hands that hold a book, the eyes that gaze,
Moved to the touch of mind a little while.
     The painter sat in judgment on his ways :
The painter turned him to and from the light,
     Talked about art, or bade him lift his head.
Judged the lips’ paleness and the temples’ white,
     And now his work abides ;  the man is dead.
But is he dead ?  This dusty study drear
Creaks in its panels that the man is here.
 
Here, beyond doubt, he lived, in that old day.
     “He was a Doctor here,” the student thought.
Here, when the puce was new, that now is grey,
     That simpering man his daily practice wrought.
Here he let blood, prescribed the pill and drop,
     The leech, the diet ;  here his verdict given
Brought agonies of hoping to a stop,
     Here his condemned confessioners were shriven.
What is that book he holds, the key, too dim
     To read, to know ;  some little book he wrote,
Forgotten now, but still the key to him.
     He sacrificed his vision for his coat.
I see the man ;  a simpering mask that hid
A seeing mind that simpering men forbid.
 
Those are his books no doubt, untoucht, undusted,
     Unread, since last he left them on the shelves,
Octavo sermons that the fox has rusted,
     Sides splitting off from brown decaying twelves.
This was his room, this darkness of old death,
     This coffin-room with lights like embrasures,
The place is poisonous with him ;  like a breath
     On glass, he stains the spirit ;  he endures.
Here is his name within the sermon book,
     And verse, “When hungry Worms my Body eat” ;
He leans across my shoulder as I look,
     He who is God or pasture to the wheat.
He who is Dead is still upon the soul
     A check, an inhibition, a control.
 
I draw the bolts.     I am alone within.
     The moonlight through the coloured glass comes faint,
Mottling the passage wall like human skin,
     Pale with the breathings left of withered paint.
But others walk the empty house with me,
     There is no loneliness within these walls
No more than there is stillness in the sea
     Or silence in the eternal waterfalls.
There in the room, to right, they sit at feast ;
     The dropping grey-beard with the cold blue eye,
The lad, his son, that should have been a priest,
     And he, the rake, who made his mother die.
And he, the gambling man, who staked the throw,
They look me through, they follow when I go.
 
They follow with still footing down the hall,
     I know their souls, those fellow-tenants mine,
Their shadows dim those colours on the wall,
     They point my every gesture with a sign.
That grey-beard cast his aged servant forth
     After his forty years of service done,
The gambler supped up riches as the north
     Sups with his death the glories of the sun.
The lad betrayed his trust ;  the rake was he
     Who broke two women’s hearts to ease his own :
They nudge each other as they look at me,
     Shadows, all our, and yet as hard as stone.
And there, he comes, that simpering man, who sold
His mind for coat of puce and penny gold.
 
O ruinous house, within whose corridors
     None but the wicked and the mad go free.
(On the dark stairs they wait, behind the doors
     They crouch, they watch, or creep to follow me.)
Deep in old blood your ominous bricks are red,
     Firm in old bones your walls’ foundations stand,
With dead men’s passions built upon the dead,
     With broken hearts for lime and oaths for sand.
Terrible house, whose horror I have built,
     Sin after sin, unseen, as sand that slips
Telling the time, till now the heaped guilt
     Cries, and the planets circle to eclipse.
You only are the Daunter, you alone
Clutch, till I feel your ivy on the bone.
 


^^EOP^^


I, being born a woman and distressed
By all the needs and notions of my kind,
Am urged by your propinquity to find
Your person fair, and feel a certain zest
To bear your body’s weight upon my breast:
So subtly is the fume of life designed,
To clarify the pulse and cloud the mind,
And leave me once again undone, possessed.
Think not for this, however, the poor treason
Of my stout blood against my staggering brain,
I shall remember you with love, or season
My scorn with pity,—let me make it plain:
I find this frenzy insufficient reason
For conversation when we meet again.


^^EOP^^


I shall go back again to the bleak shore
And build a little shanty on the sand,
In such a way that the extremest band
Of brittle seaweed will escape my door
But by a yard or two; and nevermore
Shall I return to take you by the hand;
I shall be gone to what I understand,
And happier than I ever was before.
The love that stood a moment in your eyes,
The words that lay a moment on your tongue,
Are one with all that in a moment dies,
A little under-said and over-sung.
But I shall find the sullen rocks and skies
Unchanged from what they were when I was young.


^^EOP^^


The living come with grassy tread
To read the gravestones on the hill;
The graveyard draws the living still,
But never any more the dead.
 
The verses in it say and say:
‘The ones who living come today
To read the stones and go away
Tomorrow dead will come to stay.’
 
So sure of death the marbles rhyme,
Yet can’t help marking all the time
How no one dead will seem to come.
What is it men are shrinking from?
 
It would be easy to be clever
And tell the stones: Men hate to die
And have stopped dying now forever.
I think they would believe the lie.
 


^^EOP^^


The soul, O ganders, flies beyond the parks
And far beyond the discords of the wind.
 
A bronze rain from the sun descending marks
The death of summer, which that time endures
 
Like one who scrawls a listless testament
Of golden quirks and Paphian caricatures,
 
Bequeathing your white feathers to the moon
And giving your bland motions to the air.
 
Behold, already on the long parades
The crows anoint the statues with their dirt.
 
And the soul, O ganders, being lonely, flies
Beyond your chilly chariots, to the skies.
 


^^EOP^^


Now that I know
How passion warms little
Of flesh in the mould,
And treasure is brittle,—
 
I’ll lie here and learn
How, over their ground,
Trees make a long shadow
And a light sound.
 


^^EOP^^


 I came here, being stricken, stumbling out
At last from streets; the sun, decreasing, took me
For days, the time being the last of autumn,
The thickets not yet stark, but quivering
With tiny colors, like some brush strokes in
The manner of the pointillists; small yellows
Dart shaped, little reds in different pattern,
Clicks and notches of color on threaded bushes,
A cracked and fluent heaven, and a brown earth.
I had these, and my food and sleep—enough.
 
This is a countryside of roofless houses,—
Taverns to rain,—doorsteps of millstones, lintels
Leaning and delicate, foundations sprung to lilacs.
Orchards where boughs like roots strike into the sky.
Here I could well devise the journey to nothing,
At night getting down from the wagon by the black barns,
The zenith a point of darkness, breaking to bits,
Showering motionless stars over the houses.
Scenes relentless—the black and white grooves of a woodcut.
 
But why the journey to nothing or any desire?
Why the heart taken by even senseless adventure,
The goal a coffer of dust?    Give my mouth to the air,
Let arrogant pain lick my flesh with a tongue
Rough as a cat’s; remember the smell of cold mornings,
The dried beauty of women, the exquisite skin
Under the chins of young girls, young men’s rough beards,—
The cringing promise of this one, that one’s apology
For the knife struck down to the bone, gladioli in sick rooms,
Asters and dahlias, flowers like ruches, rosettes. . .
 
Forever enough to part grass over the stones
By some brook or well, the lovely seed-shedding stalks;
To hear in the single wind diverse branches
Repeating their sounds to the sky—that sky like scaled mackerel,
Fleeing the fields—to be defended from silence,
To feel my body as arid, as safe as a twig
Broken away from whatever growth could snare it
Up to a spring, or hold it softly in summer
Or beat it under in snow.
 
                                                       I must get well.
Walk on strong legs, leap the hurdles of sense,  
Reason again, come back to my old patchwork logic,
Addition, subtraction, money, clothes, clocks,
Memories (freesias, smelling slightly of snow and of flesh
In a room with blue curtains) ambition, despair.
I must feel again who had given feeling over,
Challenge laughter, take tears, play the piano,
Form judgments, blame a crude world for disaster.
 
To escape is nothing.    Not to escape is nothing.
The farmer’s wife stands with a halo of darkness
Rounding her head.    Water drips in the kitchen
Tapping the sink.    To-day the maples have split
Limb from the trunk with the ice, a fresh wooden wound.
The vines are distorted with ice, ice burdens the breaking
Roofs I have told you of.
 


^^EOP^^


Loving you less than life, a little less
Than bitter-sweet upon a broken wall
Or brush-wood smoke in autumn, I confess
I cannot swear I love you not at all.
For there is that about you in this light—
A yellow darkness, sinister of rain—
Which sturdily recalls my stubborn sight
To dwell on you, and dwell on you again.
And I am made aware of many a week
I shall consume, remembering in what way
Your brown hair grows about your brow and cheek
And what divine absurdities you say:
Till all the world, and I, and surely you,
Will know I love you, whether or not I do.
 


^^EOP^^


My voice, not being proud
Like a strong woman’s, that cries
Imperiously aloud
That death disarm her, lull her—
Screams for no mourning color
Laid menacingly, like fire,
Over my long desire.
It will end, and leave no print.
As you lie, I shall lie:
Separate, eased, and cured.
Whatever is wasted or wanted
In this country of glass and flint
Some garden will use, once planted.
As you lie alone, I shall lie,
O, in singleness assured,
Deafened by mire and lime.
I remember, while there is time.
 
 


^^EOP^^


The house had gone to bring again
To the midnight sky a sunset glow.
Now the chimney was all of the house that stood,
Like a pistil after the petals go.
 
The barn opposed across the way,
That would have joined the house in flame
Had it been the will of the wind, was left
To bear forsaken the place’s name.
 
No more it opened with all one end
For teams that came by the stony road
To drum on the floor with scurrying hoofs
And brush the mow with the summer load.
 
The birds that came to it through the air
At broken windows flew out and in,
Their murmur more like the sigh we sigh
From too much dwelling on what has been.
 
Yet for them the lilac renewed its leaf,
And the aged elm, though touched with fire;
And the dry pump flung up an awkward arm;
And the fence post carried a strand of wire. 
For them there was really nothing sad.
But though they rejoiced in the nest they kept,
One had to be versed in country things
Not to believe the phoebes wept.


^^EOP^^


They sent him back to her. The letter came
Saying . . . And she could have him. And before
She could be sure there was no hidden ill
Under the formal writing, he was there,
Living. They gave him back to her alive—
How else? They are not known to send the dead—
And not disfigured visibly. His face?
His hands? She had to look, and ask,
‘What was it, dear?’ And she had given all
And still she had all—they had—they the lucky!
Wasn’t she glad now? Everything seemed won,
And all the rest for them permissible ease.
She had to ask, ‘What was it, dear?’
 
                                                                 ‘Enough
Yet not enough. A bullet through and through,
High in the breast. Nothing but what good care
And medicine and rest, and you a week,
Can cure me of to go again.’ The same
Grim giving to do over for them both.
She dared no more than ask him with her eyes
How was it with him for a second trial.
And with his eyes he asked her not to ask.
They had given him back to her, but not to keep.
 


^^EOP^^


Nature’s first green is gold,
Her hardest hue to hold.
Her early leaf’s a flower;
But only so an hour.
Then leaf subsides to leaf.
So Eden sank to grief,
So dawn goes down to day.
Nothing gold can stay.
 


^^EOP^^


It’s a strange courage you give me, ancient star:
  Shine alone in the sunrise toward which you lend no part!
 
                          I
Shine alone, shine nakedly, shine like bronze,
that reflects neither my face nor any inner part
of my being, shine like fire, that mirrors nothing.
 
                         II
Lend no part to any humanity that suffuses
you in its own light.
Be not chimera of morning,
Half-man, half-star.
Be not an intelligence,
Like a widow’s bird
Or an old horse.
 


^^EOP^^


O sweet spontaneous
earth how often have
the
doting
 
             fingers of
prurient philosophers pinched
and
poked
 
thee
,has the naughty thumb
of science prodded
thy
 
        beauty      how
often have religions taken
thee upon their scraggy knees
squeezing and
 
buffeting thee that thou mightest conceive
gods
         (but
true
 
to the incomparable
couch of death thy
rhythmic
lover
 
             thou answerest
 
 
them only with
 
                              spring)
 


^^EOP^^


As unto lighter strains a boy might turn
     From where great altars burn
And Music’s grave archangels tread the night,
          So I, in seasons past,
          Loved not the bitter might
          And merciless control
Of thy bleak trumpets calling to the soul.
          Their consummating blast
     Held inspirations of affright,
               As when a faun
          Hears mournful thunders roll
On breathless, wide transparencies of dawn.
               Nor would I hear
          With thee, superb and clear
The indomitable laughter of the race;
               Nor would I face
Clean Truth, with her cold agates of the well,
               Nor with thee trace
Her footprints passing upward to the snows,
          But sought a phantom rose
And islands where the ghostly siren sings;
               Nor would I dwell
          Where star-forsaking wings
On mortal thresholds hide their mystery,
                    Nor watch with thee
The light of Heaven cast on common things.
 
But now in dreams of day I see thee stand
A grey, great sentry on the encompassed wall
That fronts the Night forever, in thy hand
               A consecrated spear
To test the dragons of man's ancient fear
               From secret gulfs that crawl—
          A captain of that choral band
Whose reverend faces, anxious of the Dark,
                    Yet undismayed
By rain of ruined worlds against the night,
               Turned evermore to hark
The music of God's silence, and were stayed
By something other than the reason’s light.
               And I have seen thee as
               An eagle, strong to pass
Where tempest-shapen clouds go to and fro
               And winds and noons have birth,
But whose regard is on the lands below
               And wingless things of earth.
               And yet not thine for long
The feignéd passion of the nightingale,
Nor shards of haliotis, nor the song
Of cymballed fountains hidden in the dale,
Nor gardens where the feet of Fragrance steal:
     ’Twas thine the laying-on to feel
Of tragic hands imperious and cold,
That grasping, led thee from the dreams of old,
               Making thee voyager
Of seas within the cosmic solitude,
Whose moons the long-familiar stars occlude,—
               Whose living sunsets stir
With visions of the timelessness we crave.
               And thou didst ride a wave
That gathered solemn music to its breast,
And breaking, shook our strand with thought’s unrest,
Till men far inland heard its mighty call
Where the young mornings leap the world’s blue wall.
 
                                                 *            *            *
 
Nature hath lonely voices at her heart
     And some thou heardst, for at thine own
          Were chords beyond all Art
That thrill but to the eternal undertone.
     But not necessitous to thee
The dreams that were when Arcady began
Or Paphos soared in iris from the sea;
                         For thou couldst guess
The rainbows hidden in the frustrate slime,
               And sawst in crownless Man
               A Titan scourged thro’ Time
With pains and raptures of his loneliness.
               And thou wast wanderer
In that dim House that is the human heart,
               Where thou didst roam apart,
               Seeing what pillars were
Between its deep foundations and the sun,
               What halls of dream undone,
What seraphs hold compassionate their wings
Between the youth and bitterness of things,
                    Ere all see clear
The gain in loss, the triumph in the tear.
 
Time’s whitest loves lie radiant in thy song,
Like starlight on an ocean, for thine own
     Was as a deathless lily grown
In Paradise—ethereal and strong.
                         And to thine eyes
Earth had no earth that held not haughty dust,
And seeds of future harvestings in trust,
And hidden azures of eventual skies.
               Yet hadst thou sharper strains,
Even as the Power determines us with pains,
And seeing harvests, sawst as well the chaff,
And seeing Beauty, sawst her shames no less,
                    Loosing the sweet,
     High thunder of thy Jovian laugh
On souls purblind in their self-righteousness.
               O vision wide and keen!
Which knew, untaught, that pains to joyance are
               As night unto the star
That on the effacing dawn must burn unseen.
               And thou didst know what meat
               Was torn to give us milk,
What countless worms made possible the silk
               That robes the mind, what plan
Drew as a bubble from old infamies
               And fen-pools of the past
The shy and many-colored soul of man.
               Yea! thou hast seen the lees
In that rich cup we lift against the day,
Seen the man-child at his disastrous play—
               His shafts without a mark,
His fountains flowing downward to the dark,
               His maiming and his bars,
                    Then turned to see
His vatic shadow cast athwart the stars,
And his strange challenge to infinity.
 
               But who am I to speak,
Far down the mountain, of its altar-peak,
               Or cross on feeble wings,
Adventurous, the oceans in thy mind?
We of a wider day’s bewilderings
               For very light seem blind,
And fearful of the gods our hands have formed.
               Some lift their eyes and seem
To see at last the lofty human scheme
Fading and topping as a sunset stormed
By wind and evening, with the stars in doubt.
And some cry, “On to Brotherhood!” And some
                (Their Dream's high music dumb): “Nay! let us hide in roses all our chains,                Tho’ all the lamps go out!                Let us accept our lords!  Time’s tensions move not save to subtler pains.” 
And over all the Silence is as swords. …
Wherefore be near us in our day of choice,
               Lest Hell’s red choirs rejoice;
               And may our counsels be
More wise, more kindly, for the thought of thee;
               And may our deeds attest
               Thy covenant of fame
To men of after-years that see thy name
Held like a flower by Honor to her breast.
Thy station in our hearts long since was won—
              Safe from the jealous years—
Thou of whose love, thou of whose thews and tears
We rest most certain when the day is done 
And formless shadows close upon the sun! 
Thou wast a star ere death’s long night shut down,
               And for thy brows the crown
Was graven ere the birth-pangs, and thy bed 
Is now of hallowed marble, and a fane 
               Among the mightier dead: 
More blameless than thine own what soul hath stood? 
Dost thou lie deaf until another Reign, 
               Or hear as music o’er thy head
The ceaseless trumpets of the war for Good?
                    Ah, thou! ah, thou!
               Stills God thy question now?
 


^^EOP^^


Oh, oh, you will be sorry for that word!
Give back my book and take my kiss instead.
Was it my enemy or my friend I heard,
“What a big book for such a little head!”
Come, I will show you now my newest hat,
And you may watch me purse my mouth and prink!
Oh, I shall love you still, and all of that.
I never again shall tell you what I think.
I shall be sweet and crafty, soft and sly;
You will not catch me reading any more:
I shall be called a wife to pattern by;
And some day when you knock and push the door,
Some sane day, not too bright and not too stormy,
I shall be gone, and you may whistle for me.
 


^^EOP^^


And a poet said, Speak to us of Beauty.
     And he answered:
     Where shall you seek beauty, and how
shall you find her unless she herself be your
way and your guide?
     And how shall you speak of her except
she be the weaver of your speech?
 
     The aggrieved and the injured say,
“Beauty is kind and gentle.
     Like a young mother half-shy of her
own glory she walks among us.”
     And the passionate say, “Nay, beauty is
a thing of might and dread.
     Like the tempest she shakes the earth
beneath us and the sky above us.”
 
     The tired and the weary say, “Beauty is
of soft whisperings. She speaks in our spirit.
     Her voice yields to our silences like a faint
light that quivers in fear of the shadow.”
     But the restless say, “We have heard her
shouting among the mountains,
     And with her cries came the sound of
hoofs, and the beating of wings and
the roaring of lions.”
 
     At night the watchmen of the city say,
“Beauty shall rise with the dawn from the
east.”
     And at noontide the toilers and the way-
farers say, “We have seen her leaning over
the earth from the windows of the sunset.”
 
     In winter say the snow-bound, “She shall
come with the spring leaping upon the hills.”
     And in the summer heat the reapers say,
“We have seen her dancing with the autumn
leaves, and we saw a drift of snow in her
hair.”
     All these things have you said of beauty,
     Yet in truth you spoke not of her but of
needs unsatisfied,
     And beauty is not a need but an ecstasy.
     It is not a mouth thirsting nor an empty
hand stretched forth,
     But rather a heart enflamed and a soul en-
chanted.
     It is not the image you would see nor the
song you would hear,
     But rather an image you see though you
close your eyes and a song you hear though
you shut your ears.
     It is not the sap within the furrowed bark,
nor a wing attached to a claw,
     But rather a garden for ever in bloom and
a flock of angels for ever in flight.
 
     People of Orphalese, beauty is life when
life unveils her holy face.
     But you are life and you are the veil.
     Beauty is eternity gazing at itself in a mir-
ror.
     But you are eternity and you are the mir-
ror.
 


^^EOP^^


And a merchant said, Speak to us of
Buying and Selling.
     And he answered and said:
     To you the earth yields her fruit, and you
shall not want if you but know how to fill
your hands.
     It is in exchanging the gifts of the earth
that you shall find abundance and be satisfied.
     Yet unless the exchange be in love and
kindly justice, it will but lead some to greed
and others to hunger.
 
     When in the market place you toilers of
the sea and fields and vineyards meet the
weavers and the potters and the gatherers of
spices,—
     Invoke then the master spirit of the earth,
to come into your midst and sanctify the
scales and the reckoning that weighs value
against value.
 
     And suffer not the barren-handed to take
part in your transactions, who would sell
their words for your labour.
     To such men you should say,
      “Come with us to the field, or go with
our brothers to the sea and cast your net;
     For the land and the sea shall be bountiful
to you even as to us.”
 
     And if there come the singers and the
dancers and the flute players,—buy of their
gifts also.
     For they too are gatherers of fruit and
frankincense, and that which they bring,
though fashioned of dreams, is raiment
 and food for your soul.
 
     And before you leave the market place,
see that no one has gone his way with
empty hands.
     For the master spirit of the earth shall
not sleep peacefully upon the wind till the
needs of the least of you are satisfied.


^^EOP^^


And the weaver said, Speak to us of
Clothes.
     And he answered:
     Your clothes conceal much of your beauty,
yet they hide not the unbeautiful.
     And though you seek in garments the
freedom of privacy you may find in them
a harness and a chain.
     Would that you could meet the sun
and the wind with more of your skin and less
of your raiment,
     For the breath of life is in the sunlight
and the hand of life is in the wind.
 
     Some of you say, “It is the north wind
who has woven the clothes we wear.”
     And I say, Ay, it was the north wind,
     But shame was his loom, and the soften-
ing of the sinews was his thread.
     And when his work was done he laughed
in the forest.
     Forget not that modesty is for a shield
against the eye of the unclean.
     And when the unclean shall be no more,
what were modesty but a fetter and a fouling
of the mind?
     And forget not that the earth delights to
feel your bare feet and the winds long to
play with your hair.


^^EOP^^


And an orator said, Speak to us of Free-
dom.
    And he answered:
    At the city gate and by your fireside I
have seen you prostrate yourself and worship
your own freedom,
    Even as slaves humble themselves before
a tyrant and praise him though he slays
them.
    Ay, in the grove of the temple and in
the shadow of the citadel I have seen the
freest among you wear their freedom as a
yoke and a handcuff.
    And my heart bled within me; for you
can only be free when even the desire of
seeking freedom becomes a harness to you,
and when you cease to speak of freedom
as a goal and a fulfilment.
 
    You shall be free indeed when your days
are not without a care nor your nights with-
out a want and a grief,
    But rather when these things girdle your
life and yet you rise above them naked and
unbound.
 
    And how shall you rise beyond your
days and nights unless you break the chains
which you at the dawn of your under-
standing have fastened around your noon
hour?
    In truth that which you call freedom is
the strongest of these chains, though its
links glitter in the sun and dazzle your eyes.
 
    And what is it but fragments of your own
self you would discard that you may become
free?
    If it is an unjust law you would abolish,
that law was written with your own hand
upon your own forehead.
    You cannot erase it by burning your law
 books nor by washing the foreheads of your
judges, though you pour the sea upon them.
    And if it is a despot you would dethrone,
see first that his throne erected within you is
destroyed.
    For how can a tyrant rule the free and
the proud, but for a tyranny in their own
freedom and a shame in their own pride?
    And if it is a care you would cast off, that
care has been chosen by you rather than
imposed upon you.
    And if it is a fear you would dispel, the
seat of that fear is in your heart and not in
the hand of the feared.
 
    Verily all things move within your being
in constant half embrace, the desired and
the dreaded, the repugnant and the cherished,
the pursued and that which you would
escape.
    These things move within you as lights
and shadows in pairs that cling.
    And when the shadow fades and is no
more, the light that lingers becomes a
shadow to another light.
    And thus your freedom when it loses its
fetters becomes itself the fetter of a greater
freedom.
 


^^EOP^^


Then a lawyer said, But what of our Laws,
master?
    And he answered:
    You delight in laying down laws,
    Yet you delight more in breaking them.
    Like children playing by the ocean who
build sand-towers with constancy and then
destroy them with laughter.
    But while you build your sand-towers the
ocean brings more sand to the shore,
    And when you destroy them the ocean
laughs with you.
    Verily the ocean laughs always with the
innocent.
 
    But what of those to whom life is not an
ocean, and man-made laws are not sand-
towers,
    But to whom life is a rock, and the law
a chisel with which they would carve it in
their own likeness?
    What of the cripple who hates dancers?
    What of the ox who loves his yoke and
deems the elk and deer of the forest
stray and vagrant things?
    What of the old serpent who cannot
shed his skin, and calls all others naked
and shameless?
    And of him who comes early to the
wedding-feast, and when over-fed and tired
goes his way saying that all feasts are
violation and all feasters lawbreakers?
 
    What shall I say of these save that they
too stand in the sunlight, but with their
backs to the sun?
    They see only their shadows, and their
shadows are their laws.
    And what is the sun to them but a caster
of shadows?
    And what is it to acknowledge the laws
but to stoop down and trace their shadows
upon the earth?
    But you who walk facing the sun, what
images drawn on the earth can hold you?
    You who travel with the wind, what
weather-vane shall direct your course?
    What man’s law shall bind you if you
break your yoke but upon no man's prison
door?
    What laws shall you fear if you dance
but stumble against no man’s iron chains?
    And who is he that shall bring you to
judgment if you tear off your garment yet
leave it in no man’s path?
 
    People of Orphalese, you can muffle the
drum, and you can loosen the strings of the
lyre, but who shall command the skylark
not to sing?


^^EOP^^


Then said Almitra, Speak to us of Love.
     And he raised his head and looked upon
the people, and there fell a stillness upon
them. And with a great voice he said:
     When love beckons to you, follow him,
     Though his ways are hard and steep.
     And when his wings enfold you yield to
him,
     Though the sword hidden among his
pinions may wound you.
     And when he speaks to you believe in
him,
     Though his voice may shatter your dreams
as the north wind lays waste the garden.
 
     For even as love crowns you so shall he
crucify you. Even as he is for your growth
so is he for your pruning.
     Even as he ascends to your height and
caresses your tenderest branches that quiver
in the sun,
     So shall he descend to your roots and
shake them in their clinging to the earth.
                                       •
     Like sheaves of corn he gathers you unto
himself.
     He threshes you to make you naked.
     He sifts you to free you from your husks.
     He grinds you to whiteness.
     He kneads you until you are pliant;
     And then he assigns you to his sacred
fire, that you may become sacred bread for
God’s sacred feast.
 
     All these things shall love do unto you
that you may know the secrets of your
heart, and in that knowledge become a
fragment of Life’s heart.
 
     But if in your fear you would seek only
love’s peace and love’s pleasure,
     Then it is better for you that you cover
your nakedness and pass out of love’s
threshing-floor,
     Into the seasonless world where you
shall laugh, but not all of your laughter,
and weep, but not all of your tears.
                                      •
     Love gives naught but itself and takes
naught but from itself.
     Love possesses not nor would it be
possessed;
     For love is sufficient unto love.
 
     When you love you should not say,
“God is in my heart,” but rather, “I am
in the heart of God.”
     And think not you can direct the course
of love, for love, if it finds you worthy,
directs your course.
 
     Love has no other desire but to fulfil
itself.
     But if you love and must needs have
desires, let these be your desires:
     To melt and be like a running brook
that sings its melody to the night.
     To know the pain of too much tenderness.
     To be wounded by your own under-
standing of love;
     And to bleed willingly and joyfully.
     To wake at dawn with a winged heart
and give thanks for another day of loving;
     To rest at the noon hour and meditate
love’s ecstasy;
     To return home at eventide with grati-
tude;
     And then to sleep with a prayer for the
beloved in your heart and a song of praise
upon your lips.


^^EOP^^


Then Almitra spoke again and said, And
what of Marriage, master?
     And he answered saying:
     You were born together, and together you
shall be forevermore.
     You shall be together when the white
wings of death scatter your days.
     Ay, you shall be together even in the
silent memory of God.
     But let there be spaces in your togetherness,
     And let the winds of the heavens dance
between you.
 
     Love one another, but make not a bond
of love:
     Let it rather be a moving sea between
the shores of your souls.
     Fill each other’s cup but drink not from
one cup.
     Give one another of your bread but eat
not from the same loaf.
     Sing and dance together and be joyous,
but let each one of you be alone,
     Even as the strings of a lute are alone
though they quiver with the same music.
 
     Give your hearts, but not into each
other’s keeping.
     For only the hand of Life can contain
your hearts.
     And stand together yet not too near
together:
     For the pillars of the temple stand apart,
     And the oak tree and the cypress grow
not in each other’s shadow.


^^EOP^^


Then a hermit, who visited the city once
a year, came forth and said, Speak to us of
Pleasure.
    And he answered, saying:
    Pleasure is a freedom-song,
    But it is not freedom.
    It is the blossoming of your desires,
    But it is not their fruit.
    It is a depth calling unto a height,
    But it is not the deep nor the high.
    It is the caged taking wing,
    But it is not space encompassed.
    Ay, in very truth, pleasure is a freedom-
song.
    And I fain would have you sing it with
fullness of heart; yet I would not have you
lose your hearts in the singing.
 
    Some of your youth seek pleasure as if it
were all, and they are judged and rebuked.
    I would not judge nor rebuke them. I
would have them seek.
    For they shall find pleasure, but not her
alone;
    Seven are her sisters, and the least of them
is more beautiful than pleasure.
    Have you not heard of the man who was
digging in the earth for roots and found a
treasure?
 
    And some of your elders remember
pleasures with regret like wrongs com-
mitted in drunkenness.
    But regret is the beclouding of the mind
 and not its chastisement.
    They should remember their pleasures with
gratitude, as they would the harvest of a
summer.
    Yet if it comforts them to regret, let them
be comforted.
 
    And there are among you those who are
neither young to seek nor old to remember;
    And in their fear of seeking and remem-
bering they shun all pleasures, lest they
neglect the spirit or offend against it.
    But even in their foregoing is their
pleasure.
    And thus they too find a treasure though
they dig for roots with quivering hands.
    But tell me, who is he that can offend the
spirit?
    Shall the nightingale offend the stillness of
the night, or the firefly the stars?
    And shall your flame or your smoke
burden the wind?
    Think you the spirit is a still pool which
you can trouble with a staff?
 
    Oftentimes in denying yourself pleasure
you do but store the desire in the recesses
of your being.
    Who knows but that which seems omitted
today, waits for tomorrow?
    Even your body knows its heritage and
its rightful need and will not be deceived.
    And your body is the harp of your soul,
    And it is yours to bring forth sweet
music from it or confused sounds.
 
     And now you ask in your heart, “How
shall we distinguish that which is good in
pleasure from that which is not good?”
     Go to your fields and your gardens, and
you shall learn that it is the pleasure of
the bee to gather honey of the flower,
     But it is also the pleasure of the flower
to yield its honey to the bee.
     For to the bee a flower is a fountain of
life,
     And to the flower a bee is a messenger of
love,
     And to both, bee and flower, the giving
and the receiving of pleasure is a need and
an ecstasy.
 
     People of Orphalese, be in your pleas-
ures like the flowers and the bees.
 


^^EOP^^


Then said a teacher, Speak to us of Teach-
ing.
    And he said:
    No man can reveal to you aught but that
which already lies half asleep in the dawn-
ing of your knowledge.
    The teacher who walks in the shadow of
the temple, among his followers, gives not
of his wisdom but rather of his faith and
his lovingness.
    If he is indeed wise he does not bid you
enter the house of his wisdom, but rather
leads you to the threshold of your own
mind.
   The astronomer may speak to you of his
understanding of space, but he cannot give
you his understanding.
   The musician may sing to you of the
rhythm which is in all space, but he cannot
give you the ear which arrests the rhythm
nor the voice that echoes it.
   And he who is versed in the science of
numbers can tell of the regions of weight
and measure, but he cannot conduct you
thither.
   For the vision of one man lends not its
wings to another man.
   And even as each one of you stands alone
in God’s knowledge, so must each one of
you be alone in his knowledge of God and
in his understanding of the earth.
 


^^EOP^^


Pity me not because the light of day
At close of day no longer walks the sky;
Pity me not for beauties passed away
From field and thicket as the year goes by;
Pity me not the waning of the moon,
Nor that the ebbing tide goes out to sea,
Nor that a man’s desire is hushed so soon,
And you no longer look with love on me.
This have I known always: Love is no more
Than the wide blossom which the wind assails,
Than the great tide that treads the shifting shore,
Strewing fresh wreckage gathered in the gales:
Pity me that the heart is slow to learn
What the swift mind beholds at every turn.


^^EOP^^


Hair–braided chestnut,
coiled like a lyncher’s rope,
Eye–fagots,
Lips–old scars, or the first red blisters,
Breath–the last sweet scent of cane,
And her slim body, white as the ash
         of black flesh after flame.
 


^^EOP^^


My body is opaque to the soul.
Driven of the spirit, long have I sought to temper it unto the spirit’s
    longing,
But my mind, too, is opaque to the soul.
O Spirits of whom my soul is but a little finger,
Direct it to the lid of its flesh-eye.
I am weak with much giving.
I am weak the desire to give more.
(How strong a thing is the little finger!)
So weak that I have confused the body with the soul,
And the body with its little finger.
(How frail is the little finger.)
My voice could not carry to you did you dwell in stars,
O spirits of whom my soul is but a little finger . .


^^EOP^^


My mother the queen is dead.
      My father the king is old.
      He fumbles his cirque of gold
And dreams of a year long fled.
The young men stare at my face,
      But cannot meet my glance—
      Cavan tall as a lance,
Orra swift in the race.
 
Death was ever my price,
      Since my maidenhood began:
      At the thought of a Gaelic man
My heart is sister of ice.
’Tis another for whom I wait,
      Though I have not kissed his sword:
      He or none is my lord,
Though our night be soon or late.
 
The star grows great in my breast:
      It is crying clearly now
      To the star on the burnished prow
Of his galley far in the West.
The capes of the North are dim,
      And the windward beaches smoke
      Where the last long roller spoke
The tidings it held of him.
 
Sorrow I know he brings,
      Battle, despair and change,—
     Beauty cruel and strange,
And the shed bright blood of kings.
Breast, be white for his sake!
      Mouth, be red for the kiss!
      Soul, be strong for your bliss!
Heart, be ready to break!
 


^^EOP^^


i had scarcely got acquainted
when they took me by the paw & made me even-minded
nor did i mind
i had exactly enough window
i had exactly enough to get started
wine makes a person weak
that is not to say that wine is not delightful, only
that it makes a person weak
a person can be made weak with whiskey
and this was the mexicans’ military tactic
with the chiricahua apache
and the dutch with the lenape down in manahatta
there was a dog named charlie
cally called it an ‘it’
when we had our pronoun circle-jerk
i told the group they could call me ‘it’
you know like the sky and the grass and
a bird where you can’t tell what it is
it, its, itself
but then i sort of chickened out and said
if ‘it’ ‘made them feel weird’ as a pronoun for a human
they could call me ‘they’
or any gender-neutral pronoun i said
xe or zae or e or shim-sham or
two head-cocks and a click i joked
looking at charlie’s belly as charlie
rolled on its back
 


^^EOP^^


I saw the racer coming to the jump,
     Staring with fiery eyeballs as he rusht,
I heard the blood within his body thump,
     I saw him launch, I heard the toppings crusht.
And as he landed I beheld his soul
     Kindle, because, in front, he saw the Straight
With all its thousands roaring at the goal,
     He laughed, he took the moment for his mate.
Would that the passionate moods on which we ride
     Might kindle thus to oneness with the will;
Would we might see the end to which we stride,
     And feel, not strain in struggle, only thrill,
And laugh like him and know in all our nerves
Beauty, the spirit, scattering dust and turves.
 


^^EOP^^


Capitán profundo, capitán geloso,
Ask us not to sing standing in the sun,
Hairy-backed and hump-armed,
Flat-ribbed and big-bagged.
 
There is no pith in music
Except in something false.
 
Bellissimo, pomposo,
Sing a song of serpent-kin,
Necks among the thousand leaves,
Tongues around the fruit.
Sing in clownish boots
Strapped and buckled bright.
 
Wear the breeches of a mask,
Coat half-flare and half galloon;
Wear a helmet without reason,
Tufted, tilted, twirled, and twisted.
Start the singing in a voice
Rougher than a grinding shale.
 
Hang a feather by your eye,
Nod and look a little sly.
This must be the vent of pity,
Deeper than a truer ditty
Of the real that wrenches,
Of the quick that’s wry.
 


^^EOP^^


Once when the snow of the year was beginning to fall,
We stopped by a mountain pasture to say, ‘Whose colt?’
A little Morgan had one forefoot on the wall,
The other curled at his breast. He dipped his head
And snorted at us. And then he had to bolt.
We heard the miniature thunder where he fled,
And we saw him, or thought we saw him, dim and grey,
Like a shadow against the curtain of falling flakes.
‘I think the little fellow’s afraid of the snow.
He isn’t winter-broken. It isn’t play
With the little fellow at all. He’s running away.
I doubt if even his mother could tell him, “Sakes,
It’s only weather.” He’d think she didn’t know!
Where is his mother? He can’t be out alone.’
And now he comes again with a clatter of stone
And mounts the wall again with whited eyes
And all his tail that isn't hair up straight.
He shudders his coat as if to throw off flies.
‘Whoever it is that leaves him out so late,
When other creatures have gone to stall and bin,
Ought to be told to come and take him in.’


^^EOP^^


She had forgotten how the August night
Was level as a lake beneath the moon,
In which she swam a little, losing sight
Of shore; and how the boy, who was at noon
Simple enough, not different from the rest,
Wore now a pleasant mystery as he went,
Which seemed to her an honest enough test
Whether she loved him, and she was content.
So loud, so loud the million crickets’ choir. . .
So sweet the night, so long-drawn-out and late. . .
And if the man were not her spirit’s mate,
Why was her body sluggish with desire?
Stark on the open field the moonlight fell,
But the oak tree’s shadow was deep and black and
     secret as a well.
 


^^EOP^^


                                   THE ORE
 
Before Man’s labouring wisdom gave me birth
I had not even seen the light of day;
Down in the central darkness of the earth,
Crushed by the weight of continents I lay,
Ground by the weight to heat, not knowing then
The air, the light, the noise, the world of men.
 
                                  THE TREES
We grew on mountains where the glaciers cry,
Infinite sombre armies of us stood
Below the snow-peaks which defy the sky;
A song like the gods moaning filled our wood;
We knew no men—our life was to stand staunch,
Singing our song, against the avalanche.
 
                         THE HEMP AND FLAX
 
We were a million grasses on the hill,
A million herbs which bowed as the wind blew,
Trembling in every fibre, never still;
Out of the summer earth sweet life we drew.
Little blue-flowered grasses up the glen,
Glad of the sun, what did we know of men?
 
                               THE WORKERS
 
We tore the iron from the mountain’s hold,
By blasting fires we smithied it to steel;
Out of the shapeless stone we learned to mould
The sweeping bow, the rectilinear keel;
We hewed the pine to plank, we split the fir,
We pulled the myriad flax to fashion her.
 
Out of a million lives our knowledge came,
A million subtle craftsmen forged the means;
Steam was our handmaid and our servant flame,
Water our strength, all bowed to our machines.
Out of the rock, the tree, the springing herb
We built this wandering beauty so superb.
  
                                 THE SAILORS
 
We, who were born on earth and live by air,
Make this thing pass across the fatal floor,
The speechless sea; alone we commune there
Jesting with death, that ever open door.
Sun, moon and stars are signs by which we drive
This wind-blown iron like a thing alive.
 
                                      THE SHIP
 
I march across great waters like a queen,
I whom so many wisdoms helped to make;
Over the uncruddled billows of seas green
I blanch the bubbled highway of my wake.
By me my wandering tenants clasp the hands,
And know the thoughts of men in other lands.
 


^^EOP^^


I
Without how small, within how strangely vast!
     What stars of terror had their path in thee!
     What music of the heavens and the sea
Lived in a sigh or thundered on the blast!
Here swept the gleam and pageant of the Past,
     As Beauty trembled to her fate’s decree;
     Here swords were forged for armies yet to be,
And tears were found too dreadful not to last.
 
Here stood the seats of judgment and its light,
     To whose assizes all our dreams were led—
          Our best and worst, our Paradise and Hell;
And in this room delivered now to night,
     The mortal put its question to the dead,
          And worlds were weighed, and God’s deep shadow fell.
 
II
Here an immortal river had its rise,
     Though dusty now the fountain whence it ran
     So swift and beautiful with good to man.
Here the foundation of an empire lies—
The ruins of a realm seen not with eyes,
     That now the vision of a gnat could scan.
     Here wars were fought within a little span,
Whose echoes yet resound on human skies.
 
Life, on her rainbow road from dust to dust,
     Spilt here her wildest iris, still thine own,
          Master, and with thy soul and ashes one!
Thy wings are distant from our years of lust,
     Yet he who liveth not by bread alone
          Shall see thee as that angel in the sun.
 
 


^^EOP^^


Love me because I am lost;
Love me that I am undone.
That is brave,—no man has wished it,
Not one.
 
Be strong, to look on my heart
As others look on my face.
Love me,—I tell you that it is a ravaged
Terrible place.
 


^^EOP^^


Since you would claim the sources of my thought Recall the meshes whence it sprang unlimed, The reedy traps which other hands have timed To close upon it. Conjure up the hot Blaze that it cleared so cleanly, or the snow Devised to strike it down. It will be free. Whatever nets draw in to prison me At length your eyes must turn to watch it go.
  My mouth, perhaps, may learn one thing too well, My body hear no echo save its own, Yet will the desperate mind, maddened and proud, Seek out the storm, escape the bitter spell That we obey, strain to the wind, be thrown Straight to its freedom in the thunderous cloud.
 


^^EOP^^


When you, that at this moment are to me
Dearer than words on paper, shall depart,
And be no more the warder of my heart,
Whereof again myself shall hold the key;
And be no more—what now you seem to be—
The sun, from which all excellences start
In a round nimbus, nor a broken dart
Of moonlight, even, splintered on the sea;
I shall remember only of this hour—
And weep somewhat, as now you see me weep—
The pathos of your love, that, like a flower,
Fearful of death yet amorous of sleep,
Droops for a moment and beholds, dismayed,
The wind whereon its petals shall be laid.
 


^^EOP^^


The wind of night is mighty on the deep—
     A presence haunting sea and land again.
     That wind upon the watery waste hath been;
That wind upon the desert soon shall sweep.
O vast and mournful spirit, wherefore keep
     Thy vigil at the fleeting homes of men,
     Who need no voice of thine to tell them when
Is come the hour to labor or to sleep?
 
From waste to waste thou goest, and art dumb
     Before the morning. Patient in her tree
          The bird awaits until thy strength hath passed,
Forgetting darkness when the day is come.
     With other tidings hast thou burdened me,
          Whom desolations harbor at the last.
 


^^EOP^^


The farmer in deep thought
is pacing through the rain
among his blank fields, with
hands in pockets,
in his head
the harvest already planted.
A cold wind ruffles the water
among the browned weeds.
On all sides
the world rolls coldly away :
black orchards
darkened by the March clouds —
leaving room for thought.
Down past the brushwood
bristling by
the rainsluiced wagonroad
looms the artist figure of
the farmer — composing
— antagonist.
 


^^EOP^^


In passing with my mind
on nothing in the world
 
but the right of way
I enjoy on the road by
 
virtue of the law        —
I saw
 
an elderly man who
smiled and looked away
 
to the north past a house —
a woman in blue
 
who was laughing and
leaning forward to look up
 
into the man’s half
averted face
 
and a boy of eight who was
looking at the middle of
 
the man’s belly
at a watchchain —
 
The supreme importance
of this nameless spectacle
 
sped me by them
without a word —
 
Why bother where I went ?
for I went spinning on the
 
four wheels of my car
along the wet road until
 
I saw a girl with one leg
over the rail of a balcony


^^EOP^^


Of death
the barber
the barber
talked to me
 
cutting my
life with
sleep to trim
my hair —
 
It’s just
a moment
he said, we die
every night —
 
And of
the newest
ways to grow
hair on
 
bald death –
I told him
of the quartz
lamp
 
and of old men
with third
sets of teeth
to the cue
 
of an old man
who said
at the door —
Sunshine today!
 
for which
death shaves
him twice
a week
 


^^EOP^^


This is the time of year
when boys fifteen and seventeen
wear two horned lilac blossoms
in their caps — or over one ear
 
What is it that does this ?
 
It is a certain sort —
drivers for grocers or taxidrivers
white and colored —
 
fellows that let their hair grow long
in a curve over one eye — 
 
Horned purple
 
Dirty satyrs, it is
vulgarity raised to the last power
 
They have stolen them
broken the bushes apart
with a curse for the owner — 
 
Lilacs — 
 
They stand in the doorways
on the business streets with a sneer
on their faces
 
adorned with blossoms
 
Out of their sweet heads
dark kisses — rough faces


^^EOP^^


Somebody dies every four minutes
in New York State — 
 
To hell with you and your poetry — 
You will rot and be blown
through the next solar system
with the rest of the gases — 
 
What the hell do you know about it ?
 
AXIOMS
 
Do not get killed
 
Careful Crossing Campaign
Cross Crossings Cautiously
 
THE HORSES      black
                                 &
PRANCED             white
 
What’s the use of sweating over
this sort of thing, Carl ; here
it is all set up — 
 
Outings in New York City
 
Ho for the open country
 
Dont’t stay shut up in hot rooms
Go to one of the Great Parks
Pelham Bay for example
 
It’s on Long Island sound
with bathing, boating
tennis, baseball, golf, etc.
 
Acres and acres of green grass
wonderful shade trees, rippling brooks
 
               Take the Pelham Bay Park Branch
               of the Lexington Ave. (East Side)
               Line and you are there in a few
               minutes
 
Interborough Rapid Transit Co.
 


^^EOP^^


Still will I harvest beauty where it grows:
In coloured fungus and the spotted fog
Surprised on foods forgotten; in ditch and bog
Filmed brilliant with irregular rainbows
Of rust and oil, where half a city throws
Its empty tins; and in some spongy log
Whence headlong leaps the oozy emerald frog. . . .
And a black pupil in the green scum shows.
Her the inhabiter of divers places
Surmising at all doors, I push them all.
Oh, you that fearful of a creaking hinge
Turn back forevermore with craven faces,
I tell you Beauty bears an ultra fringe
Unguessed of you upon her gossamer shawl!
 


^^EOP^^


Tell me, dear beauty of the dusk,
   When purple ribbons bind the hill,
    Do dreams your secret wish fulfill,
Do prayers, like kernels from the husk
 
Come from your lips? Tell me if when
    The mountains loom at night, giant shades
    Of softer shadow, swift like blades
Of grass seeds come to flower. Then
 
Tell me if the night winds bend
    Them towards me, if the Shenandoah
    As it ripples past your shore,
Catches the soul of what you send.
 
 
 


^^EOP^^


Sister and mother and diviner love,
And of the sisterhood of the living dead
Most near, most clear, and of the clearest bloom,
And of the fragrant mothers the most dear
And queen, and of diviner love the day
And flame and summer and sweet fire, no thread
Of cloudy silver sprinkles in your gown
Its venom of renown, and on your head
No crown is simpler than the simple hair.
 
Now of the music summoned by the birth
That separates us from the wind and sea,
Yet leaves us in them, until earth becomes,
By being so much of the things we are,
Gross effigy and simulacrum, none
Gives motion to perfection more serene
Than yours, out of our imperfections wrought,
Most rare, or ever of more kindred air
In the laborious weaving that you wear.
 
For so retentive of themselves are men
That music is intensest which proclaims
The near, the clear, and vaunts the clearest bloom,
And of all vigils musing the obscure,
That apprehends the most which sees and names,
As in your name, an image that is sure,
Among the arrant spices of the sun,
O bough and bush and scented vine, in whom
We give ourselves our likest issuance.
 
Yet not too like, yet not so like to be
Too near, too clear, saving a little to endow
Our feigning with the strange unlike, whence
          springs
The difference that heavenly pity brings.
For this, musician, in your girdle fixed
Bear other perfumes. On your pale head wear
A band entwining, set with fatal stones.
Unreal, give back to us what once you gave:
The imagination that we spurned and crave.


^^EOP^^


The white bark writhed and sputtered like a fish
Upon the coals, exuding odorous smoke
She knelt and blew, in a surging desolate wish
For comfort; and the sleeping ashes woke
And scattered to the hearth, but no thin fire
Broke suddenly, the wood was wet with rain.
Then, softly stepping forth from her desire,
(Being mindful of like passion hurled in vain
Upon a similar task, in other days)
She thrust her breath against the stubborn coal,
Bringing to bear upon its hilt the whole
Of her still body. . . there sprang a little blaze. . .
A pack of hounds, the flame swept up the flue!—
And the blue night stood flattened against the window,
     staring through.
 


^^EOP^^


This is how the wind shifts:
Like the thoughts of an old human,
Who still thinks eagerly
And despairingly.
The wind shifts like this:
Like a human without illusions,
Who still feels irrational things within her.
The wind shifts like this:
Like humans approaching proudly,
Like humans approaching angrily.
This is how the wind shifts:
Like a human, heavy and heavy,
Who does not care.


^^EOP^^


Nothing was remembered, nothing forgotten.
When we awoke, wagons were passing on the warm summer   
          pavements,
The window-sills were wet from rain in the night,
Birds scattered and settled over chimneypots
As among grotesque trees.
 
Nothing was accepted, nothing looked beyond.
Slight-voiced bells separated hour from hour,
The afternoon sifted coolness
And people drew together in streets becoming deserted.
There was a moon, and light in a shop-front,
And dusk falling like precipitous water.
 
Hand clasped hand
Forehead still bowed to forehead—
Nothing was lost, nothing possessed
There was no gift nor denial.
 
2.
I have remembered you.
You were not the town visited once,
Nor the road falling behind running feet.
 
You were as awkward as flesh
And lighter than frost or ashes.
 
You were the rind,
And the white-juiced apple,
The song, and the words waiting for music.
 
3.
You have learned the beginning;
Go from mine to the other.
 
Be together; eat, dance, despair,
Sleep, be threatened, endure.
You will know the way of that.
 
But at the end, be insolent;
Be absurd—strike the thing short off;
Be mad—only do not let talk
Wear the bloom from silence.
 
And go away without fire or lantern
Let there be some uncertainty about your departure.
 


^^EOP^^


The language we currently use to describe ourselves is a form of Boolean algebra. 
I don’t want scars to remind me that I had to take a knife to this body in order to call it mine. 
I buy a dress shirt and I feel like a child again. It is a men’s size S and the cuffs go past my fingertips. 
A stranger mistook her left for her right and kissed me on the  shoulder instead of her boyfriend. 
I hope we evolve into higher beings with 6 sexually dimorphic  genders and needlessly complex sex. 
My parents watch a video of my nephew. They laugh and say he reminds them of me as a child. 
I watch the broad shoulders of the Asian man walking in front of me and feel euphoric. 
I don’t want to shoot up this body in order to call it mine. 
Would I prefer being a fairy in a dress or a butch dyke in menswear? 
This fear is habitual, unconscious, reflexive. 
My optometrist asks me, Number 3, or number 4?


^^EOP^^


Translated from the Japanese 
The square in    the square in the square in the square in the square.
The    square    circle    of    the square circular motion of the square circular motion.
The person who sees through the smell of the soap of the blood vessels that the soap passes through.
The earth made in imitation of the globe made in imitation of the earth.
Castrated socks. (Her name was words)
Anemia cells. your expression is also like the legs of a  sparrow.
The enormous weight that drives itself toward the diagonal of the  parallelogram.
The eastern autumn that welcomes the fragrance of coty unmoored from spring in marseille.
Mr. Z’s vehicle cruising the clear sky like a bird. It says Roundworm Medicine.
Rooftop garden. The young mademoiselle imitating a monkey.
The formula for a falling body speeding straight through the curved straight line.
Two wet bits of dusk pressed as xii on the dial.
The greeting from the fitted door from inside the canary in the  birdcage in the door inside the door.
The male or female friends who arrive at the entrance to the cafeteria split apart.
A sugar cube with black ink spilled on it is carted atop a tricycle.
Military boots stepping on a business card. Fake nasturtium that runs through the town.
The people who went down from above and up from below and down from above and up from below are the people who did not go up from below nor down from above nor up from below nor down from above.
The bottom half of that woman is like the top half of that man. (I am one who mourns the chance meeting of sadness.)
A square case starts walking (that is a strange thing).
The goodbye that rises up near the radiator.
Rain outside. Group migration of luminescent fish.


^^EOP^^





Honey-sweet song
—Pindar



Standing, leaning, with both long-
clawed paws she rips punk
wood out of a tree with 
a high hollow to get
at her cause inside—her sharp brute
parentheses tear at the living 
humming word. The honey
the tree has helped the bees
hide has drawn her near with 
its scent. Forcing the issue,
she’s heavy, off-balance, intent.
Flying defenders of the sweet 
they’ve produced and on
which they and their larvae
depend, the bees swarm her 
nose, her eyes, her tongue, her plan,
often they trace with their hovering
the lying-down eight of infinity 
before they sting and fall
mortally self-wounded.
Yet always in this valor they fail 
to defend—and who can succeed?—
the whole history of poetry.


^^EOP^^


Take the measure of wooden speech with a wooden tongue
The sound waves crash in, like a handful of grasshoppers
Take the nails and bang them into the weeping painting
The kids are shouting what they’re for: it’s making noise
Making noise and drinking milk with a magnifying glass 
The ancestor’s dead from reading books and breathing
From boxing vegetables and reading books and breathing
The cardboard boxes are in his brain in tiny mirroring bits
From the vein in his forehead to the vein in his toe they run
They run like children to the school milk and the myths 
Out of the crush they would say of him, mad as a string
The trees would say different of course when they saw him
Out of grace, they never were, they would mimic Umback
The leaves in his hair were the marks of a bush comedy
A bush comedy so good it could run forever without seats 
The little version of the novel, every novel he read at night
That he played out with his bosses, with strangers, his wife
The wife has another ancestor with the same name, related
That the lightning spilled down the hill in hot liquid form
A form that was repeated and parodied in the hill’s plants 
Take this string and wrap it round the painting as if alive
As if alive and attempting to survive out there in the bush
Take the clock and time the boy who went to get the milk
As if you can get milk from a large white rabbit that makes
The sound of death, chewing grasshoppers like a machine


^^EOP^^

