
A pair of adolescent boys grabs a rabbit to shear off  its ears. It doesn’t matter why, whether they’re sad or from the city. What matters is what they do with their hands: hold the blade, hang the rabbit by its ears. But the rabbit says, “I met a truck-stop priest in Mississippi outside Books-A-Million, should I tell you what he said?” And the boys pause to consider, so he continues, “We sat into the night talking about anything: his gay ex-wife who practices witchcraft, masturbation with vacuum hoses, his fetish for boys’ leg hairs—like your own!” They giggle at this and scream, set the rabbit down, and listen. “The priest in his collar and cross necklace spoke, though his face transformed: he grew freckles where there weren’t any freckles; he grew beards where his chin was smooth; and his eyes were more ancient than all the lakes in Mississippi.” What did he say? What did he say? the boys demand, wanting to learn, more than anything. Continues the rabbit, “The faces spoke, not the priest, in voices that traveled to my brain. They taught me lessons. First, that every soul is a thread in a cloth that floats through black everything, sparkling like snow into a lake. So you, and I, and everyone we know are iterations of these souls, these cloths, some newly woven, and some old.” The boys: What else did the faces say?  The rabbit: “They said that they and I were of a single cloth, of the type who dies and rises again.” And what about us? What about us? demand the boys, and the rabbit jumps off the rock and runs because the boys hold a knife and can’t recognize a parable or my face, however human.


^^EOP^^

A change to my usual sleeping position,
earth holding me close
like I’m something that it loves.
I feel a murmur through the hedgerow,
old gods thawing from the permafrost.
Only a matter of time
before an Empire falls
into the hands of an idiot
and there are more ways of saying things
than things worth saying;
only a matter of  love to steer the wind,
which batters us daily, this only life
that climbs beyond unfashionable
beginnings, leaving us leaving it,
breathless software, a bite taken out
of the grand old narrative,
while our ghosts refuel midair.
Deep time. Lovely time.
The human print will not survive.
I mean like, woo, there it was.


^^EOP^^

I—the telltale animal—rest my throat
against the snare of you, offer my howl
to the black-eyed Susan in free will,
one fistful of yellow stubbing the chin
of never-never land. We try our best to
out the devil, to trace his foul-mouthed
lips that outline why we desire what we
loathe. It was your personhood that made
me lose hope—that prison system of a
language. I keep a pay phone in my living
room for you. It rings when I touch myself,
the nostalgic purpose of ill will. I am a marked
woman now. Nape backlit with you in shades
of blue, suffering the robe pity slips off at dusk.
I will always give you credit for such undressing. No—a form of never—clings like stringy meat to
peach pit. I have yet to love a man who has not
strangled me to death, has not tried to muzzle
want upon waking. If startled, I shout out
the names of gods or unborn babes, a once
upon a time of denials. I count black sheep
and wait for the sound of your touch.
These numbers are a nervous system.


^^EOP^^




Sauntering along, the boy looks up and sees a tree filled with angels, bright angelic wings bespangling every bough like stars.
—Alexander Gilchrist



I wake to the grayest, maddening light. Good morning. It is seven o’clock in London. 
What comprises the night? What conducts
the dark? The thing
worries for the thing. The houseboats on the River Lea
waver brightly in the shallows. In Roydon, a swan thinks the lake,
which doves—O Fama!—plunge to meet. What does it mean
when the footbridge continues into the forever-
fit of shadows? And the meadows, purpled like nothing else.
The what-is in the marshes. And the pink sky, shattered over Lewisham!
In another part of the city, my friends
break their fasts together
in London’s late, caliginous wash.
We have Chinese food in the dark
and, in the distance, foxes
wear the voices of the dying. 
It can’t be what it was. It can’t be
what it should. Like the hand that moves
the gate. Like the water
water moves—the trees giving way
to the place where the cliff breaches the mist
and my muses sputter at the edge. I wanted so much the highest river
and that single swan. I wanted the uncrying valley, white as white.
It could have been like this. It could have been
like this. It couldn’t. It could. And the blood bay horses grazing
as a schoolboy falls asleep beside me
and the train turns in the gloaming—
I said I wanted the clouds. I said I wanted
the dusk that isn’t dusk, but, instead, the thorny husk
of the thing that drives me. Madly, that shaking of the dust beneath the tracks
where a path leads to an alternate grove
and the metal un-beams itself and, yes, our incapacitable hearts— 
If  I were the lamb, I’d choose the block.
If  I were the horse that rode with you, I’d ride with you.
I don’t know how to write for the God
in whose voice I can only hear
my own sullied desperation. We stop at an empty station, old child of the fog.
The snakes look over us, my coffee-sweet, my lost-now ravishing,
my shaking in the black. My friend, the fates knew from the start.
O how it shakes. The mud of which we’re made—O how it. The summer,
it tore me—O, this spring, how I.
Like the day, like the swan, like my sacral lungs
gagging for the smog
on the way to Peckham Rye. And the wild humming of  Brockley Footpath
as we walk home beneath the huge, undefiable moon
and the terrors for which we were never prepared
fade into the night on the other side of the tunnel—
the dim-lovely, bitter, blank and powder, the dirt and whatever short
shreds of ourselves we lost among the hallows. Errant and unlit.
O how, howl, howling, my love that isn’t. Nunhead Cemetery
and my been-beaten chest. It was me all along. I don’t know.
When I got up to leave, I watched the curtains block the bastard light
until slowly, slowly, they forgot all about me,
glowing in the new day,
my shade against their blue, my back against his back.


^^EOP^^




^^EOP^^




After “Hecky Naw” by José Olivarez



you can take my breath
but the bruh stays
lips slapping spice
of unknown bulk
face curry-blushed
from its blandness
my dad’s face caved
sour into his nose
when he heard it
the bruh cliff-hanging
on his beard
I think he tries to pray the white out of me
Town and Country now
a sermon bench for
290 west lectures
where D & D
is a cult following
if  that’s the case
my dungeon master got me hypnotized
rolling d20s is life in a quick toss
my new friend group is wild
they got bruh in their structure
fingers type in the group chat
with the single syllable
smash
we duke it out in basements and
Ike’s aether always pops out our croaking throats
bruh
sometimes I want to falcon-punch life in the face
cause I can never find the rhythm
to lift my hand
place it on her waist
and hip the yuck out me
need to leave my house
can’t look at any direction without muttering
bruh
this word
should not be something I want
something that never leaves
the tongue of my brain
but I love the way it punches my chest
just wish it would punch me harder


^^EOP^^

It was the hard winter she came,
frozen larks plummeting through the gloam like falling stars,
each pail in the yard a slattern’s looking glass. 
Each dusk, the house cobwebbed by creeping frost,
my husband slipped like a knife from an oyster,
my sons nestled like dormice in their cots,
I stood at my black window and oh
the cold it pressed upon me like a lover,
held its hands to my throat, my knees. 
She came first through the trees:
a small glint amongst the poplars,
hoarfrost dripping from the velvet nubs of their antlers,
leaping fast to a shuddering pillar of flame,
her pelvis a cradle of jeweled tinder,
her ribs white kindling. A holy thing—
such furious unblossoming—and something profane. 
I pressed my eye to the glass, the crackling dark,
saw her heart catch light,
blackbirds flap frantic from the forks of trees—
    —woke shivering, sweat between my breasts,
my tongue in my teeth. 
Every night then she came
in the stolen hours between caring and dream,
the children vanished, the drudging chaos of day
put to sleep.
I have no words to tell of the shapes she scorched,
the frozen lock, the copper key,
but that heat licked me raw as a wild love,
cracked the ice on my ribs and tossed in a flare. 
All my life I have been a good woman,
compliant, neat, my children’s snow boots polished,
each snowflake of ash swept clean from my step.
I’ve worn obedience like a uniform,
the hoof of the iron cooling in my grate.
Yet I riled in the witching hour, tongue glittering. 
My darling, I whispered to my own dry bones,
for what do you burn? 
Three moons she has been absent,
though I wait at my window, the chill persisting, presaging snow,
and my longing rises hopeless as the carp in the pool.
I don’t know where she is living
or if she lives at all—
with women nursing in fevered sheets
or scrubbing floors until their knuckles ignite? 
But by dark, when my sons sail the black cut
of sleep, and frost lays its terrible lace
upon the grass, when I am alone with my fretting,
with my dreams like black pearls in the clam of my mouth,
I press my fists to that tenderest wound—my soul—
and Christ how I burn.


^^EOP^^

Somewhere ravens, or are they crows, say, “Ha ha,”
not the British ditch with fence, famous 
to Scrabblers, but a small horn’s notes, terse
and hoarse. A sheep’s bleat, a handsaw, 
the finches’ high-pitched chitter
in the blighted apple tree, its stalled 
tart fruit, red-bottomed, inch-wide, already timed
out: it all makes a music, animal, 
vegetal, human. One white morning glory
solos in the swath of optimist 
dandelions—nothing haunts
or hunts them, their dazzle-yellow boasts:  Hello, hello, we’re hiding’s counterpoise.
They border the moles’ 
two beige mounds and a hole.
Wild hemlock’s parsley-look 
also emblems the book of “seem,”
while the ground-dwelling flower 
with arrowhead leaves—no memorial
to the native tribes, Wiyots here 
or Ishi’s people further south—lures a bee,
a troth if not a promise: 
the flower, ale gold and blowsy,
has drunk beauty’s beer. 
Our only fence is the raven’s ha and ha:
air’s vowels, an LOL, or 
bravado’s call?
It’s what Yahweh boasts 
his battle horses say
in the Englished book of  Job. 
The ravens circle and call.
Even earth can seesaw 
when the fault slides right.
It’s raven heaven here.


^^EOP^^

one night, leaving your son’s makeshift bedroom in the loft
of the barn, in that first house I knew you in,
crunching through January’s snow back into your kitchen,
past dinner’s left-out dessert plates, then past the fireplace whose embers
still chittered like the chatting old sisters on the bus
I had taken here the day before, north, for eleven and a half hours—
a trip during which I sometimes crocheted what became
a rather long scarf for your son—then up the stairs past your bedroom,
to the guest room, up to the gables with its sloped ceiling
where waited the bed’s patchwork quilts, a painted comb, the lamp
you left on for me, and for some reason lost to time
a copy of Anne Frank’s The Diary of a Young Girl near enough—
maybe on a low bookshelf outside the room?—near enough
for me to choose it, and once under the covers I was awake
from start to finish with Dear Kitty, again, with the Epilogue, again,
though I felt I was reading it for the first time, or more like
I was a tree to which a bird returns and this time sees
the branch on which it will make its nest, and so I understood—
because being told of your death I want to parse all I have learned from you—
I understood we were to have some experiences many times in our lives
if we were lucky, but we would live them each time differently,
which seems obvious now, but then I was sixteen and didn’t know,
I didn’t know that each experience wasn’t just the first of identical ones to
    come,
like a rack of same dresses, and for that reason I thought
the mother of men I loved would all be like you, and all their sons
as kind as he, and that the journey between barn and house on a winter
    night
would always show a spray of constellations that would connect
all I was feeling with the goodness of the earth, also turning.


^^EOP^^




After Deana Lawson



babysleep (drape) stage every canvas. haunts the iris. the backdrop says parlor. plies her flat Vaseline as stitched sea velvet, as baby’s soft, oiled cheek. the viewer’s opaque fail. tumid and hip, the weave’s dazzle mantled wall and cloistered night sun like women, black and lipstick. be kept from. semantic, switch of lovegrass black and apple, flung stars in heavy sienna dust night, burning like hot comb temple altar and kneeling night host, assembled into body’s stock.    
                                   Whose held belly at center she frame. Situs poised true
                                   in situ. The Africanist of glimmer gaze upon
                                   dark nations in return. The sifter, supplants glitter.
                                   oiled and brandish, rouge and lippish, fetish and brogue, thick
                                   lipstick, swole blue hip, the wish and the aureole, the
                                   saddle and the want nipple, the ones high priestess doing
                                   a high thigh curtain, unlashed in soft netting, unleashed
                                   in that poppin’ hair, or that grassy flat, gods beginning,
                                   or not so Venus, sung to the oblong glare, women
                                   mustering, a host of sistren, the host of our lost black
                                   semantic doubling over heavy sienna. It’s
                                   the viewer’s failure to weave and dazzle at artifice
                                   in lust with hot comb burn and altar kneeled to the back
                                   at home temple, us like a body in a stocking, some    
                                   days, lip o’ lovely in rainbow crotch shot. How I love
                                   her stung blue sofa, crouched and ejaculating hifi
                                   hydrant sprung from childhood’s articulate couch. father
                                   disrobed and hung like a thoroughly dented drape, against
                                   the dismantled, fussy mother and burnt afterbirth
                                   spilling along the interior lawn hosed and shiny
                                   and thus diluted melanin sibling packaged in
                                   blackgrass and star apple and flung one side of the fawn room
                                   to the next. what black women be kept from. that loom look
                                   haunting the iris. hurled into the flat black of baby
                                   sleep, the intentional length goes on among infants’
                                   witness, from the rhythm of tone in a sister’s hip. her
                                   lovers dressed inside huge tits. the sag coo you amply
                                   finger. the radiators hissing up the thin, sheer seams.     (drape) sleepbaby 
through days spent between body, and so
midlove in the hydrant sprung of green
living, an articulation of
sex and notice, whose father’s grass makes
humus earth, genetic. In other
words, some gods begin in a sleep swing
grassy infants, marked by netting of
bush; that poppin’ hair; wombs of couple
fucking. the splendid melanin of
dirt soil, drench planets, brandish and rogue
rouge and lippish, rough witness behind
curtained lash, the birth of lovers dressed
easily soft inside black’s huge tits.


^^EOP^^

What about days when you feel nothing.
Waiting in the car, relative arbitration,
pigeon-pewter or urinal-cake sky, whatever.
A man shouting, a parade of missiles... 
You chew the food and harvest thoughts
from a seafloor. Control subject,
a raincoat blurred in close-circuit resolution,
you pinch the nerveless gummy flesh 
of  your elbows and fail to love well.
You try to carry a flag, at least,
in the distance. This is not sickness.
This is not anything. Hand gripping 
the big knife cutting onions. You could
cut fifty onions this way. You could sleep
until Easter. Maybe the fog will have lifted
by then and time will not seem to pass 
like small bones being broken in order.
What’s that sound? Bald human instinct,
pounding on the windows like a fly. Who am I? All blown open, paper fold, 
you cannot stop the living obligations,
debts abstracting in neutral waves.
Please come back. Patient hearts
are lining up along the shore.


^^EOP^^

Gallagher came down my steps on a darkening August evening,
in need of hot whiskey, lemon, sugar and cloves. A jaunty sailor’s cap
on his bald head, long nailed toes in sandals, warm embrace. 
He carried a faded Quinn’s supermarket bag that bulged with two
blue lobsters, fresh from lobster pot and seaweed curtained
hollows under rocks, angry claws clamped by red rubber bands. 
Moving antennae interrogated my smiling, greedy face.
Brave and warmed by whiskey, I dropped the biggest into
a cauldron of  boiling water, poked raised claws with spoons 
and looked away, saw his expression. He knew I couldn’t
watch those questioning antennae turn from blue black to red,
that I was glad lobsters have no voice that any human ear can hear. 
We drank more whiskey. He went home to hungry dog and fire.
Left me with memories of a wild river salmon he once brought,
a small child’s size and weight, wrapped in newspaper, 
silver scales and dead eyes. He slit the silver belly,
left liver and guts in the sink, scrapped away silver scales.
My fish kettle fitted the salmon as close as any human coffin. 
My mother died one spring. That first Christmas Eve, he brought
shrimps from pots he’d pulled in Curragh cove, translucent brown
bodies twitched under seaweed blankets. We sat close to the fire, 
curtains drawn against wind, rain and ghosts. Peeled pink, boiled
shrimps, threw shells into the fire, drank tea and whiskey.
Butter melted over our fingers as we swallowed shrimps on bread.


^^EOP^^

On the blacktop, along the track, against
      the gym’s bricks, somewhere, you said,
I teased you in middle school, some-
      where, relentlessly, you said. Are you gay
yet?

^^EOP^^

One of the first experiments we give children teaches the three states of water: liquid, vapor, and ICE at the border storing children in hieleras, short-term detention facilities known as iceboxes because it’s so cold you can see your breath as it transforms from vapor into liquid and ice.

Why? a child on the floor asks.

Our bodies are mostly water and the water inside them is the same temperature as our bodies, around 98.6 degrees, but the icebox is much colder so when a child exhales a warm, saturated breath, it becomes dew, and when it is cooled even further, condenses to minuscule droplets of liquid and ice, and this, child, is the cloud we see.

Some children are given two apples a day, which helps them keep time.

When it comes to the human bones, it’s hard not to admire the rib cage that holds my heart like it’s an animal.

Still, if I had to name just one favorite, I’m torn between the hip and the jaw.

Imagine the invention of the wheel and then the waterwheel, the color wheel, the spinning wheel for turning threads into blankets.

Next lesson: there are five basic needs—water, air, food, sleep, shelter.

I admire the moving parts.

The evolution of the hip decoupled walking from breathing so we can run at sunset toward each other or away from fire.

The bones of the hips are winged; if I flashed a picture quickly before you like pornography, you might mistake it for an emperor moth, which is one way to enter the world, headfirst through a body attracted to light.

The history of hips frees the hands for holding a baby, rocking a baby, holding your child’s eyes near your eyes at the distance the eyes first can see.

The jawbone gives us each a face.


^^EOP^^

Not seen for a decade, diver of lupine, horsemint, vetch in the high meadows
    of the coast
and Sierra-Cascade ranges, 190 miles south to north, from Mount Shasta to
    Roseburg, OR, 
rarest of bumble bees, with the flamboyants—Wandering Skipper, Gabb’s
    Checkerspot,
Sonoran Blue, Santa Monica Mountains Hairstreak, California Dogface 
(my father caught them, collected into cellophane envelopes each pair of
    wings hinged to dry
bodies, from the Sierras, the meadows above Tahoe his mother painted, the
    lake 
a jag of sea-green blue through maize and ochers in her landscapes, after
    she stopped
playing the violin and tired of her sister’s theosophy; for years all I had of
    his was a cigar box 
of light, all this to keep from sliding into darkness, each thing saved part of
    a constellation,
one chip of  light necessitating the next one’s proximity, forming an outline 
someone will trace again and again, into wing or antennae, or hive, or a
    storm of bees
from a hollow, from the retreat of another form back into darkness,
    through a vent, 
underground, and my father, gone for longer than my daughters’ lives,
    floats somewhere, talking
to me, whispering my wrongs, my failures, each syllable a bit of dust from
    wings), 
the disappearing Frosted Elfin and Karner Blue, Mitchell’s Satyr, Taylor’s
    Checkerspot.
Who was Gabb or Taylor or Karner, to have their names attached to a streak
    of blue, 
brushed flakes of cerulean, or orange, or drab brown; or Franklin, who
    noticed
the solid black abdomen or the gold U on the anterior of the thorax, 
cohabitant on this range with the Western bumble bee, itself rare, and what
    we know
pinned to balsa wood, through abdomens, a bee or wasp, 
a solitary zebra-stripe, above milkweed, vetch, or top-heavy goldenrod
netted and gassed, how quickly the last ones are with us 
then not, a specimen tray in a cabinet pulled out, rows of  bodies, wings
    flared mineral
light, chitin brittle as pressed leaves. Pollinators, foragers. Signals of  
    summer’s height, the race 
of wildflowers blooming before the dry grass fires. In a season, to spawn,
    wrap in self-made
husks, then unfold, moist, and float up toward the sun or nest and lay the
    colony 
over the summer, queen and workers, caretakers of the burrow, foragers,
    and autumnal queens
to wait through winter laden with the future, laid on a mound of nectar, in a
    cup of wax. 
This year the cherry-tree had no fruit—or if there was, it was high in the
    tree, out of sight—
no bees meticulous in their work, the tree was silent all spring and summer. 
(Perhaps my father sought to find a Lepidoptera not yet named, in New
    Guinea or Borneo, something
mistaken for sky leaded between the tree canopy, but found none unknown— 
or this would be my story, since he told nothing of time, his time in the war,
    working
the wounds, the tropic diseases, like most who returned, slowly from their
    theaters of conflict, 
in silence, so turned to growing orchids, Phalaenopsis, white moth-orchids,
    dozens on a spray,
he would cross, hoping some new variant would take, our house filled then
    with possibility.) 
One monarch drifted over the scattered milkweed plants. A cool spring and
    summer, warm
fall, the absence of dragonflies over the meadows and warm lawns. So I
    think of the entomologist 
waiting in the August meadows of Mt. Ashland where he found the last
    Franklin bumble bee
and has come back each year to look again, his specimen box holds three,
    pinned, in the light 
their thorax bristles golden as though always stained by pollen shaken loose
    by their thrum in C,
sorting across scents and chromatics, compounding the nectars, mortal
    pollens. 
Does one know one is the last, no one answers, or there are no others on the
    path
across the wildflower meadows of Mt. Ashland, or no path, the last ones
    along it have been gone 
for a season or two, the last one a leftover cell deep in a vole’s lair, or a
    half-buried fox, sun-
warmed from sleep’s knots. If gone, who would miss them—someone,
    searching for one 
like a word hovering just beyond the tongue, its meaning he shapes with his
    hands, something
infirm, shapeless, “you know what I mean,” just to keep the conversation
    going or return it 
to where we were, start again, a memory, you are still pitch-perfect, a  
    middle-C to tune
the rest by, or is it an A, the oboist’s, then picked up others, that dis- 
ease you refuse to talk about, it can’t be you, to be the last one to remember
    this and then
no one afterward to call it back, say its name as you gently cup the stunned bee 
to show the golden U, in moments it is released, groggy, knowing it must
    find its way, picking
its alphabet back from vetch, lupine, horsemint, to bone-hollowed-hive.


^^EOP^^




Those lovely eyebrows were lifted high,
and those lips like a pomegranate’s insides
were pressed against Death!
—“Nongae” by Byeon Yeong-ro, translated by Mia You



Every origin story
          comes with embellishments,
and since my mother is now
          well over 40 I can tell you that
when I lay in wait in her uterus,
          pink velour lining and clots
of  melancholic sex around me,
          I could see already what the world
would give me, and I knew those gifts
          wouldn’t make my life easy. 
When she started to push
          I twisted the fabric
of  her cunt around my fingers
          and dragged all of it out with me
onto the pink polyester of
          her lap, the bedsheets,
the midwife’s gloves,  O, I only wanted my father to love me. 
That’s what a baby cries
          so we know it’s healthy.
That’s what I sighed last night
          so you could feel pity.  O, you aim at my belly,
but I aim to please. 
As my mother sat in heaps
          around me, I gathered her
needle and knife and unwound
          the strings from the lyre I’ll soon
strip for cartilage. I promise you
          I’ll fix this, I sang to my father,
through our secret,
          four-digit code. 
The television begins to play
          Cinderella, the calla lilies display
romance as filial piety, the market
          smells of crab and patent leather.
The women across, above, and
          beneath me methodically
ladle carbon and melodrama
          into steel bowls too warm
for bare hands. But here,
          my pink gloves, you might call them
an inheritance, I’ll sell them to you
          if  you tell a good story.
I’ll sell them to you if you tell me
          there’s no way out of this.
I’ll sell them to you
          if  you tell me you love me. 
The bone of my chin
          will shelter you in the evening,
my eyelids will embrace you
          whenever you need solace,
the bridge of my nose
          will lead you home.
My body is branded with
          luxury and chrysanthemums,
and I have no commitment
          to authenticity. Take this
cellular cream and rub it
          deep into the sky, you’ll see
the moon will shine for us
          just as brightly.  O, you’re all I’ve been looking for
          and all I’ve ever had,
you’ve taken everything from me
          because what’s sweeter than promise.
Our interest lies far
          beyond that horizon, and you’ll pay later, I whisper so gently.
          Don’t worry yourself about the river,
its name means “sorrow,” or “other,”
          but that’s just the packaging
and paperwork to my sincerity. 
Here, lean in,
          wrap your legs around me,
I’ll lick your intestines like
          a lollipop laced with plutonium.
I told you, I aim to please. 
That contraction you’re feeling,
          it’s the gift my mother gave me,
it’s the debt to you I’ve let grow
          and grow. O, I’m in you now,
don’t you see, and while you push
          I’m twisting my fingers through you.
These lines are my rings,
          they can’t be undone, you didn’t know how much
          I wanted you to love me. 
Every happy ending
          comes with disfigurements,
but for ours I’ll be the mirror
          to your beauty. Look down,
you see them all, don’t you,
          all the gifts the world
has promised you. It was I
          who fixed this for you, it was I
who led us here, right to the edge
          of the cliff—  Now we jump
into that white abyss—

^^EOP^^




^^EOP^^

All we ever talk of is light— let there be light, there was light then,  good light—but what I consider
dawn is darker than all that. 
So many hours between the day
receding and what we recognize 
as morning, the sun cresting
like a wave that won’t break 
over us—as if  light were protective,
as if  no hearts were flayed, 
no bodies broken on a day
like today. In any film, 
the sunrise tells us everything
will be all right. Danger wouldn’t 
dare show up now, dragging
its shadow across the screen. 
We talk so much of  light, please
let me speak on behalf 
of  the good dark. Let us
talk more of how dark 
the beginning of a day is.


^^EOP^^

Finn’s blue hands pulled pale sugar beet from mud
in cold cliff fields for many months a year. 
At times it snowed, often it rained. Sea winds raved,
sometimes rippled dark green sugar beet leaves. 
He scowled. We were fourteen years old. 
His thin lips tight. His white face clenched
against cold, clips round the ear, hard words. 
His father’s tweed jacket frayed at the cuffs,
hung over the top of his Wellington boots. 
A tough man, they said of his father.
Hard as nails that man. 
I skirted around his father’s fields, searched
for early primroses on south facing banks, 
carried my yapping dog out of the mud,
gazed out to sea, pretended I didn’t see Finn. 
Yesterday I saw him for the first time in fifty years,
sitting lopsided on a barstool in An Seanachai. 
His pinched boy’s face flabby from years
of whiskey drinking next to warm pub fires.


^^EOP^^

I offer you a cup of tea made from the roses that survived the bomb, honeyed inside a porcelain cup painted with roses the bees would go wild over if they could see the color red or feel its electric field.

The ether, I say, seems to me to be embodied in the scent we inhale so the tea, when we are away from the garden, will remind us to breathe.

The flowers are earthed, but the air around is charged with one hundred volts for every meter above the ground: the pollen leaps from the flower when the bee buzzes near the way the thorn beckons our finger toward it even though we know there will be a welling of blood.

It’s electric.

I hum, Where are you going my river, my river, where are you going? To the sea, to the sea.

Before the garden, a woman read my tarot from a deck of her own making: my past is a grave reflected in mirrored sunglasses, a headless soldier, a toilet after a party, but she says, if I get through a series of three places—a mountain,  a city in fog, a long river by raft—I will meet the two-thousand-pound wax man of judgment and, after that, find a place at last to rest my head.

In the middle, there’s a body with a hole at the head and at the heart and at the part of a woman that looks like a shell and underneath the first card I pulled: a shell she says could be emptiness or entry; I see, I say, like a flower.

Before I go, she asks me to write down my shame so I write, didn’t ask the question, and drop it in the anonymous box.

Like me, the bees are attracted to blue and see it like Monet does: deep and watery.

I’m wearing a shirt with a bunch of mixed-up letters and nearby another woman shouts, What is it?

It has to say something!

There are the letters, H, A, N ...

T.S. Eliot writes, in a note about the tarot cards read in The Waste Land, that the Hanged Man is associated in his mind with the Hanged God, which has to do with a ritual of sacrifice.

Something must be destroyed in order for something else to grow, the theory goes.

Of the fun facts about shame I’m handed, I’m attracted to to be shameless is to play God. 

Quick, boys!

The bombs are falling and you can save just one thing, what is it?

The roses.

Hybridists know each bloom is tender, born from crossing, so they sent the seeds overseas.

The garden we walk is an asylum for roses too rare for erasure.

Before and after, Eliot’s poem on the rose garden ends.

We played hangman one night to unravel a ladder; you look at me now in recognition and speak softly, Oh, HAPPINESS.

It’s been there all along on my chest.

What’s invisible to us the bees use to bind.


^^EOP^^




An erasure of George Meredith’s “Martin’s Puzzle”



Book, how well I understand
your gladness. 
Suffer’d a fool. 
Why heart? 
Well, the human fist
can be designed with a savouring. 
Why taste the books
of turns? 
I never solve
crush’d complaining. 
Thanks leave
wonderful body hymns. 
Fingers only
ask. 
Answer this: Should it select eyes
fixed on eye? 
So, Book, what must injustice
again mark? 
Engines permit tools. 
Respect may perhaps bow
but I instead question. 
Made together, the sky. 
Stop discord properly. 
A universe from heaps,
kneeling.


^^EOP^^

He carved faces into the dead parts of cedars.
He wore a belt of chisels around his waist. 
To determine where they were dead,
he took a leafless limb, followed it like thread 
back to its spool, down the corresponding strip of trunk.
In the middle of those woods, where the ground 
sloped into a large bowl, mist often got trapped,
parted at our calves. We walked together for a long time, 
and as we walked, he traced what I said
back to my left breast, down to the tender hole 
where I was once attached to my mother
until I went silent. Then, he braced my back 
against a tree. He took out a chisel and kneeled.
You ask when I stopped shouting everything 
and started keeping language close to my mouth
as if  I were reading to a match that had to last my life. 
Well it was not that day. That was much later,
after the trees had all been cleared and the earth 
leveled. When I stopped begging to be believed
and started telling the truth—no man was there.


^^EOP^^




For Cornelia Spelman and Reginald Gibbons



Perhaps dream figures of fire and wind
Spirit-being gathered up in human being momentarily
More than flesh and flashy garments
More than supper and skin of many colors
More than meat and raiment. 
Age, gender, race, hue, aristoi, data to discard
After when and why and wise—identity on earth, momentous momentarily
Who you are is who you are—a-blaze
Inside, a-bloom, a-risen, all the ages
You have ever been remember
All the stories you were ever told
All the stories you ever told
All the songs you ever heard sung
All the songs you could barely hum
All of these winding around inside you
Like a choir of remembrance. 
Blood of heritage               blood of spirit
Promise and delay,     clamoring
Stammering child, weeping woman,
Howling, crying man, talking baby,
Blood of heritage,          blood of spirit. 
Injuries, slights, neglects, abandonments
Assaults, bruises, all the hurts you have
Endured, survived and did not
But took inside, these are you
As much as the fire leaping up and out
And the wind spinning round, delight, and comfort, succor
And hilarity, a-trembling 
Soul-piece, God-lamp, heart pumping red
Blooded blue blood true blood round
Bone of bones, bone of honor, bone of strength,
Backbone connected to the wise head bone connected
Through the body bones to bones all connected
More than themselves 
All the feelings felt recur
Course through thoroughfares
Of thought, riding and gently
Twinkling like little lights, strung
Around, around through
Until the mind breaks with love
Or worrisome need, desire is a firework
Opening up this moment into a thousand thousands. 
And then more than that or this
More than words or images
An invisible indelible indivisible
Infinite beyond age the numeral
Or gender the sex or wish or race
The wise or myth or class the money or
No money or manners or hue the grades
Of color or aristoi the steps above
Below more than concept or conceit,
Food and clothing, elusive as freedom-need and justice,
Belief or disbelief, the presence of awe,
And awesome, awful and discrete, replete
And contiguous, night and noon at once
And more than anything we can name now or then or
Once, more than meat and raiment, far far
More than, 
And then there will be more for you.


^^EOP^^

Was it steady, a drizzle, a trickle under the door?
People with their cloaks over their heads, dodging,
the donkey’s back bright with wet? 
Or did it whip and howl and everyone bolted their doors
and ate hot soup, then held their breaths
making love, one eye on the window? 
The first, a dull, mechanical disaster: Who left the faucet on?  The second, Shakespearean: Fortune brings in some boats that are not steered.  
You don’t have to be an animist to believe
that weather is God standing on your roof
when your every veil around you sinks, 
or your boy, hit by a wrong sawn board,
floats face down. The dripping—
that’s Hitchcock, the swells swelling, 
the rusting swords, Noah hoarse,
every pinprick of a shower
triggering stress.


^^EOP^^




Abstract for a happy poem



You made your students write stories about happiness and they were, you said, the worst stories of the year. Remember the pregnant woman? in a Fontainebleau café, I meant to reset it in America when I wrote the poem, she was sordid with mammalian culmination, dissatisfied with the first table she chose, the chair, with too much too hot sun soaking her through the picture window, she gathered crockery, groceries, her unsatisfactory handbag in order to move but the space between tables was small and the deadweight of  her near-term baby in the moonbounce of  her body made her clumsy, trip, fall, splash, and spill her au lait into a man’s open laptop.
 
His screen went blank. She broke into tears. Him so angry and sorry for her he couldn’t speak. He lifted the milk-glopped computer out of the coffee; it dripped viscous stalactites onto the table and his knees and the floor, pooling around tasseled, perforated loafers. The woman at the end of  her tether. Tears dribbled down her face to her blouse and into the now-empty cup she swooped over to pick up nearly losing her balance. That happens pregnant: you forget for a minute and the front weight shocks you. The man, scrunched up in an expensive embroidered sweater, navy, thread beads, intricate, abstract in pattern, with thighs to make you think of sex, was heavy too with urgency to save circuitry, get back to his important work, money work, stocks work, smoke-and-mirrors work, rather like poetry, without forgiveness or incivility. His earpiece lighting up with calls he didn’t take.
 
Somebody in the background mumbled about Marine Le Pen ... Someone I think said something about the poor quality of the produce at the Intermarché Super et Drive, for C’est affreux! they said knowing and happily, tapping a newspaper. Euro! somebody spat, still grinding that axe. Somebody asked the waiter for l’addition who said if you are hiking in the forêt there is a hunt—chasse—in progress—en cours. Story and wound, deer, wild boar, trampling the underbrush. We peeped into lives made interesting by our watching. We at least (a happy part) were content. Note to self: put in some exquisite lines about the light in the forest, the openness between trees.
 
Pregnancy (unwanted, wanted, each kind harasses for all except the super-confident) and affluence meeting over coffee, ambition, and hormones. Some business of apology and napkins as coffee dripped milkily from table to floor and he finally moved his feet. What happened next: did she find a seat? Did his computer recover? Their faces hardly in motion. None of the shock of the scream of formation fighter jets but an army cargo plane bumbled low in the sky above the café, a cache of what in its belly? The very deepness of its gray. The man, the pregnant woman, looked up. The story stops there. Could be a meet cute. Or everything falls apart. My student wanted to know if the girl in the Hemingway story decided to get an abortion or not. “I like closure,” she said. The woman has no ring. So, what if he falls in love with her maternal body, discovers fatherhood’s more important than work, while she—what? Now everything plots without them 2... You see how gravid cancels the imagination, renders mother an instrument for other characters’ moral and emotional development, cancels a story trying to become about guns, money, and war. After all, they were only two people wordless with reaction, moving unknowable even to themselves, nothing due them but some final punctuation





^^EOP^^




With a nod to Maggie Nelson



I think you overestimate
the maturity of adults.
If a man who thinks he
is a king is mad, a king
who thinks he is a king
is no less so. Heavy is
the lighthead that crowns
before the leaves loosen.
Beneath the mask of
a father is a grapefruit,
a boy in fear of his own
fingers. From fear’s fetus
comes the notion of grati-
tude. We are indebted
even before we are born.
My occasional chin hairs
are masculine plural.
Because our tongues are
a violent pink and I cannot
speak of blood without
teeth. Because I never
learned how to whistle
and I can’t seem to kick
this body, I have adopted
this brittle lake of truth.
On one hand sits a song,
on the other my father
eats a bird.


^^EOP^^

My mother says I sure was heaven-sent
& determined on making her life hell—
cried every afternoon, & not one spell
worked. She rocked, she sang, made all the attempts
of  too-young mothers. Don’t they say the scent
of  a mother’s neck, & her voice, soothe well?
The familiar heartbeat’s supposed to tell
the story of the womb. Not how it went.
Until one day she put me in a chair
with a newspaper to tear out & toss
into a water bucket. Algebra
or God happened (quiet, I tore), & where
does it end? She recognized it, this loss,
she swears, the morning I was born. She saw. 
She swears the morning I was born she saw
the dishes stacked, though the news wasn’t dry.
The war brought the dead, the mothers the cries
of newborns. The militias made the laws:
cross here, here stop, here knock, here dance, here draw
a card—spades or hearts? Your fate does not lie
in your hands or the Almighty’s. The eye
of the gun is multi-pupiled. Blah blah
went the angels, though they watched over us,
didn’t they? Or did we come to our aid?
Some smoked. Where’s the crossword? asked the grandpas.
Everyone smoked, blamed each other, the bus,
& every pregnant woman was afraid
she’d soon be in labor, all back & jaws. 
I’d soon be in labor, all back & jaws,
though less after the epidural. God
bless the anesthesiologist! No rod
of in pain you will, your unholy laws.
Stab my spine painless or I’ll dig my claws
into your jugular. Don’t you applaud
the sacrifice of mothers, don’t you God
them. Altars are for the dead, & rage gnaws
at us: we’re badass, & what we want? We
know. & we don’t know. None of your business.
Both times I prayed for a girl, & intent
birthed them, as it did my mother & me;
we’re our own expulsion—& genesis,
moments later. We begin our descent. 
Moments later, we began our descent
down the building stairs. There was no shelter;
we hid in the school next door. We entered,
played with the older kids, who sometimes lent
us their Risk game set. Confused, we still went
with it. We loved the colors, & better,
the dice. We rolled. Hunched into our laughter,
we counted losses. My mother’s lament
came not from missiles, but from sudden news
of her brother’s death. He, countries away,
engineer, hit his head on the cement.
She’d seen him in a dream. How does God choose
when to show us, when to keep us at bay?
She saw her brother’s face, saw herself  bent. 
She saw her brother’s face. We saw her bent
over his photo, or a soapy plate.
Heard her light her last cigarette so late
it was early. Morning, between the rent
& electricity, to what extent
does one have time to mourn? Who derails fate,
peace? The only train I’d seen didn’t wait—
abandoned in the city grass, content
in the apocalypse. I spent most days
on the balcony: next door, the immense
emptiness of the archbishopric called.
I imagined running in the always
of its sun-flood until mother’s voice pressed.
I tied my blue laces, postponed my awe. 
I tied my blue laces, & to my awe,
it never worked. I loved September best:
without fail, rain—the clear illusionist—
fell on the first day of school, always brought
the earth with it: the soil’s fragrance rose raw
even in the alley. We chewed fast, lest
our mom find out what we’d bought with the rest
of our money. Remember? The hurrah
as we quickly ate the cake-filled brioche?
& the rotary phone? & my love for
new stationery, my fear of chamois
shoes? Tights torn, soaked, too whole-hearted, too gauche,
too rushed. I tried to hide it all before
we walked in, but tying my shoes, she saw. 
I walked in & she tied my shoes. She saw
the dirt, & sometimes shouted. But she let
me find & lose my Edens, alphabet
after alphabet. When boredom would gnaw,
she said, Read the dictionary. No flaw
in scarcity, if the mind wills. Duet
of  languages, thank you. Thank you, cassette,
& TV ads—I memorized them all.
Today she called, said her mother isn’t
dying. Perhaps she should? Didn’t she wolf
most her days? Enough. She can’t invent
excuses for her again. She wasn’t
kind. She dreaded the visit, thinking of
how the whole day would go. & still she went. 
How the whole day would go, & how it went
depended on the inflatable boat,
the cold river, the warm mountain, its coat
of marguerites, & our careful descent
into the summer morning. We’d no tent,
too young to camp, happy to be remote
from parents & the city. An old goat
grazed, & it strangely lightened my torment,
my fear of the wild. Then you turned—did you?
In a lost diary, a girl writes this; We walked off, briefly, but alone at least.
The others set the picnic, called. I knew.

^^EOP^^

                 But I could not hide
My quickening inner life from those at watch.
They saw a light at a window now and then,
They had not set there. Who had set it there?

^^EOP^^




Helal Marwa After—



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 [adhan]

           messages Facebook me sends uncle My
does translator Facebook .understand barely I
           .ح with starts One .images to apply not

                             .amo ,you love I writes He
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  [standing]
           
,clothes Friday my In
skips he as me sees homie the
    just is mosque The .school
from corner the round house a
               .algebra period second
 

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 [bowing]

phone my over Hovering
7abibi why searching I’m
name pop’s if as—habibi not and
.line the on weren’t
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       [prostration]

.Rayan Al Dujanaht it’s ,God of house wooden this In
           even sometimes ,gate the at ,Dujie

           different is father my ,Here .way the on
course Of .same the or
wild this ,prayer all it’s

pushing ,corner the to jockeying
.another down back then ,out not up
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              [again prostration]

? this say to How
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              [sitting]
 
1.God by Confounded

                                                                                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                 [alaikum salam]

direction which days these note I
foot what ,drip ablution of drops last the
,shoes my on back putting when first goes
.shut slams gate the how



 
1. الحمدالله.↩︎


^^EOP^^

1 
All day, I feel the approach of dolphins; their thoughts are in my mind. 
When I swim, my cells attune to them, because ocean’s full of vibrations that transmit to water in my body. 
It’s a repository of primordial data from space; all creatures in water can access the Akasha. 
Tones entering my cells transform into feeling, an awareness of two worlds at once. 
I send back my thought, picture, feeling, and together we form new vibrations of knowledge that had been dormant in me. 
They’re here! 
I swim out of the cove toward them. 
So happy, I hum, and their answering chorus reverberates across water; we know each other. 
One dolphin is still, far below me. 
Her form takes shape, as she rises silently in bright blue, motionless, sunlit. 
Thank you for showing yourself, fulfilling a deep longing within my deep memory. 
2 
I empty my mind and listen for her reply, which comes as waves of emotion. 
A cloud surrounds me; I expand into its stillness and receive tones conveying information very fast. 
They teach me to hum, to whistle and sing; sound amplifies my body across open water; even their joyous play has this sensation of creating space, and when they sleep, stars augment their frequencies. 
We converse by mind-cell helixes of image and feeling. 
Cosmic legacy, cosmic extension imprint holographically on my heart neurons as dolphin empathy. 
There are sounds which can stop time, alter surroundings or shift your dimension. 
Swimming I lose my sense of place, even physicality, and connect with collective love. 
They teach me to join my aura to the cosmos by spiraling with me in sound-star tetrahedrons and to love those with whom we merge. 
Then being is healing, through innocence, when the animal becomes the teacher. 
3 
One dolphin swims toward me; I open telepathically and respond. 
I practice this method of reflection to contact life-forms in other space, who are trying however they can to meet us. 
Sirius radiates high frequencies to lighten the dark, denser planets. 
Dolphins travel to and from such a planet through diagrams like songs on ocean floors. 
They wish us to participate in over-lighting the collectivity of souls in our galaxy and ally with them to access the Space Sister-Brotherhood. 
Through these planetary vortices, dolphins catalyze starlight to refresh water on earth. 
Transference between species is both cellular and holographic or geometric. 
For example, my friend’s body is 3-D in front and 4-D in the back; she exists across dimensions, while appearing so ordinary in her yellow shirt and blue slacks, as we walk to the shore. 
“Memory is vibratory, like DNA, condensed light,” she volunteers. 
“You and I relate through our mutual past on Sirius, in Glastonbury, Santa Fe.” 
So I repeat their joyous, staccato syllables; I listen to “pod”casts of Noh singers and tune to high pitches the Pleiades use for propulsion into our atmosphere, using the star codes of dolphins. 
4 
We’ve attributes in realities we’re not aware of. 
Dolphins reside in these dimensions, like dreams in oceans. 
They swim within magnetic streams of other entities, angels we’ve invented, others’ heavens, cyclic destiny. 
I glimpse one jump from its energy band, attracted by my friend’s intense aura. 
He shows me earth’s sister planet replicated by sound as we co-create it by singing, sitting in her yard, gazing at the ocean under pine trees. 
There are messages in clouds, in wavelets on granite, cicada and meadowlark calls. 
Space travelers materialize morphogenetically from local beauty and merge with us. 
They enable travel between time and stars by projecting tones just ahead of the consciousness of the person migrating, the way dolphins pass me so fast, I don’t see the bubbles until they’re far, out of sight.


^^EOP^^

I need to get out of this situation, I said;
to be more like the day-fox
practically blowing smoke rings
out there on the pavement;
to be a nice little virus, or spore
on the wind with my hair tacky,
my swollen hand resting on the edge
of a smear on a napkin; to hardly touch
things, or access an inbox or die on
contact with a purchase order or
fellow demon of the backwash. Hell.
I don’t know what Jesus had in mind
when he said let the day’s own trouble
be sufficient for the day

^^EOP^^

Tell it this way: depression is the 30cm nail driving into the walls. 
If  you ever read about Plath, ever kept a lantern from dying, 
ever tended a garden it grew so wild to swallow god, ever kept 
dressing the fire in your bones, then you must know about grief, 
possibly how to end it. Maami once stood in this garden. Now, 
I stand in her shadow like a sphinx in a crusade of an inferno. 
In Lagos, another news says a student of microbiology, 400L, took 
a nook’s way to the sky, death could not stop for him—anymore. 
Let’s agree: failure is the arm swinging the pendulum across the face 
of every dream. These gardens grow wild & the birds unfurl their 
wings into an offering of flight. My cousin knelt in this garden once. 
I kowtow into his absence, my knees—eyes dressed in dust & dearth. 
In my mouth, every name glistens with a beak. I owe every wall 
a shadow, every bed a midnight of creaks & crimson, every heart 
an arrhythmia twice the speed of a destrier. In the library, my finger  Canterburies through The Selected Poems of Sylvia Plath, for once in 
my whole life, I recite “Lady Lazarus” & remember I have a father 
growing in the garden. Do I terrify?—what fear sweeps this little life? 
Tainted black & bruised, a chorus lifts itself onto my mouth’s blade:  dy—dying is an art, so just like everything else I do it exceptionally well, yelz 
yet even with honey disguised in holocaust, who, tell me, wants to die this young?


^^EOP^^

My daughter Louise asks about shame
and I want to tell her about the seer,
Marie Taréis, who worked with colors
and mirrors. The way she took my egg
drawing, yellow in the middle, then orange
then indigo, moved a pyramid of two mirrors
over and around it searching for my soul. 
But it was just an egg.
Other people’s drawings had symbols
multiplied and reflected—
the tree of life, Egyptian dancers,
a caduceus, gods and goddesses.
I cringed, kneeling at her feet
in a sweat of old shames. 
The time Ellen spotted nits in my hair,
that old perv dribbling over my fat thighs,
thread worms, the squirm and itch. Age ten,
sneaking in to read Playboy magazines
under my father’s bed. Disgust whitening
his face when he caught me looking
and reading about the ways I would be seen. 
Like that young priest colliding
with my dancer’s body all sweaty
and vital running up the stairs of the priory,
the pleasure in his smile quickly
changed to a pursed-up sneer, rejection,
blame, his shame smeared all over me.
Depression then, clinging to the bed, 
even the purple green pink I saw haloed
around a rose, too witchy and weird
like the wildflower remedies
I used in my practice. Circles
of  women, their whispered secrets
and me a kind of sin-eater grubbing
in the muck. She moved the mirrors 
searching for my soul in that childish drawing,
and I wished that I could do it all again.
I’d been so naïve when I made it,
playful like a child who’s forgotten
she isn’t loved. Somebody laughed.
The mirrors moved, opened,
kaleidoscoped the egg into a circle of candles.


^^EOP^^

You want a door you can be
            on both sides of at once. 
                       You want to be
           on both sides of here 
and there, now and then,
            together and—(what 
                       did we call the life
            we would wish back? 
The old life? The before?)
            alone. But any open 
                       space may be
            a threshold, an arch 
of entering and leaving.
            Crossing a field, wading 
                       through nothing
            but timothy grass, 
imagine yourself passing from
            and into. Passing through 
                       doorway after
            doorway after doorway.


^^EOP^^

I go inside the wolf
9:35 Sunday morning
Inside my beastly stinking
I kneel and light
A candle for snow
On the website
Churchoftheend.org 
Late Monday stuck in traffic
I stick also to the wolf
Like Teaberry gum
Glommed to the sole of a boot
Marked down in the Goodwill
Or ice clinging to a leaf
Three million years ago 
Though I am not famished
Nor does my fur bristle
Tuesday I go inside the wolf
Following standard sheep
Of no particular breed
Maybe old testament sheep
Maybe apocalyptic statistics 
How large my teeth and ears
How wild my panting Wednesday
When I put on the head
And stare out of the wolf
The Krewe of  Oak jerks
And turns the corner
From Oak onto Carrollton 
Hello fossils Hello Thursday
That smells like money
Hello American elm Hello dodo
Hello polar bear snoozing in a sauna
I hear inside the wolf
The Carborundum of coal drills
Resonating from glaciers 
On Friday I write Wolf Hell
On the bank I write it in wolf blood
To make (myself) believe
The condition is critical
I donate my body to science
To synch with the wolf
And spare the cost of the funeral 
Saturday crossing the causeway
Seeing three boys on skis
And sometimes in the sky
The letters of an ad or proposal
I am happy to be a rich animal driving
There is a great storm coming
I go inside the wolf


^^EOP^^

Grief without song could be any stone chapel built of loss
packed with aging villagers lulled reticent as rue
by a rote bell’s tongue, hemmed by iron gates and a yew
tree lurking mirthlessly beside a burial ground where moss- 
patinaed spirits and earth angels gather round relic icons
of threadbare hand-me-down faith. You sit/kneel/stand on
your misericord like an eaten Job in the organ belly’s drone,
sorting your parents’ hoarded aggregate—clothes pawn 
and charity shops won’t take, sewing kits, boxes of old
Polaroids of anonymous sepia-people you wouldn’t be here
without, file drawers of past taxes, uniforms from the war,
wedding dress, unworn shoes unfit for a holy soul ... 
—and that’s just the tip, to say nil of unspeakable sins
in attic and basement. Macular shorebirds scan whitecaps
for questions the mind’s eye can alight: dim synapse
of a candlelit nave, musty kneelers, a deacon’s 
chair from Suriname. Grief without song is wasted pain.
According to patron James, faith in works—in real acts
of creation—amplifies our part in salvation’s soundtrack
louder than wafers, wine or words of mumbled expiation 
dissolved on penitent tongues. In your rusted anechoic
husk, your veins blood-thrum a rushing river-hymn,
an electric fence of nerves ticking in your cerebellum—
until silence clears its throat ... and from her first chthonic 
tremolo it comes as no shock: how from Galway to Summerhill
churches are being repurposed as concert halls by clergy who swear
love’s lost call note still lingers, runic under the moored murmur
of all those services you sat unmoved through, the supernal 
flatulence of organ bellows at last revised in fidelity rare
as a black velvet angel with spindly legs and mental hair,
her aqueous blues beguiling as the B-side of prayer
beside an ocean we couldn’t hear but always knew was there.


^^EOP^^

A decade on, you make a fuss at finding me—an expression a slide
rule couldn’t read. I am thawing;                  spilling every              which way. Flip, you say, gripping my forearm with new faith.
             You usedn’t touch things. Not me.
                                                     Not a sister.
                                                     Not a rudder. The Magic Show would be freed from its cellophane skin
              by your will alone. I tried to hurry the process once
               —you remember—
               we weren’t really children                       you warned:                           Get behind the fourth wall and stay there.
Now, I see your hands. One too many diamonds
devalues all of the diamonds.
I could set a table on your life. No wine
would topple and stain.
Yes         the weight of a body can help 1 feel
lifted      but—too—it can turn 1
              into a bird-like thing hither-
              thithering the self away
              space all arsoned and malicious
              and youth then is given over.
              By not seeing 1 self in the glass ...
Looking in the right places for wrong things—
                                       in the same calm repetitious uncitylike places
                                       for things unownable. Legroom
                                       to cram with appendages. The leaves
along your drive are oil-slick. A car service is overdue.
Garden dewdense with crabgrass kinked bittercress poor man’s mustard swallowwort unctuous dandelions
                                                                                             to piss a paddling pool full to the brim.
I am heartened by all that neglect.
You correct me:              We are not truly invested in the lawn.
I don’t tell you            lest I am interrupted by a child I’ve never met
                                  lest they look familiar and need carrying to the toilet
             lead is heavier than silver but lighter than gold.
             What is yours? What did you plan to own?
                                      Books can be reduced to weatherproof icons on a screen,
                                      photographs to thumbprints, a child to a turkey baster, a principle
                                      to a charity donation.
This new country           this land of We
or else                             is very humid.
                                       My stressed husband left the tap gushing all day,
                                        the dote. We were at work, the kids were at crèche.    It was just
                                          too much. We came home to a swimming pool—      another private ocean
                                                                                                                          to love him across.
You place in my arms a damp crimped Yellow Pages
weighing of an infant        for a mooring. There are all sorts of numbers to sum.
None of you touches me—          not your belly, not your gaze, hot water bottle breast.
You go to the kitchen. To the sound of crying.
1 is the total percentage of water that has been lost by the time a person feels thirsty.
I say naught for the Velcro sound of my tongue. Leave again, finally, click the lifebuoy icon.
My data will be anonymized, though DNA is unanonymizable.
It is statistically likely that some 1 would love me and I am letting them
                                                                                                          down.


^^EOP^^




Fladry: a line of rope mounted along the top of a fence, from
which are suspended strips of fabric or colored flags that will flap
in a breeze, intended to deter wolves from crossing the fence-line.
USDA National Wildlife Research Center



I am weak and edible. Some human quality
stays weird, alien to the wild, outsiders,
bad sport with spooky habits not just fladry—
other enchantments against order, house paint,
yard art, border fences and the tunnels under borders,
the amen, the wedding ring, the flavored condom.
The wolves are back. I've seen them, seen the fladry
ranchers tie, red flags' flutter to puzzle or annoy,
folk-work tendered back from wood-shadow,
more each year, abjured with clover.
What I like most about the first shot of bourbon
is how it feels like letting go of a grudge. 
In the dream, I kill my friend and bury him
lime in the church basement between sump pump
and broken fireplace. On my knees I tile
red stone back to mosaic. Soldiers beat me up
and called me names in my own language,
this one, the one Whitman used to soothe
the dying, limbless, the bleeding, the infected. 
Beat me with fists slight more stone
than the shape that holds this pencil.
A house is held together by shapes. 
And yet in the ongoing negotiations between 
the world where I hold my son and 
famine, bombings, hate, prosperity—
two notes, octaves apart
attenuate what's hidden inside your body
to the invisible. It might help remembering
shadows and not hours. Infinity 
also has the contour of a children's game. 
Infants remember fladry, safe in the car seat grasping,
grasping. Some forces are enormous and move
against you, and when you pretend they aren't 
there, surge. Some swing on a hinge
which at night sounds like don't look back, 
don't look back

^^EOP^^

Even though we've already been dead,
when I find two trays of Grateful Dead tapes
in a Missoula secondhand store,
I too feel bound in the stasis of cassette,
plastic cases scarred and cracked
like old scuba goggles. Some retain
the delicate peg that lets the door swing open;
some have broken, maybe from a fall
when someone slid too fast the van door open
in a hot parking lot. Could be no tragedy
made the tapes secondhand greater
than a lost interest. Used to listen to them,
the owner might say, the way you adjust
to walking past a grave. I love him, or her, 
who has curated these happenings, although
the Dead's not really my bag. I follow
other melodies and injured visions, draw 
my cider from another press, a cooler lava.
I saw them once, summer of '95 at RFK,
with my friend Jax. It was terrible,
a lot of twentieth-century business came due
at once. Bob Dylan opened unintelligible
and sleepy as if reaching from the frost
to make known "in life I was Bob Dylan."
The Dead would play five more stands:
Auburn Hills, Pittsburgh, Noblesville,
Maryland Heights, Chicago, then done,
those last shows, autobiographies of indulgence.
Lightning struck by a branch. We left early.
Tapers caught every note of the show.
You can hear it forever at archive.org. 
In my greatest period of disorientation,
the Dead, like death, seemed best avoided. 
Yet I was the sort who might admit
a simplifying affection like the Dead.
I remember, coming down in a cornfield
near a creek at dawn, talking it out with Jason
whether those trees were weird, or that
weirdness took the form of trees, 
and every woman I pursued 
had a pet cat that made me sneeze.
They either liked the Dead or Neil
Diamond. Yet I would persevere,
like one with a disorder, hanging
in the doorway to their petite kitchens
while they ground coffee, or searched
the crisper for a roommate's hidden beer.
I longed to become more elaborate,
my approaches too simple and still are,
ask anyone about pleasure's light opera
and the children's music of the first kiss,
the hair metal of the second. And now
I play the Dead around the house. 
It's children's music. We play operettas, Pinafore, Penzance, for the same reasons,
because they are kind and almost meaningless.
I make few claims. What lasts is awkward
chance, like this thrift-store wrench
anthologized on pegboard, or smudges
on a yellow phone. I'm not buying 
the tapes today. The price isn't marked
and the clerk's busy. I keep what marriage
and child need, a few books and held-back objects,
metal or paper, letters from old loves,
because letters are antique, and for
the limestone antiquity of those affections. 


^^EOP^^

Nothing worth noting
except an Andromeda
with quadrangular shoots—
            the boots
of the people 
wet inside: they must swim
to church thru the floods
or be taxed—the blossoms
            from the bosoms
of the leaves


^^EOP^^

When my mother sent me for cigarettes
I'd buy a candy bar too, sign her name
to the book, and walk out with the green-
and-white carton, Virginia Slims 100s,
under my arm, the chocolate already gone.
Sugar, my god! like newspaper cartoon 
panels spread out on the kitchen table
where I'd pretend to smoke, imitating her.
After the corner store closed we made our groceries
at Dillon's, joined the impersonal. A villain
snatched her purse there when I was away at college
and on the phone she told me, excitedly,
how Topeka police chased the culprit, and she named
each street, each intersection and landmark,
the whole adventure, just for her. 
I'm grateful now to the sedentary house
though I've grown as large on candy as John Candy. 
My older brothers left home and our meals stayed
the same, a skillet high with beef Stroganoff,
pot roast in broth, chili con carne,
cheese sandwiches with mayo, flocks of fried chicken. 
Then the whole house went on a diet of cold
tofu cubes, a broken disk of lemon in a water glass,
cottage cheese measured onto lettuce,
and then back to London broil the next night,
no questions asked—lovely. We were emotions
without form, and I carry it with me, 
not just in frame, arm and jowl and belly,
but here in the intergalactic space of written
thought, the infinite stage where we come
talk to each other. Sugar makes me curious.
After Katrina, I took the diet where you eat meat,
and lost almost a hundred pounds from a surfeit
of bacon, sautéed pork medallions, beef & lamb.
The weight fell away like a knight's armor
after a joust. I bought shirts at a regular store.
I played softball and ran bases, bounded them,
as if on a new, more forgiving planet. And
I went crazy, evened out, broke down again,
inconsolable at the finale of Six Feet Under,
tears for my mother, postponed, and more
torrented for delay. Opening the book of grief
requires you read all the way to the end,
every time. Driving to work, I stopped
bewildered at a gas station, paid cash for two
Snickers providing more salvation
than I have ever known from religion's acres.
I write about the West and the South and home,
their tenderness and trouble and the weird spirits
breaking the best days. Still I find myself down
by the river at twilight. On the bridge deliberate-
seeming people walk by like victorious aliens,
past the consequential palaces lit as before,
the faces turning in their rotisseries. 
In profile, my mother looked like Alex Chilton,
lead singer of the Box Tops, and then Big Star. 
I used to see Chilton around New Orleans, 
in line at the grocery store, walking down Esplanade.
My mother also had a solo career, playing
solitaire and watching her own TV in the kitchen
and dying before everyone else. Dying, Chilton
urged his wife to run the red lights, his last words,
and when I had to leave my mother in the hospital
that was hard, and then again at the funeral
I set a marble under her folded hands, 
don't know why. It's been ten years.
Ten fingers, the closed eye of each knuckle,
each nail its years' fullest day moon.
Which shed the other? My scar from opening
a window, such force to move the wood frame,
so little to shatter glass it held. To be held so
again. Ten years, so forty seasons, eight endings
and beginnings, well, always a gust in them
which is the sigh of how she would note leaf and bird.
One hand to hold the coffee cup, one the cigarette. 
The red ember she became at midnight. Red light. Eye. 


^^EOP^^

Ethics are learned from who you sleep with
the first few times, and theater is sex,
almost. Being in it, I mean, and being young,
with a lot of group undressing
and silence in darkness, chaste
permissions of the cast party,
spiked punch in the recreation room. 
I was always cast as Old Man
with tennis-shoe polish for white hair
and lines drawn where my lines now are,
forehead haiku, the eyes' briffits,
and parentheses around the muzzle.
I guess I miss it, achievement's sense,
the way a show's run ends
and everyone knows it together, 
a social pain, like the death
of a popular imaginary friend. 
When lights between scenes dim,
I like to see actors take props offstage
or team up with stagehands to move 
the built elements of our fantasy.
I hope they keep going, and sneak
some of the properties home to mix in
with their private dramas. I pass theaters
the way I pass churches, but like 
better this foldable theater
half-constructed in the mind,
sometimes thrown away
along with the day's receipts. 
Nothing's lost. I carry my own
props in—red telephone,
bowl of apples—and then with me draw
back into the unseen.


^^EOP^^


    1
Part of the simulation is not knowing
your coyote's real name. Part of the simulation
is knowing your group could leave you
behind. Part of the simulation is knowing
that if you are left behind, a pickup truck
will take you back to your hotel.   
    2
Through caves, through brush, through needles
we form a line by holding on
to a stranger's backpack. In the dark live 
rounds are fired. I duck, people laugh.   
    3
The desert here is no desert at all & I think of how
I could cut a thick barrel cactus open
& eat it. In Chihuahua I've never seen
thick barrel cactus, only the thin long threads
of ocotillo that don't carry much water.   
    4
The chairos pay 250 pesos to walk 
all night in the desert in the middle of México
to simulate a border crossing. They bring jugs
filled with water & pose for selfies.  
    5
When you wade across the river you only have to worry
about swimming if a current pulls you under, not the red
glare of night-vision goggles, floodlights & guns.   
    6
In the simulation, only two people make it 
to the other side without getting stopped by actors
portraying la migra or narcos. All are brought back
for cups of atole. It's three in the morning, a girl laughs.   
    7
I walk back to my room, turn on the light
& the flying ants won't stop swarming. It is so dark
& have so much water left in my jug.
My teeth full of grit from the atole. 


^^EOP^^

I run around the block eating an orange & drop
its rind in continents on concrete. This is my gift 
to the suburb, which told me not to burn logs 
when the air quality is marked yellow. My dog
chases me around the block barking & a woman
yells from her portrait window she could sue me 
for not using a leash. My phone reminds me to take
a shower, so I do. It's not that I'm dirty, it's that
I'd rather stay in bed wearing fur, watching 
documentaries about Dior. I apologize to no one
while scrubbing my scalp until it bleeds. I know
what it is to stare at yourself in a shattered mirror 
& not remember if it was you who broke it.
I wanted to see if I could mine my body for rubies
& look, I can! I write a letter & don't send it:  Here is a book & a ruby. One from my body,
the other I made after a fit with a pen. Both
worth nothing, but I like the thought of a man
picking them up & holding them in his hands

^^EOP^^

You are so poor that all you have is a country. 
Whenever you open your mouth
you talk about the country
to which you can no longer return.
China is a giant shield that you use 
to conceal your cowardice and to preempt
the onslaught of duties and hardships.  
You dare not take these as your rights:
the warm sunlight, clean water, fresh air,
a happy mood for an ordinary day.
As long as you live, you want to grieve
for the fairy tale of patriotism. 
You dare not take a country as a watchdog—
a good dog wags its tail to please its master,
becomes fierce in deterring burglars;
a bad dog ignores invaders
and only bites and barks at its master. 
You dare not clasp the dog's ear,
telling it, "You won't have food 
if you continue to misbehave like this." 
Actually, you are merely a grain of rice
that fell through China's teeth,
but you treat it as your god,
your universe, and the source 
of your suffering and happiness. 


^^EOP^^

You must hold your quiet center,
where you do what only you can do.
If others call you a maniac or a fool,
just let them wag their tongues. 
If some praise your perseverance, 
don't feel too happy about it—
only solitude is a lasting friend. 
You must hold your distant center.
Don't move even if earth and heaven quake. 
If others think you are insignificant,
that's because you haven't held on long enough.
As long as you stay put year after year,
eventually you will find a world
beginning to revolve around you. 


^^EOP^^

How, Alan Turing thought, does the soft-walled,
jellied, symmetrical cell
become the asymmetrical horse? It was just before dusk,
the sun's last shafts doubling the fence posts, 
all the dark mares on their dark shadows. It was just
after Schrödinger's What is Life?
not long before Watson, Franklin, Crick, not long before
supper. How does a chemical soup,
he asked, give rise to a biological pattern? And how
does a pattern shift, an outer ear
gradually slough its fur, or a shorebird's stubby beak
sharpen toward the trout?
He was halfway between the war's last enigmas
and the cyanide apple—two bites—
that would kill him. Halfway along the taut wires
that hummed between crime
and pardon, indecency and privacy. How do solutions, 
chemical, personal, stable, unstable, 
harden into shapes? And how do shapes break?
What slips a microfissure 
across a lightless cell, until time and matter
double their easy bickering? God?
Chance? A chemical shudder? He was happy and not,
tired and not, humming a bit 
with the fence wires. How does a germ split into a self?
And what is a—We are not our acts
and remembrances, 

^^EOP^^

So let misunderstanding spread.
It only shows how different 
you are from others.
Many things cannot bear
explaining; you'd better
let silence and labor speak 
in your defense. 
You don't need many friends
or to be enamored with beautiful women
or share the wine of happy gatherings,
because you have solitude enough,
content to leave this world without a sound. 
Distant thunder can give you pure joy.
Birds in the sky can teach you
another kind of wisdom.
As your soul is growing new wings
such words will disappear from your dictionary: boundary, complaint, cowardice, collapse...


^^EOP^^

I saw how they lived with restrictions.
Hardly past thirty they began to decline.
Like fish trapped in an invisible net,
they swam in all directions
but couldn't get anywhere.  
They had to surrender to the country
and it let it consume them at will.
They were like trees dependent 
on the strength of the forest, but none
could stand tall and straight alone.  
Their dreams were banished into caves
and withered away, never able to sprout.
While alive, they tried hard
to garner praise from everyone
so as to become model ghosts afterward. 


^^EOP^^




     But in Indo-China I drained a magic potion, a loving-cup which I have shared since with
     many retired colon and officers of the Foreign Legion whose eyes light up at the mention
      of Saigon and Hanoi.
                     Graham Greene, Ways of Escape



1. Saigon 
    The other night, I went with friends to see the Saigon River where it loops past the venerable Majestic Hotel still standing on the riverbank at the end of the modernized, old downtown. From the hotel's top floor balcony we looked across to the Nhà Bè side from where, back in the American days, rockets were sometimes launched at the city from the mangrove swamps across the way. We stood awhile saying nothing just watching the boats chugging slowly behind dim bow lights as a full moon floated above the river.  
    During the war, the street behind the Majestic was—architecturally speaking—still a colonial avenue of small shops, GI bars, cafés, Maxim's nightclub (still there), and green-shuttered appartements with yellow, stuccoed walls leaking blotches of mildew. Now it's a dazzle of luxury hotels and skyscrapers. Downtown Saigon is nearly unrecognizable but, every now and then, my taxi would turn a corner, stirring up a distant encounter... an argument in a government ministry, a flower market where I once bought a pair of finches, or simply our corner cigarette stall where a gold-toothed old lady sold Marlboros tapped up with marijuana.  
    Behind the Majestic, the old Graham Greene apartment is gone, though one remembers the man who prepared Greene's opium, still climbing the creaky wooden steps into the early '70s to serve Americans with his valise of popes. Now, after many re-inventions, it's become a garish complex of glass and metal called "Katina" as the global imperium changed hands over the decades and the Rue Catinat became Tụ' Do or Freedom Street, and then, after our war, Đồng Khởi, or Great Uprising, and Saigon became Ho Chi Minh City.   
2. The Opium Pillow                  That night I woke from one of those short deep opium sleeps, ten minutes
                 long, that seem a whole night's rest...

^^EOP^^


    1 
A green turtle in broth is brought to the table—
I stare at an irregular formation of rocks 
above a pond and spot, on the water's
surface, a moon. As I step back and forth, 
the moon slides from partial to full
to partial and then into emptiness; but no 
moon's in the sky, just slanting sunlight, 
leafing willows along Slender West Lake,  
parked cars outside an apartment complex
where, against a background of chirping birds 
and car horns, two women bicker. Now
it's midnight at noon; I hear an electric saw 
and the occasional sound of lumber striking
pavement. At the bottom of a teacup, 
leaves form the character individual
and, after a sip, the number eight.  
Snipped into pieces, a green turtle is returned
to the table; while everyone eats, 
strands of thrown silk tighten, tighten
in my gut. I blink, and a woodblock carver 
peels off pear shavings, stroke by stroke,
and foregrounds characters against empty space.   
    2 
Begging in a subway, a blind teen and his mother stagger through the swaying car— 
a woman lights a bundle of incense and bows at a cauldron— 
people raise their palms around the Nine-Dragon Juniper— 
who knows the mind of a watermelon vendor picking his teeth?— 
you glance up through layers of walnut leaves in a courtyard— 
biting into marinated lotus stems— 
in a drum tower, hours were measured
as water rising then spilling from one kettle into another— 
pomegranate trees flowering along a highway— 
climbing to the top of a pagoda, you look down at rebuilt city walls— 
a peacock cries— 
always the clatter of mah-jongg tiles behind a door— 
at a tower loom, a man and woman weave brocade silk— 
squashing a cigarette above a urinal, a bus driver hurries back— 
a musician strikes sticks, faster and faster— 
cars honk along a street approaching a traffic circle— 
when he lowers his fan, the actor's face has changed from black to white— 
a child squats and shits in a palace courtyard— 
yellow construction cranes pivot over the tops of high-rise apartments— 
a woman throws a shuttle with green silk through the shed— 
where are we headed, you wonder, as you pick a lychee and start to peel it—  
    3 
Lightning ignites a fire in the wilderness: in hours,
200 then 2,000 acres are aflame; when a hotshot
crew hikes in to clear lines, a windstorm
kicks up and veers the blaze back, traps them,
and their fire shelters become their body bags. 
Piñons in the hills have red and yellow needles—
in a bamboo park, a woman dribbles liquefied sugar
onto a plate, and it cools, on a stick, in the form
of a butterfly; a man in red pants stills
then moves through the Crane position.
A droplet hangs at the tip of a fern—water
spills into another kettle; you visualize
how flames engulfed them at 50 miles per hour.
In the West, wildfires scar each summer—
water beads on beer cans at a lunch counter—
you do not want to see exploding propane tanks;
you try to root in the world, but events sizzle
along razor wire, along a snapping end of a power line.   
    4 
Two fans graze on leaves in a yard—
as we go up the Pearl Tower, I gaze
through smog at freighters along the river.
A thunderstorm gathers: it rains and hails
on two hikers in the Barrancas; the arroyo
becomes a torrent, and they crouch for an hour. 
After a pelting storm, you spark into flame
and draw the wax of the world into light—
ostrich and emu eggs in a basket by the door, 
the aroma of cumin and pepper in the air. 
In my mouth, a blister forms then disappears.
At a teak table, with family and friends,
we eat Dungeness crab, but, as I break
apart shell and claws, I hear a wounded elk
shot in the bosque. Canoers ask and receive
permission to land; they beach a canoe
with a yellow cedar wreath on the bow
then catch a bus to the fairgrounds powwow.   
    5 
—Sunrise: I fill my rubber bucket with water
      and come to this patch of blue-gray sidewalk—
I've made a sponge-tipped brush at the end
      of a waist-high plastic stick; and, as I dip it,
I know water is my ink, memory my blood— 
the tips of purple bamboo arch over the park—
      I see a pitched battle at the entrance to a palace
and rooftops issuing smoke and flames—
      today, there's a white statue of a human figure,
buses and cars drive across the blank square— 
at that time, I researched carp in captivity 
      and how they might reproduce and feed
people in communes—I might have made 
      a breakthrough, but Red Guards knocked at the door—
they beat me, woke me up at all hours 
until I didn't know whether it was midnight or noon—
      I saw slaughtered pigs piled on wooden racks,
snow in the spring sunshine—the confessions
      they handed me I signed—I just wanted it
to end—then herded pigs on a farm—wait— 
a masseur is striking someone's back,
      his hands clatter like wooden blocks—
now I block the past by writing the present—
      as I write the strokes of moon, I let the brush swerve rest for a moment before I lift it 
and make the one stroke hook—ah, it's all
      in that hook—there, I levitate: no mistakes
will last, even regret is lovely—my hand
      trembles; but if I find the gaps resting places,
I cut the sinews of an ox, even as the sun 
moon waxes—the bones drop, my brush is sharp,
      sharper than steel—and though people murmur
at the evaporating characters, I smile, frown
      fidget, let go—I draw the white, not the black—  
    6 
Tea leaves in the cup spell above then below—
outside the kitchen window, a spray  
of wisteria blossoms in May sunshine.
What unfolds inside us? We sit at a tabletop 
that was once a wheel in Thailand: an iron hoop
runs along the rim. On a fireplace mantel, 
a flame flickers at the bottom of a metal cup.
As spokes to a hub, a chef cleans blowfish: 
turtles beach on white sand: a monk rakes
gravel into scalloped waves in a garden: 
moans issue from an alley where men stir
from last night's binge. If all time converges 
as light from stars, all situations reside here. 
In red-edged heat, I irrigate the peach trees; 
you bake a zucchini frittata; water buffalo
browse in a field; hail has shredded lettuces, 
and, as a farmer paces and surveys damage, 
a coyote slips across a road, under barbed wire.   
    7 
The letter A was once an inverted cow's head,
but now, as I write, it resembles feet
planted on the earth rising to a point.  Once is glimpsing the Perseid meteor shower—
and, as emotion curves space, I find
a constellation that arcs beyond the visible. 
A neighbor brings cucumbers and basil;
when you open the bag and inhale, the world
inside is fire in a night courtyard 
at summer solstice; we have limned the time here
and will miss the bamboo arcing along
the fence behind our bedroom, peonies 
leaning to earth. A mayordomo retrenches
the opening to the ditch; water runs near
the top of juniper poles that line or length— 
in the bosque, the elk carcass decomposes
into a stench of antlers and bones. Soon
ducks will nest on the pond island, and as 
a retired violinist who fed skunks left a legacy—
one she least expected—we fold this 
in our pocket and carry it wherever we go.


^^EOP^^

And what is Life?—An hour-glass on the run,
A Mist retreating from the morning sun,
    A busy, bustling, still repeated dream;
Its length?—A minute's pause, a moment's thought;
    And happiness?—A bubble on the stream,
That in the act of seizing shrinks to nought. 
What are vain Hopes?—The puffing gale of morn,
    That of its charms divests the dewy lawn,
And robs each flow'ret of its gem,—and dies;
    A cobweb hiding disappointment's thorn,
Which stings more keenly through the thin disguise. 
And thou, O Trouble?—nothing can suppose,
(And sure the power of wisdom only knows,)
    What need requireth thee:
So free and liberal as thy bounty flows,
    Some necessary cause must surely be:
But disappointments, pains, and every woe
    Devoted wretches feel,
The universal plagues of life below,
    Are mysteries still 'neath Fate's unbroken seal. 
And what is Death? is still the cause unfound?
That dark, mysterious name of horrid sound?—
    A long and lingering sleep, the weary crave.
And Peace? where can its happiness abound?—
    No where at all, save heaven, and the grave. 
Then what is Life?—When stripp'd of its disguise,
    A thing to be desir'd it cannot be;
Since every thing that meets our foolish eyes
    Gives proof sufficient of its vanity.
'Tis but a trial all must undergo;
    To teach unthankful mortals how to prize
That happiness vain man's denied to know,
    Until he's call'd to claim it in the skies.


^^EOP^^




Madonna del Parto, ca. 1460, Piero della Francesca



Are the drapes drawn open or being closed?
Each of the heavy, velvet wings is clasped
in the hands of a little angel, a little man really,
in the shades of plum and mint green that frame 
the birthing tent's opening for a girl
who retreats into or emerges from the dark.
It isn't clear: the perspective is such
that if I cover the painting's 
top half with a hand, Mary steps forward;
if I cover the lower, she shrinks back,
her blue bodice split at the bulging seams
to show the pear-white cut of her linen shift,
the great weight of the child she is about to bear
and later bury. And even if I didn't believe
the child would rise again, I would believe the artist
had seen such fear paint a girl's face
when the eldest women in the village
were called for help, and fresh straw brought in
if there wasn't a bed, and hot water, and rose oil to rub
over the hips, and vinegar and sugar water
to drink, and hog's gut and a thick needle
to sew her up with later. Even if I did not believe
in Mary's joy, I would believe in her pain, the quick flick
of her thoughts turning to the sister, or the cousin, 
or to her own mother who'd died giving birth,
the baby, too, not making it, for the birth
was in winter: ice so clogged the village's 
deep ruts that the midwife's cart slipped
into the soak dike, splitting the wood wheel
in two, and by the time the woman could walk 
the steep hill up to the villa, the mother had torn,
and in the rush to save her, no one worked
quick enough to cut the cord wrapped
around the baby's throat. Or the baby came out
strong and fine, but died two years later
when it stumbled into a fire, or was bitten by a rat
and sickened and starved, or caught the fever 
that spread through the town when all the animals
were stabled inside the houses for winter. 
So many people died, so many people
were supposed to die, it's hard to conceive
of how the mothers survived their grief,
and how they named their next, living baby
after the dead one because the name, at least, 
was good. It's hard to know whether I should read
the deepest grief or resignation or both in the line 
from Mary Shelley's 1818 notebook, the year 
her daughter, Clara, died, two weeks
after Mary had given birth to her. Woke this morning.
Found my baby dead, 

^^EOP^^

Small flames afloat in blue duskfall, beneath trees
anonymous and hooded, the solemn trees—by ones
and twos and threes we go down to the water's level edge
with our candles cupped and melted into little pie-tins
to set our newest loss free. Everyone is here. 
Everyone is wholly quiet in the river's hush and appropriate dark.
The tenuous fires slip from our palms and seem to settle
in the stilling water, but then float, ever so slowly,
in a loose string like a necklace's pearls spilled,
down the river barely as wide as a dusty road. 
No one is singing, and no one leaves—we stand back
beneath the grieving trees on both banks, bowed but watching,
as our tiny boats pass like a long history of moons
reflected, or like notes in an elder's hymn, or like us,
death after death, around the far, awakening bend.


^^EOP^^

So after M died, she turned
to the dog. His copper eyes, the sinewy
haunch muscles. The way he perched
by the door of M's study as if
sensing the body he missed
behind it. Something she would not
let herself feel, dry-eyed
at the funeral, refusing to gather
up the pants that still hung in his closet
beneath which the dog slept, breathing in
M's last particles until,
out of some extravagant kindness
or pity, she gave the dog
one of his sweaters. She watched
as the dog circled and pawed at it, tearing
at the tissuey material in his attempts
to fall asleep. Impossible
not to love such need

^^EOP^^




after Susan Stewart



No one ever died for a bite
of one, or came back from the dead
for a single taste: the cool flesh
cellular or stony, white 
as the belly of the winter hare
or a doe's scut, flicking,
before she mates. Even an unripe one 
is delicious, its crisp bite cleaner
almost than water and its many names
just as inviting: Bartlett and Comice,  
Anjou, Nashi, Concorde
and Seckel, the pomegranate-skinned
Starkrimson, even the medieval  
Bosc, which looks like it dropped
from an oil painting. It is not a sin
to eat one, though you may think 
of a woman's body as you do it,
the bell-shaped swell of it
rich in your hand, and for this reason 
it was sacred to Venus, Juno, all women
celebrated or dismissed 
in its shape, that mealy sweetness
tunneling from its center, a gold  
that sinks back into itself with age. 
To ripen a pear, wrap it in paper, 
lay it in cloth by an open window 
or slip a rotten one beside it
on a metal dish: dying cells call always
to the fresh ones, the body's  
siren song that, having heard 
it once, we can't stop singing.
This is not the fruit 
that will send you to hell
nor keep you there;
it will not give you knowledge, 
childbirth, power, or love;
you won't know more pain
for having eaten one, or choke
on a bite to fall asleep 
under glass. It has no use
for archer or hero, though
anything you desire from an apple 
you can do with the pear, like a dark sister
with whom you might live out
your secret desires. Cook it 
in wine, mull it with spices, roast it
with honey and cloves. Time sweetens
and we taste it, so gather the fruit 
weeks before ripeness,
let summer and winter both
simmer inside, for it is  
a fall fruit whose name in China
means separation, though only the fearful
won't eat one with those they love. 
To grow a tree from seed,
you'll need a garden
and a grafting quince, bees, a ladder,  
shears, a jug; you'll need water
and patience, sun and mud,
a reverence for the elders 
who told no true stories
of this fruit's origin,
wanting to give us the freedom
of one thing that's pleasure alone.  
Cool and sweet, cellular and stony,
this is the fruit I'll never die for, 
nor come back from the dead 
for a single taste. 
The juice of the pear
shines on my cheeks. 
There's no curse in it. I'll eat
what I like and throw the rest
to the grasses. The seeds 
will find whatever soils they were meant for.


^^EOP^^

From the porch at dusk I watched
a kingfisher wild in flight
he could only have made for joy. 
He came down the river, splashing
against the water’s dimming face
like a skipped rock, passing 
on down out of sight. And still
I could hear the splashes
farther and farther away 
as it grew darker. He came back
the same way, dusky as his shadow,
sudden beyond the willows. 
The splashes went on out of hearing.
It was dark then. Somewhere
the night had accommodated him 
—at the place he was headed for
or where, led by his delight,
he came.


^^EOP^^

At first we all
went down to the lake
to hold hands,
all the multicolored 
signs said
with love
we will resist,
over my head
I lifted my son
so he could see
what people
look like
when they hear
the song Imagine,
a few weeks later
again people stood
at the water,
this time at night
holding flashlights
to say to fire
you came 
without permission
and took our young
gentle soldiers
for art
so we will show
even with our old
technology
we can see
each other
without you,
others booed 
the mayor which was
my friend said understandable,
I don't know 
what is anymore,
everyone understands
in a different
contradictory way
the so far purely 
abstract
catastrophe
so many millions
of choices
brought us,
not too far
from the water
I sat on the couch
below the sound 
of blades
drinking amber
numbing fluid
my thoughts
chopping the air
feeling not
what is the word
to be a father equipped,
mine never told me
where to hide
a brick of gold,
for a long time
I have known
no voices 
will come at last
to tell us how
to stop pretending
we don't know 
if it is not 
safe for some
it is not
for anyone. 


^^EOP^^

It was midday before we noticed it was morning.
The boy cousins brought us a tray—soup and cheese,
warm soda, and a soft cloth and candy for her fever.
They wouldn't come in, the tray weighing between them.
They stood like woodwork inside the door frame. 
By afternoon the old procession—silence at the lip
of a dozen night travelers tired and grieving, one
by one, or pairs floating to the bed and back
with a touching of hands like humming,
and the one we gathered for slipping farther 
for all the good we could do. She lay in her shadow.
She looked to no one. Her daylilies bobbed wide
open out in the wild, blue sun and the same bee
kept nosing her window to reach them.
Dusk: even the boys were back watching it try.


^^EOP^^

A rabbit has stopped on the gravel driveway: 
           imbibing the silence,
           you stare at spruce needles: 
                                          there's no sound of a leaf blower, 
                                          no sign of a black bear; 
a few weeks ago, a buck scraped his rack
           against an aspen trunk;
           a carpenter scribed a plank along a curved stone wall. 
                        You only spot the rabbit's ears and tail: 
when it moves, you locate it against speckled gravel,
but when it stops, it blends in again; 
           the world of being is like this gravel: 
                        you think you own a car, a house,
                        this blue-zigzagged shirt, but you just borrow these things.  
Yesterday, you constructed an aqueduct of dreams
                        and stood at Gibraltar,
                                                but you possess nothing. 
Snow melts into a pool of clear water;
     and, in this stillness, 
                        starlight behind daylight wherever you gaze. 


^^EOP^^

No matter what the grief, its weight,
we are obliged to carry it.
We rise and gather momentum, the dull strength
that pushes us through crowds.
And then the young boy gives me directions
so avidly. A woman holds the glass door open,
waiting patiently for my empty body to pass through.
All day it continues, each kindness
reaching toward another—a stranger
singing to no one as I pass on the path, trees
offering their blossoms, a child
who lifts his almond eyes and smiles.
Somehow they always find me, seem even
to be waiting, determined to keep me
from myself, from the thing that calls to me
as it must have once called to them—
this temptation to step off the edge
and fall weightless, away from the world.


^^EOP^^

I was born the autumn
after a wave of flowers
swept the land 
too late to appear in even
one poem by Frank O'Hara
so my poems do not delight me 
which until recently 
I didn't even realize
was an option 
I always just hoped
at best they could be
good-natured rebellious 
first sons who wander
intently curious but 
not too brilliant 
as if Wordsworth scrubbed
of self-regard got drunk
on a Greek island 
with L. Cohen and Marianne
then they all went to see
Emily putting on 
a black dress to go out 
and meet her dangerous love
under an arbor of stars 
crying blood and nameless
birds with black eyes
that attack everyone 
so she could not hang out
but gave them the other dress
I have always been afraid 
to wear and some drugs too
and they took them and went
to a library and cried 
then the intercom informs
the kids there is no threat
after all and rising up 
from behind their desks
they reach out
with strange smiles 
dear committee of the future
I could tell you I am almost 
sure you will find my poems 
unacceptable because
they appropriate the common
human experiences of fear 
and desire taking little
sips from the nest
dumping bits of blue 
into the river which until
my poems was more
than cerulean enough 
but the truth is
I want you and everyone 
to like them 
so I sit up here born
too early and late
staring at these trees 
their black leaves turning 
slowly dull green
in the morning light of tasks 
ashamed I actually open 
my mouth to ask
mundane diurnal silence 
to help me forget 
whatever I know
so I can write 
what I am sure
people will mostly
not read or tell me 
no matter how clearly 
I speak they sorrowfully 
don't understand 
then I switch on the hum
of my old device to listen
to the sons of no one 
sing and remember
yes because I belong 
to the first generation  
that named itself
my great ambition has
always been to be 
a loser with pointless integrity
that just serves the man
and with the fatal certainty 
of the most useless
letter in the alphabet I know
to say who cares we've got 
Kim Gordon and Deal
and these cigarettes
will just kill someone else 
and there's always a job
for people who sort of 
studied the quadrivium 
and at least when we are
kissing their asses 
we know it's wrong so 
lovingly not forgiving
ourselves for hating ourselves
is the only solution


^^EOP^^

I commit to vote because
I'm pretty sure I grab
whatever I need from the world
and place it in my mind
which is getting incrementally
like the commons
undeniably more toxic and sad
yes I too walk around
considering my intractable problems
complaining it's too late
for more sonatas
everything is already too beautiful
music and anger won't save us
yet I commit to talking
earnestly with Sarah
about the school board
it will be night and we will be sitting
shoulder to shoulder 
at the old table we love
each holding a pencil
like grade school children left alone at last
then in the morning
before our son wakes
I commit to holding
this tiny bit of quicksilver
(quick in the sense of living
in its very molecular nature
it wants to usefully combine with yours)
in my palm and to walking
up to the blue mailbox
I pass most mornings
in that familiar silence
under those nameless little trees
when all things that surround me wait


^^EOP^^

Like all strangers who temporarily
find themselves moving in the same direction
we look out the window
without really seeing or down at our phones
trying to catch the dying signal
then the famous lonesome whistle
so many singers have sung about
blows and our bodies shudder
soon we pick up speed
and pass the abandoned factories
there has lately been so much conversation about
through broken windows they stare 
asking us to decide
but we fall asleep next to each other
riding into the tunnel
sharing without knowing the same dream
in it we are carrying something
an empty casket somehow so heavy
only together can we carry it
over a bridge in the snow
emerging suddenly into the light
we wake and open our laptops
or a book about murder
or a glossy magazine
though we are mostly awake
part of us still goes on solving 
problems so great they cannot be named
even once we have reached our destination
and disembark into whatever weather
for a long time there is a compartment
within us filled with analog silence
inside us the dream goes on and on


^^EOP^^

Across the deep eternal sky
a thousand changing shapes flit by, 
i.e. clouds, or so I have always called them.
But how is it I have never 
among my incessant coffee refills
and insectivorous travels 
among the cubicles in search
of individual wrapped chocolates 
and conversations asked you
if you in my heart detect 
several as I do in yours
of the adorable qualities  
of broken folding chairs?
Or why we build desired outcomes 
on the spots where old ones stood?
I call this meeting to order: 
item one let's go to lunch and order
wild boar. Let's have an old-world chat 
about the original action items.
O fuck the fluting on the donuts! 
I feel totally Anglo Saxon!
I want for once in my life to whip 
around an actual halberd gleaming
in the sun and win 
a great victory versus the air!
Here is my project update: 
the file cabinet is watching
over the particles 
safely asleep in a beam,
and nothing into our building 
has at last so gently crashed
leaving us bored and fortunate. 
I move our faces
around this highly polished table 
to each other look
almost familiar 
so let us slip into the light
blue sleeve this afternoon 
so gracefully carries
the next few hours in 
and together forget
what our great task is. 


^^EOP^^

I'm walking in sight of the Río Nambé— 
salt cedar rises through silt in an irrigation ditch— 
the snowpack in the Sangre de Cristos has already dwindled before spring— 
at least no fires erupt in the conifers above Los Alamos— 
the plutonium waste has been hauled to an underground site— 
a man who built plutonium triggers breeds horses now— 
no one could anticipate this distance from Monticello— 
Jefferson despised newspapers, but no one thing takes us out of ourselves— 
during the Cultural Revolution, a boy saw his mother shot by a firing squad— 
a woman detonates when a spam text triggers bombs strapped to her body— 
when I come to an upright circular steel lid, I step out of the ditch— 
I step out of the ditch but step deeper into myself— 
I arrive at a space that no longer needs autumn or spring— 
I find ginseng where there is no ginseng my talisman of desire— 
though you are visiting Paris, you are here at my fingertips— 
though I step back into the ditch, no whitening cloud dispels this world's mystery— 
the ditch ran before the year of the Louisiana Purchase— 
I'm walking on silt, glimpsing horses in the field— 
fielding the shapes of our bodies in white sand— 
though parallel lines touch in the infinite, the infinite is here—


^^EOP^^

Before the burglar
raped my grandmother 
he pushed her down
a flight of stairs.  
Ankle turned, hip unhitched.
There was no getting up, no 
hope for flight. She told me that while he
was on top of her, she stared up 
at the clock from the kitchen floor. 
Watched each minute crawl by 
like a half-smashed bug, 
imagining the school bus 
emptying her sons into the yard.
Thought of the sandwiches 
 
she had no time to make. 
As the man pulled his pants up, 
she noticed the tattoo on his
forearm. MOTHER framed 
by a heart. My sons will be home
soon,

^^EOP^^

When I was nineteen
I stole a gun. The drug dealer
next door, blitzed out
of her skull, didn't 
see me
pull it from her
kitchen cupboard. 
As the California sun
sank below the
foothills, I haunted
the neighborhood,
screaming your
doomed name. 
I was ready.
A death-wish Romeo
beneath your bedroom 
window. Split once
a neighbor threatened
to call the cops.  
I never told you this story. 
Not because I regret 
what I did, was prepared
to do—those forty-five
minutes of havoc, hunting
down your head.  
Back then, I wasn't shit. 
Just electrified violence.
All fists, piss & safety pins, 
an unwed teenage mother
with no address. 
You had parents. Freckles. 
A three-story house. I'd listen
to you spit your angsty
fiction while I slept in parks 
& ate from garbage cans.  
When I learned you were
coveting the man I loved,
I felt my insides darken,
cursed your well-fed
royalty disguised as grit. 
Got tired of the forgery,
wanted all the black-eyed 
wealth to myself:
BANG, you're dead.  
Wish I could say I've put
those days behind me,
that I never fall into
the steel-weight daydream
of a gun's hard lesson. 
1995—half my life ago—still,
every time you call
to bitch about your latest
ex-soulmate or DUI,
one more kid taken
from you by the state 
I want to tell you
about the only night
you survived.
When something
said fall asleep 
& you did. 
Crashed hard
with a starving bitch
& pistol at the ready,
birds still singing
in the half daylight. 
I'll say it here, right now, 
one more time, with feeling:
it was the only moment
in this wretched life
a god was on my side. 


^^EOP^^

I have learned to need the body
I spent years trying to rid the world of 
have learned to cherish its pale rebel hymn
warped by ghost heat, carried, carried 
by all my loyal dead. I have learned
to crawl backward into the wildnerness 
to ask, to eat, to steep in your gentleness. 
Let this be where I permit forgiveness 
to know your name, to leave our cruelest years
where & how we need them most— 
                                                       behind & unlit. 


^^EOP^^

Reed, who’s got one strike left   before he gets
   life, tells me afterbirth is what the cougars are after.
“Lambing season,” he says, “plus, placenta’s a delicacy
         to a cat.” I try to explain how 
intent they were, how their intentions appeared
        to involve me, but Reed won’t hear
a word. My    mother takes me at my word & won’t
  let me leave the house. So I learn to regret
     my story, sit indoors       for weeks, watching 
for hunters, only to find what’s hunted: the gray
        diggers interring green
walnuts at the feet of the tree    they fell from. Now
all I can think of is blood, how we first feed
                                              on it without knowing 
we feed on it or that it possesses   a plan all its own. Every girl
                 I know has started, nicknamed it
Florence or Flo or the Red Badge   of Courage. It’ll be years
   for me. When a doctor finally says      I’ve fallen so far
                                 off the growth chart he’s worried 
I won’t find my way back,     I’m fourteen
                           & can still go out shirtless
without causing a stir. “Eat more butter,” he says, but I don’t
        yet believe      what I eat will help me hate 
        my body any less. Reed doesn’t hate
his kids. He loves them      too much is the story. People tell me
        to avoid him, but I don’t. His flock grazes
the fields I drag      my shadow over & I    have nothing
    better to do than gaze at the perpetual       feeding, mumbling
Exodus under my breath,    some passage      about bearing 
                            false witness. & somehow I think I know
       by now that knowing involves the senses turning a touch
licentious. My parents     haven’t known each other in years
        & no one wants    to know me either. A tree falls
                 in the woods. Consensus leaves    us cold, etc.  Green Eggs and Ham,       I really dislike that kid’s book, with all
    its I-would-nots & could-nots on boats & in woods,
all its reds & its greens inter-         mingled, muck of inks
      you should never swallow. A doctor hands me 
           a copy, says, “eat up” & pulls a polyester curtain
between us. I’m three & can’t yet read
                 any word on my own    but “God.” He reaches
his hand, gloved         green, inside my mother & says,
   “what about this weather we are
                                 having?” Just between us, 
I warn the story’s      star not to touch
                  its plate, but in the end it’ll do
   what the good Dr.’s scripted. I throw
                               the book. My mother stops singing
beneath a stream of steaming
                    water, a red-black mass dehiscing
at her feet. “Find    your father,” 
she commands, so I run
                      through yellow meadows, yelling
   his name, his name, which the hills give back
to me, though he can’t        hear them from the other side
                           of this state. On the other 
    side of this state, my mother
                          finds her first horse. It is 1980, decade
of the single-wide & no-children-in-the-
                          picture. Just a mare called Chianti
        who dies one year
before I’m born. Her heart, size of a child’s    globe, fails 
while foaling, something involving      a length of decayed
               intestine & great        pain. My parents take
great pains to save        her, but the foal will lose
                        her         the instant             the air 
enters his chest. In Egyptian hieroglyphs, “I” can be rendered
     as a single reed & “meadow” as a row of three
reeds bound by a flatline   of horizon. I know little,
                              even now, though enough
             to say my name & know it isn’t 
mine, but just       an inadvertent testament
      to my mother’s love of horses & “good
breeding.” In an ancient Seventeen
               Magazine

^^EOP^^

All my friends are finding new beliefs.
This one converts to Catholicism and this one to trees.
In a highly literary and hitherto religiously-indifferent Jew
God whomps on like a genetic generator.
Paleo, Keto, Zone, South Beach, Bourbon.
Exercise regimens so extreme she merges with machine.
One man marries a woman twenty years younger
and twice in one brunch uses the word verdant;
another’s brick-fisted belligerence gentles
into dementia, and one, after a decade of finical feints and teases
like a sandpiper at the edge of the sea,
decides to die.
Priesthoods and beasthoods, sombers and glees,
high-styled renunciations and avocations of dirt,
sobrieties, satieties, pilgrimages to the very bowels of  being ...
All my friends are finding new beliefs
and I am finding it harder and harder to keep track
of the new gods and the new loves,
and the old gods and the old loves,
and the days have daggers, and the mirrors motives,
and the planet’s turning faster and faster in the blackness,
and my nights, and my doubts, and my friends,
my beautiful, credible friends.


^^EOP^^

                                             I feel you
                                   judging me for
                      becoming agoraphobic
                      in someone else’s house
    I forget how I learned to stroll through
     grocery stores as though there is no crisis
my elbow cannot touch the middle of my back
  my fingers though have found every part of me
                    soon no migration of  wild animals will
                         be unknown to humans we will chart
                         film record publish archive everything
                              it gives us something to do while we
                                annihilate beauty poets shoveling
                               a quarry that is really an ongoing
                                        crime scene investigation
                                     a study in vomit imitating
                                  vast chronicles of the face
                            whatever world we can hold
                                we will never agree our
                                  neglect was worth it
                                 whatever amount of
                              crazy we can imagine
                              coming at us double it
                                     I found the perfect
                                  listening chair nothing
                                        but listeners who sit
                                          I am sitting in it now
                                           listening to my friend
                                                   the photographer
                                                   whose self-portrait
                                                           I find reflected
                                                                       in eyes
                                                                        of  her
                                                                       every
                                                                     photo


^^EOP^^

bird

I was making my way through the grounds of a stately home which had been turned into a public garden. I seemed to be being followed at a distance by a huge bird, like a heron, but pink, kind of coral-colored. I felt like it was  mimicking me. I hurried on to try to get away from it and saw a door into a small hut. I went inside thinking I would hide in there until the bird had gone away. The hut had windows at head height so I was able to look out and observe the bird’s progress. I saw it approach another girl, who was with a man, probably her boyfriend. They were crouching down to look into some kind of display case. The girl was dancing, unaware of the bird, which was now right next to her. It started moving in time with her body, but slowly, as if insulting her. Then it moved off in my direction. I ducked down below the window. There was a small bolt on the inside of the door but it looked weak. I worried that the bird would hear me locking it, so I held the door shut with my hand. When I heard breathing I knew the bird was right outside. The breathing got louder. The bird was taking its time to leave. I don’t know how it got in. Its claws were like the claws of a giant insect, pink and reaching. There was one inside me. Deep. I was screaming. It was a very beautiful bird.

therapy

There were only two men in the therapy workshop. One was a young man from another country, whose means and modes of self-expression troubled the rest of the group, but we could not be sure to what extent this sense of trouble was prejudicial and based on our poor understanding of cultural mores which in this young man’s country of origin were considered perfectly standard. He was always drawing up overflowing buckets from his deep wells of sadness and then dropping them back down again almost before anyone had got a glimpse of them. At least, that was our guess, because he generally maintained a deep, impermeable silence which had the queasy atmosphere of a lake that was so still as to appear to be a solid, or perhaps a gel, something  sealed with a film, a film which—one had the impression—had formed through the substance’s fear of contamination through exposure to air.

fish tank

I watched a woman in a fish tank shitting directly into a tortoise’s mouth. It was meant to be some kind of spectacle—she was invited to do it and was very happy to, and the tortoise was happy to eat.
 


^^EOP^^

The man across the table waiting
for my take is not unkind. In fact,
his hair stands up sweetly like a boy’s 
as he offers me some praise I must
deflect. A little jewel lobbed my way
and throwing beams from all its facets, 
the kudo rides the charge of light
between our sturdy roles. Of course, I want
to catch it, enjoy the way it cools 
the palm and will later weight
the paper on my desk, but even
as it lofts my open ego, I’m sure 
others are more worthy, or worse,
that if I take it I’ll be jinxed
and never see its like again. Maybe 
it’s just midwestern diffidence
that leaps to intercept the gem
and save it for the velvet drawer. 
All this action happens over plates
of greens with tangled stems,
seeds and spices that tease 
and sting the troubled tongue,
so when I down it all and open
for response, the blurt 
who lives somewhere deep
in what might be raw gut
or lizard brain, sneaks up, 
looks around with those
comic mobile eyes, and speaks,
oh God, that thing crouched 
inside. I know there are those
to whom this ordinary shame
never comes, but mine’s alive 
even in the kindest company.
It clicks its claws and likes to bare
ferocious little teeth, but it’s not, 
like a cat, immune to what you think.
Sometimes it hangs around all night
when the encounter’s long forgotten 
by the man across the table. The blurt
assigned to him a power and feeds
it in the dark with oily possibilities 
that agitate toward dream.
Even when the worst has already
passed, and I’m no one again— 
like a child, but without
a future’s magic wand,
the blurt knows how to hurt 
by simply sticking to its source.


^^EOP^^

Remember your neighbor who mistook a wolf for a dog?
He rescued a pup from a storm not realizing it was a whelp.
His trust in the pup was limited because of its strange eyes.
The man paddocked off his garden and locked up the pup at night. 
He rescued a pup from a storm not realizing it was a whelp.
Each morning the pup had jumped its fence and roamed.
The man paddocked off his garden and locked up the pup at night.
During the day the pup placidly lay under cobs of laburnum blossom. 
Each morning the pup had jumped its fence and roamed.
The pup had unusually long legs so the man decided to roof the paddock.
During the day the pup placidly lay under cobs of laburnum blossom.
The pup was visibly uncomfortable around all but one human. 
The pup had unusually long legs so the man decided to roof the paddock.
The pup had a straight tail and tufts of hair in its ears.
The pup was visibly uncomfortable around all but one human.
In the moonlight, it struck the man he was housing a wolf. 
The pup had a straight tail and tufts of hair in its ears.
Your neighbor’s trust in the pup was limited because of its lupine eyes.
In the moonlight, it struck the man he was housing a wolf.
Remember your neighbor who mistook a wolf for a dog?


^^EOP^^

Most things have hidden roots, why not piety, that crow’s wing.
I bought a card at the shop, mailed it to my brother.
He asked nothing of me. Did you imagine some greater riddle,
then. A spindle whorl. A spool. Dog rose in flower at the Tywi’s
edge. You may make an image if you like. The sheep do it.
Ants do it in and through their labors, their chemical mazes.
It is time, my friend said, to reckon our exhaustion, to tote it up.
That is, after all, what math is for, its foolproof schematic.
Dig deep into the eye, the saints advise. They remember time
but no longer understand it. I remember
the single crow drinking from the ancient well, that startled
as I drew near. This happened in time, its plague of roots
undermining every present motive. Here are some things
other people do inside buildings, give or take a thousand years—
is what I wrote my friend. The dedicated space
inside the chancel was very small. Whether to construct
a larger chancel was debated, and then rejected. Because,
it was argued, the dead lie sleeping there, in their natural forms.
It is easy to forgive measure: the wild garlic, the devastated
bluebells in the wood. My bruised ribs seek a shelter—
other than the body, I mean. Once, I talked in my sleep.
Now I watch workmen clear the failed plantation of everything
that resembles glass. I count, as every beast must, the flecks
of ash that fall upon my pelt. I was surprised, my teacher-
friend confessed, by how few children knew the name of that
old war. I am surprised by dog’s mercury, pink campion,
bird’s-nest fern at the path’s clean edge. You can draw a town
on any map. Imagine the people who live there, what they stow
in their gardens, their medical anomalies, their sports teams.
Just the same we are never very far from an altar, here.
One can be very precise about worship, about the intensity
of the sun and other light that travels further to rest
within our cells, to mimic rest. The family arguing in Welsh
is not part of the permanent display, the docent clarified.
Remember the children’s inflatable birthday pavilion
stripped of its gaudy hexachords. Perceptible matter goes a long
way toward explaining the universe, but never far enough.
That is why mammals engage in breath, ceramics, politics.
We are all guests at the Festival of the Senses:
some of us blindfolded, some of us the dispensers of blindfolds.
No one comes here to the lichen throne (which seats four)
except the aging groundsmen with their scythes.
Their tattoos remind them of other, distant loyalties, past loves.
As do mine, but mine are all, in the conventional sense, scars.


^^EOP^^

    A jaguar sat in a tree. It was midsummer. The sun was shining fiercely. The jaguar was a golden color with plenty of brown spots. Then the ghost of Emiliano Zapata walked by. He was in full uniform, with rifle and sword, but in black-and-white. He looked like a cloud.
    The jaguar leapt from the tree and walked up to Zapata’s ghost. The jaguar  genuflected in General Zapata’s direction. Zapata pulled out his sword and knighted the jaguar. “From this day forward, this noble jaguar will be called Cuauhtémoc Xochipilli,” he said. The sun faded and set. It began to rain.


^^EOP^^

God wears glow-in-the-dark acrylic nails, her favorite color is obsidian black,
             she’s lactose intolerant & is tired of femme exploitation. 
God buys gold hoop earrings at Dollar Tree & ain’t afraid to wear eyelash extensions
             for two weeks straight even if the package reads “one-time use only.” 
God says “hi” to everyone the moment she boards public transit & after she’s seated,
             she speaks loudly into her phone while munching on hot Cheetos. 
God carries a plastic bag with quarters, pennies & her passport cuz she knows
             most of her followers ain’t shit & removal proceedings are always already a possibility. 
God orders $1 fries, $1 cheeseburgers & $1 drinks at fast-food restaurants cuz
             a gurl needs to live & sometimes thriving looks like surviving. 
God checks her eyebrows on her phone every two hours & licks her index finger
             to realign each hair particle before meeting up with da girls. 
God walks into Metro PCS every three days for water damage services cuz she’s too often
             weeping onto her Android—M, Tu, W, Th, F, Sa, & Sun—the deaths of Black girls. 
God has hired a personal stylist cuz she don’t know no more how to be simultaneously ready
             for a funeral, court hearing, birthday celebration, anniversary dinner & the club. 
God has a Twitter account with 36 followers & it’s aiiight cuz she follows 794K folk & they
             all Black femmes & the 36 that follow her hold her so she can hold the rest of the world.


^^EOP^^

That’s enough memories, thank you, I’m stuffed.
I’ll need a memory vomitorium if this goes on.
How much attention can one man have?
Which reminds me: once I let the gas go on flowing
after my car was full and watched it spill its smell
(and potential hell) all over the ground around me.
I had to pay for that, and in currency quite other than attention.
I’ve had my fill of truth, too, come to think of it.
It’s all smeary in me, I’m like a waterlogged Bible:
enough with the aborted prophecies and garbled laws,
ancient texts holey as a teen’s jeans, begone begats!
Live long enough, and you can’t tell what’s resignation, what resolve.
That’s the bad news. The good news? You don’t give a shit.
My life. It’s like a library that closes for a long, long time
—a lifetime, some of  the disgrunts mutter—
and when it opens opens only to an improved confusion:
theology where poetry should be, psychology crammed with math.
And I’m all the regulars searching for their sections
and I’m the detonated disciplines too.
But most of all I’m the squat, smocked, bingo-winged woman
growing more granitic and less placable by the hour
as citizen after citizen blurts some version of
“What the hell!” or “I thought you’d all died!”
and the little stamp she stamps on the flyleaf
to tell you when your next generic mystery is due
that thing goes stamp right on my very soul.
Which is one more thing I’m done with, by the way,
the whole concept of soul. Even bees know what zero is,
scientists have learned, which means bees know my soul.
I’m done, I tell you, I’m due, I’m Oblivion’s datebook.
I’m a sunburned earthworm, a mongoose’s milk tooth,
a pleasure tariff, yesterday’s headcheese, spiritual gristle.
I’m the Apocalypse’s popsicle. I’m a licked Christian.


^^EOP^^

You remember the mermaid makes a deal,
her tongue evicted from her throat,
and moving is a knife-cut with every step.
This is what escape from water means.
Dear Colleagues, you write, for weeks
I’ve been typing this letter in the bright
kingdom of my imagination. Your body
is a ship of pain. Pleasure is when you climb
the rocks and watch the moonlight
touching everywhere you want to go,
a silver world called faraway. Dear Colleagues,
you write, this place is a few sentences
contained by the cursor’s rippling barrier—
what happened here is only beaks
and brackets, the serif’s liquid stroke.
The old story has witches, a prince in love
with the surging silence of women,
a knife that turns the water red. You write,
Dear Colleagues, now these years are filed
in the infinite oceans of bureaucracy.
Everything bleaches or fades. In other words,
goodbye. Sometimes it’s possible to walk,
although you’ve been told inside the oyster
shell of your heart there is no soul.
Creatures like you must end as a spray of salt,
green droplets floating breathless in the air.


^^EOP^^

Head rush on the bus, mind-boggle.
I pray for hemoglobin,
I—a moth,
lying on my mouth,
bleeding, like a motherfucker.
On (top of) and offensive in other words. 
Here you are, ahead of all,
the crow, craning, you glisten,
and drag, an infinite next,
farther ahead, you see and drag
farther, into a stairwell, a ladder, 
a lead in, to where,
a stairway, up to pfft down the drain,
from story to story,
upward and downward and heartward, 
here, you see,
stands my balcony,
waiting while beckoning to
black stones. 
The city a silent upright-piano wing.
You see the ravens pull together.
The eyeblink-moment’s armada.
You see the eyes tracking. 
Light, like the golden giraffe
of good fortune. Slight
in the anthem of your day, 
and how terrifying: 
head rush, mind-boggle
on the bus, I—lightheaded,
lingo, vertigo.
Translated from the German


^^EOP^^

1

Letting the groove be what it is. Letting the sounds go where they need to go. Committing to repetition, committing to texture. Following mind and ear rather than form. Trusting self-oscillation. Letting mind manifest itself. Beautiful and filthy, from attenuated to expansive. Letting the drone open the feeling. Panning slowly over the landscape. Trusting honesty. Moving toward feeling.

2

The lyre is very old. From a time, too long ago to remember, when things were all one thing. The lyre and the voice doubling. The cycles repeating, breathing. But not tiring. The buzzy, rich sound. The wisdom of plant life emerging from the universe and meeting, eventually, a strange thought of kindness. A calm, weird peace in your heart whispering something to you that you had forgotten.

3

A kind of ensemble felicity following solidarity. Fuzz squishes the multiple concepts to a scale where they can interact differently. They recombine into a possible larger good hard to guess at. Rather than compete the usual way. You don’t let the fear direct you, but you’re not unkind to it. The helpful flute riff. The blurry moments. The gigantism of open-mindedness. Feeling what kind of person you want to be, and letting that guide you. A kind of strength that comes from unfolding layers. Flammable things that never burn. You travel by staying in one place.

4

Horizons have their own thoughts. There is the patience of evolution, and there is the practice of waiting for someone you love to return. Suddenly the sounds around you are vivid and alive, and the subway escalator squeak relates an engrossing tale with a green subterranean light coming through the gaps.

5

There is a fire boiling the tea and there is a moment that will happen just this once. Then another line of sight. There is a mountain that slows down motion by changing its perspective and a rain that disappears and returns. It is your doctor who has passed away and you become a peculiar kind of  health. The beauty of not getting in others’ way repeating in cascades of novelty, so you don’t overstay your welcome. Move toward it and it expands, move away and it splashes humorously through the surface into the sunlight.


^^EOP^^

Chased by Chinese troops, the monks
blinked like owls in the sun sheen 
abandoning their burning temple
where the obdurate slumped over altars 
with bullet-hole Third Eyes oozing
gunpowder and pineal, black blood. 
With blizzards choking the high passes
they huddled in the cliff caves 
while trusting you to lead them through, 
a 600-year-old boy, 
who was coming from behind his back
and was going in the direction he faced. 
The Chinese prowled behind like wolves
as snow squalls filled your tracks. 
As weeks passed, peasants and monks
boiled their saddled bags and ate them, 
drove yaks ahead to breach the snowdrifts
and then men when the beasts perished. 
By a blue lake in a Himalayan valley
where only the yeti had ever stood upright 
you meditated on the dharma path. 
Rinpoche, I glimpsed you once  
hailing a cab on Madison Avenue. 
Where were you going?


^^EOP^^




For Kazim Ali



                                    sometimes I strain
                                         to hear one
                                             natural
                                          sound
            when gender blurs in a
         poem my world sets a
              tooth in the gear
               if god is in me
       when will I ask for
     my needs to be met
    every god is qualified
       it is not such a secret
       when I was afraid of the
            road I learned to drive
               map says name of
            your city in ocean
            line drawn to it
          towing behind
          the big party
   history of life on
      earth might be
      interesting to a
        visitor one day
 chewing parsley and
cilantro together is for
           me where forest
               meets meadow
                    in a future life
                   would we like to
                 fall in love with the
                    world as it is with
                       no recollection
                       of the beauty
                       we destroy
                             today


^^EOP^^

A good shepherd is a wonder in contrapposto, an artist
mapping the Serengeti with kingdom lines. 
A good shepherd angles a lion’s eye, traps gazelles
in dry fields, copies a cheetah’s spots one leg at a time. 
A good shepherd does not give you stones
when you ask for toast, does not ask you to work 
without a burning bush—but owns a gate, uses a gate, pulls
the weeds and leaves the wheat on an altar of choices. 
A good shepherd is a prince of peace when terror finds its full echo,
a creator in the wild where a predator, providentially, becomes prey.


^^EOP^^




nuit de l’enfer [hellnight]



I have gorged on a glorious dose of poison.—Triple blessings
on the advice that was proffered!—My guts on fire. Future shock
distorts and contorts and hurls me into the dirt. Choking and parched
I can’t call out. This hell, this eternal torment. Watch the flames
leap high. Out in a blaze of fashion. [  Je brûle comme il faut ... I am
burning in style ... and working through a verisimilitude of the now sprinkling the language changes so rapid and the syntax
so fluide we go to Style Council, baulk, a la mode, Vogue, “magic,”
le chic —]. So it goes, demon!
    Appalling glimpse of my salvation, conversion to justice [bonheur,
Delmore, bonheur! such joy such Plato in the quiver] and virtue [valor,
merit]. How do I articulate this vision? The corrosive air of  Hell is not
conducive to hymns. All those millions of sweet entities, insipid choirs
of spirits, all that nobility [“noble ambitions” per nobles ambitions which
echoes repeats refrains mirrors in the next indent of  Hell ... so should be
retained preserved as the chaos of inferno is like good order is like hanging
onto the little domestic tasks of washing and eating even when drink has
one in its grip, surely?] and courage and peace, and fuck only knows
“what else” [if we went for God Only Knows, rather than your “I know not
what else” to tackle Rimbaud’s “que sais-je” we are bringing the domestic
cat into the bushland and tolling the bell for songbirds and small reptiles
calling the feral in the cat the secular to the holy, and the condemning
is in our hands, not the cat’s paws {not claws}, surely?].
    Les nobles ambitions!
    And this still life is life still is ... well, fuck, I’m alive, still! What if
damnation is eternal! Self-destruction damns us, does it not damn it all?
We are creating hell on earth therefore we are in Hell? I offer my hand here—
join me in my selfie. Make community with damnation, makers, all. Our catechism, eh?! Damning parents who damned us and were damned
before they began to parent—drowned by the baptism. Pauvre innocent!— [Hell is a construction of the empowered to increase their power.] Hell has
nothing to do with the “heathen.”
    —Still life still alive, still! Relish damnation’s delight later, still. Quick-
smart, give me a crime to commit and I’ll fall into the unfillable pit via
Western law-making.
    Shoosh, shut your face!... Such shame, reproach, here: Satan is un-
impressed with my efforts at rage, so embarrassing, so “pas à sa place”
in the calque of salon conversation [LA- or Sydney-style? direct flights],
and the kitchen IS fucking hot.—Enough!... Amidst my plethora of
failings they despise, they pick out for special treatment my body
wash, inclination to magical thinking, toxic limericks. And over-
investing their lost childhoods they find a purity of truth in mind,
a refreshing sense of what’s just: such clarity of thought, such perfect
judgment,  je suis prêt pour la perfection ... Pride! I have psoriasis. Pity!
Lord, I tremble. It’s the thirst, the thirst that drives. It’s all childhood
it’s all the sensations of grass and rain and the lake-edge where water
laps over rocks to make pebbles, it’s the tall trees that spoke a language
we understood but lost and let them fall and said what a loss but not
knowing a way out kept doing what we were doing are doing, still,
and it’s the full moon the blue moon the blood moon the once and again— le clair de lune quand le clocher sonnait douze ... the diabolical bells sounding
the elegy over the lake the grass the sand at this hour, at this hour. Mary!
Holy Virgin!... Horror via my stupidity.
    Some honest soul out there would surely offer refuge, goodwill?... Help ...
but I have a pillow over my mouth and they can’t hear me as they are phantoms.
We think of ourselves in this plight we share. Avoid me. I stink of the world’s
burnt flesh, I am sure.
    Cascading hallucinations. This is what I am now: there is no grounds
to history, history is erasure and claims. I’ve no right to keep the facts
to myself: poets and visionaries will be jealous. [Herein a potential key
to the arts failing activism: even in the collective, some voices seek to shine,
and put in the self-defining seer’s mouth: poètes et visionnaires seraient
    jaloux

^^EOP^^

This story is a leaf that bursts out of
a branch, unfurls itself, lives for a summer,
and then dies. And it’s your face striking
me like the time of an appointment I’ve
missed when I notice it after all this time.
I fear a catastrophe that has already occurred.
The communication always went wrong.
Like we were under a bad star. Bad?
The star was festering. Coldness around
all of my love. There was a woman
who stopped me in the street to shout
in my face about the violence she’d seen
in me. Brake lights in the early mist
like so many accusing eyes. You did this. 
For a long time a man was dying,
making himself die, he couldn’t stop,
and we forgot, we did our best to forget him.
How can a person walk in a shroud
all the miles of their life. But how
can they shrug it off. We were searching
for a place of refuge for our love, but instead
the road led us to the land of the dead.

^^EOP^^




A statistician would say: of all the millions of ghost stories ever told, what percentage would have to be true for ghosts to exist? The answer is that only one story would have to be true.
—Burial



You can invest everything in someone. This one feeling chopping you up. Anyone can go into the night. I just want to be gone. I want to be unknown. There’s a storm coming. Euphoria trapped in a vial ... I was once in these mountains, the middle of nowhere. I used to get taken away. A lot of things were wrong, cold things, bad things. The weight of the decisions in you. You’d see these fires. Someone upset on the other side of the world. It’s like a Ouija board, it’s ... the devil’s face in their eyes, that feeling like a ghost touched you, like finding a body in a lift shaft on the other side of the night, even if you fight to see it, you’ll never see anything. I love rain, safe haven. Deserts, forests, people. I just want to be a symbol you alone could hear. Someone in your head. Everyone knows those sorts of feelings. When there’s nowhere to go, tearing through an empty building, the image of where you just were still on your retina. If you talk about it, it just sort of disappears


^^EOP^^




After Toni Cade Bambara, the Commodores, and Tramaine Hawkins



                    
                    & the augurs among us direct our gaze to the sky all alluvial
breaking through, breaking blue & we open our mouths to
catch the cerulean, catch the rugged blues again on our tongue, blurred & bruised
decadent deluge of dirge drenching skin, dandelions, & dirt. diviners say we dancing dizzy to the
ends of the world, dancing at the end of the world. to elsewhere. edging to
flight. let there be flight. & there flight be. we be a many-forked-tongue folk,
glossolalia-gurgling, crossing-&-translating-other-realms folk. apocalyptic glitch, we put our
hands on our hips, then put our hands in the air, hold our hands to the haints & catch their
iridescent feathers. oh haints, come true to us, come blue to us, come through to this
juke joint we call earth, this jagged jollification. we won’t jilt you. no, we
keep our dead kin with us as the dead kin have kept us the living.
listen, they can’t catch us, but they can catch these hands, these
moonfire spells to undo & redo, this fractalwinged explosion of this world, this
newness, this emergence—that isn’t actually that new at all. if we telling the truth about our
origins, this is quite old. blues old, which is bones old, which is dirt old. oh, yes we’ve got our
poems, parables, psalms, & our own palms as record that we’ve refashioned ourselves before, we’ve
questioned ourselves before. quivered with loss before. made portal of crisis & quantum-leap
rebirthed. bled & tended flesh wounds with rest & stinging medicine before because the material
without the spiritual & psychic does not a dialectic make. let’s get the rhythm of our feet, let’s get
the rhythm of our throats, holding a cosmic alchemy of tragedy & celebration that can turn this
thing upside down so that the sky becomes soil & soil becomes sky & dirt is what we seek for
salvation. verily, verily, when you get this rhythm, meet us at the crossroads. you’ll know because
you’ll hear whistling from the mulberry trees. you’ll smell them, too. & we’ll be there, perched. 
looking real xenial & otherworldly. we’ll be humming with the haints, conspiring about
going up yonder. going up yonder to be with our motherworld.
zoom zoom. we’d like to fly away. fly away to right here.
                

^^EOP^^

My womb was floating and I was on it
like the Jetsons.
Hysterical laughter
driving on a highway.
Under the bridge hysteria.
What is the womb doing now, hysteria?
And the blackbirds baked in the pie—
they not only had to die
but entertain the king. Poor things!
Like glass dipped in a barrel of oil,
and the Vesuvius of each tiny headdress.
And now I keep intruding on a conversation
I’m having with myself.
It’s irresponsible to despair.
And so I am hysterical enough for now.
Although I didn’t always know hysteria was tapping like a knife
all along the rim of my life.
I confess: I have so much practice in forgiving myself
even for hysterical gossip:
breaking into a greenhouse at night
and I can’t see what I trample.
The stalks shattered,
the pots of soil overturned,
and yet the fragrance.
Hysteria inside the never opened book.
Dear book, you with your stiff  love,
your breathless labors,
you who never gave birth to a reader.


^^EOP^^




At the Bronx Zoo



The cobras unlock their jaws into safety pins // Pick 
Open the locks of their terrariums & escape.  
The penguins throw // Student loans at women with Prada purses. 
So upset the thought // Of happiness existing anywhere seems insulting.  
The albino rhinoceros pushes // Open the gates of his captivity. 
How he dreamt of a road trip & camping in Yosemite.  
To walk in the valley & let waterfalls empty their bladders into his mouth. 
The ram rams open // The gates of his enclosure too.  
The apricot parrot // Sings the same song of struggle.  Anti-capitalism means // The rich can no longer // Control us with their laws.  
This whole fucking zoo will burst like a // Molotov cocktail 
Once the parrot sets flame to the aviary &  
Then a fly flies // Onto the spine of a gazelle // A gazelle 
Who’s lighting a blunt while // Resting her hip against the ice cream stand &  
The alligators are starting to pour margaritas. 
Alligators used to be enemies with the gazelle // But now they’re together.  
They hijack the stereo & start dancing to Selena’s 
“Bidi Bidi Bom Bom.”  
The pigs // A most anxious of animals // Stay locked inside. 
The pigs are feeling their badges // Hiding in mud & waiting for the uproar
   to pass.  
Here come the wisps of tranquilizer darts // Humans pushing giraffes whose 
Necks are craned in the shape of a // McDonald’s arch &  
Now we’re at the juncture where everyone suspends // we mustn’t  fold back to corn meals from the trough.  
I’m dashing to freedom // My cheetah crop-top // Turns me into a cheetah. 
My legs are pixelated in quick motion // Catch me   If   you can!


^^EOP^^




^^EOP^^





^^EOP^^




For Laura Villareal



     A mango fell from a tree into a jaguar’s paws. It was late summer. The  jaguar devoured the fruit and ran into the ocean. The ocean was turquoise like the August sky. The jaguar swam underwater for a few minutes. It smiled beneath the waves.
    Later, clouds began to form. The sun became veiled by the clouds; it began to rain. The jaguar swam a little bit more, but then exited the water. It walked back to the jungle for twenty minutes in the rain. When the jaguar arrived on its turf, it climbed up a tree and fell asleep. The moon looked like a summer mango.
 


^^EOP^^

It’s now within
an hour of sundown of a late
November afternoon. 
It was a beautiful day,
the cold burned
down any indignation. 
What won’t degrade:
the sick and distant, or near and black,
bad-natured tides of want. 
Jean Rhys is saying
If  I could jump out of the window
one bang and I’d be out of  it. 
It isn’t done
to admit to this kind
of  need, 
but spirit needs a house,
and the brief pageant of  being
escorted through 
the grieving joy of words
set down right. The cold bores her,
oppresses her. Life 
comes to bore her. She can strip
a thing down. I want
beauty, she adds. Hear me? 
I hear you, Jean. Yours is a voice
disabused; and inside the cold of  it,
there’s a sort of festival.


^^EOP^^

Beauty on earth so blue, even the cheese flowers
a culture with no democracy...    Yesterday (for example),
I ate the same sandwich I eat every week: eggplant
roasted in red pepper aioli, a focaccia jammed full
by arugula, capers sweaty in browned butter. How
have I come to love routine? I’m thirsty and abashed.
The fabric of my childhood underwear triple axels in the wind—wow.
The whole neighborhood watches me do emails, go to therapy: she shed 
revenge for forgiveness

^^EOP^^

Sure seems like IKEA schemes to keep me furnished 
with neediness, snagged by the cuff on greed’s unvarnished 
and snarling wood grain, then bagged in a crinkly vein-blue shopping 
sack ideal for laundry schlepping, DIY kidnapping, or wrapping, 
like some budget Christo, interiors just nearly formed 
but lucky for us, forests of fiberboard pine to be farmed 
and packed, hacked and hewed to exactitude. 
Hating having, hating having not, you’re screwed 
on both ends, like the first and last fastener of the IKEA 
LACK side table—a clean, Cartesian idea 
of carpentry, its figure abstracted three degrees 
from that poor nobody, buckled on knuckles and knees, 
who posed (the fable goes) as the wheezing prototype 
for our first table: he’d know whether the bowing top 
or the lack stacked beneath matters more, whether force 
or conformity forbids you to get up off all fours. 
Sure seems like my dreams of the perfect remodel, modish 
modules clustered flush, must speak an undubbed Swedish 
and what I’ll need is unspellable, zillion-syllable, 
an endlessly assembling emptiness that’s still 
not done until you dust its lacquered black. 
(It looks spectacular when lack looks back.)


^^EOP^^




For anon after he was changed
And from his oghne kinde stranged,
A lappewincke mad he was,
And thus he hoppeth on the gras,
And on his hed ther stant upriht
A creste in tokne he was a kniht;
And yit unto this dai men seith,
A lappewincke hath lore his feith
And is the brid falseste of alle.
—John Gower, “Confessio Amantis”

Pour up, drank, head shot, drank
Sit down, drank, stand up, drank
Pass out, drank, wake up, drank
Faded, drank, faded, drank
—Kendrick Lamar, “Swimming Pools (Drank)”



i 
Otherwise known as peewit, otherwise known
as tew-it, otherwise known as Vanellus vanellus
of the family Charadriidae, otherwise known as
plain old lappy nestling itself in the till, otherwise
known as diver found in its down in the center
of some middle-of-nowhere, otherwise known as
wailer, otherwise known as waverer, as imp,
liar, as shrill green sky, as wader of the marsh,
slope, as flock, as Tereus turned and heckling
the cows, otherwise known as crown prince,
as crest, as sharp throat, as hare, otherwise known
as zigzag, soaring, dizzy, otherwise known as lost.  ii 
Otherwise known as green plover, controller
of seasons, shaman, crook, some skittish soul
turning everything it doesn’t understand into a god:
god of the long grass, god of the cuckoo bird,
god of the gloved hand, god of the drought,
god of the estate, god of the sloping roof,
god of the silver tree, god of the frost,
god of the harvest, god of the metal roar,
god of the spinning white, god of the crop,
god of the unhatched, god of the death machine.  iii 
Otherwise known as nickname, posture,
as totter, raked ground. Lapwing, some sly
false flex, otherwise felt as a leap, as
tombstone shiver, as an ever-constant wince.  iv 
Otherwise known as Peet-Peet-Peet. Plumage
primped and plucked to perfection, each bright
tail up like a rake, breast down, peck,
crown, otherwise known as hollow-man,
as bust-up, wing smacking the green fool that even
thinks to try his luck in these parts. Territory
as self-expression, otherwise known as belonging.
Peet-Peet-Peet. Otherwise known as showman,
as feathers, all dives and rolls and tumbles in time
to his spring song, swansong, his own pees-weep-
weep-weep. Otherwise known as seduction.  v 
Birds have their demons too. Otherwise
heard as diversions. From the Latin to draw
or drag apart, Peewit has his ways of flitting,
of feigning each intended cry. Drink, violence,
no sense of direction, reneging on a promise
to mate for life, insolence. Otherwise known
as a deceit, for every short, sharp peet-peet-peet
there are ten tew-its that never catch the wind.
Here’s one with a temper under his wing. Come
cat, he shrieks, come fox, come man with his
sharp tang and featherless glove, come cuckoo,
come endless sound, come parch, come hunger,
come pluck, come blunt serrated edge, come
raging monster blocking out the clouds.  vi 
To be beleaguered, Peewit, otherwise known as
migrant, otherwise known as hoopoe, otherwise
known as flicker, must first settle into humdrum.
Winter hummock, scum trail twitching on the marsh,
the hare’s breadth, exhaust cloud caught in an early
morning mist. The world keeps growing smaller.
Winnow, otherwise known as dart, otherwise caught
as a flash of white and black, pays his dues, scrapes
out the mud on a cold November Saturday, calls in
on neighbors, grubs, dozes belly-deep in the black
pond, crafts and recrafts his earlier misdeeds.  vii 
Plain speech falling prey to full moons, myth
cresting through the ice. Dappled light, small
wonder. Tew-it, otherwise known as wandering
eye, displays the subtle, iridescent greens of his
carefully-preened plumage. This can work,
he reflects. Capricious order, domesticity as
an uneasy rest. As coagulant. Unearthly cries
drown out the common redshank, curlew,
each arrogant heron lording it on some nearby
log, the dull, incessant gossip of the coots:
chew-it, chew-it, chew-it.  viii 
One cloudless morning she let out a short, sharp
Peet, but otherwise they copulate in silence. Smell
of dirt, of warm feather, of dead worm, otherwise
known as aphrodisiacs. The way the light falls just so.
Lapwing, otherwise known as Tieve’s Nacket,
as Toppyup, as winnowing wing, ful of treacherye.
But we all tell lies to get laid, says the lapwing chick.  ix 
Otherwise known as the king of tact. Circumlocution
tricks left in a trail of dark feathers. Recorded
by the peeping ornithologist as valiance. Otherwise
known as second nature. We can all dissemble. Life
and soul, one-man party, likes a drink, up for a laugh.
See, no fuss. Heard first as a weapon, lies more closely
resemble a bedtime story. A drawn-out cry for help.  x 
Fear found as flush as a clutch of speckled light,
sown spring, enough for a basket, otherwise blown
clean crest, a cap for a babe. Some precious
quartet laid open for all the world and his friend,
for some Saxon notion of betrayal. Laid on the slake,
the comfortable scratch of dead grass. Decoy, snatch,
the endless cries of alarm. Swooping as redundant
motion, birth mistaken for a harvest.  xi 
Otherwise known as failed utterance, how successful
can the lying hornpie really claim to be when faced
with the report: threatened, decline, in the red. Try
winnowing through those metaphors. Tew-it,
otherwise known as plover, known to his friends
as lappy, chooses not to bury his head in the sand,
but rather to drag his beak through the earth
in concentric circles to create a great hollow world.  xii 
Otherwise known as lore unto himself.
Lapwing. Such intellect, such grace, such
promise, that killer voice—the kind of reedy
tenor tipsy birds can’t help but fall for at a
house party, at picnics and evening jam sessions.
A clutch of partners, of habitats. Otherwise
known as a mosaic. Peet-Peet-Peet, otherwise
known as itchy feet, otherwise known as wind
change, as vagrant, as story keeper. Migration
offers endurance, novelty, otherwise known as
the hard-won maintenance of a myth, as survival.
Dissemblance as another breed of song.  xiii 
Known first as prodigal, cracked shell, survivor
of drought, summer son, otherwise held up
as miracle, as proof of the decoy nest. First
felt as Cristatus, sole endured, first and only
to leave, as bare-crowned, damp crest, as not-
yet devoid of all faith. There could be no witnesses
to marvel. Gratitude told as a readiness to flee.
Each writhing meal, the wet-nosed dog, the circling
hawk. Cramped conditions breed contempt, the cruel
weight of sibling love. Expectation, like a cuckoo
taking shelter in the crudely scratched out nest.  xiv 
Hymn for seasons. Hymn for every frame.
Hymn for births, deaths, and migrations.
Hymn for each mislaid babe, smashed egg,
snatched chick, wing trodden and crumbled
underfoot. Hymn for the cold. Hymn for
the gone. Hymn for every imagined ghost.
Hymn to ward off approaching catastrophe.
Hymn to know it. Hymn to acknowledge an
over-eagerness to feel besieged. Hymn
to recognize threat. Hymn to stay still
long enough to see it approach.  xv 
Lapwing resents the accusation that never having
to exhaust every problem, every possibility, never
having to stay, means never having to discover
the hard meaning of care, of  love not as a feeling,
but as a labor. There is labor enough, labeled
as necessity, labeled chance, in simply staying alive.  xvi 
Brother, cousin, uncle, mate. Otherwise known
as excess baggage, as dying weight. Stillness as
a series of parries, otherwise known as the long
meaning of eschew; the same pronouncements
repenting of themselves over many years. Stillness
felt as forgetting what it means to be anything
but quarry, as collateral loss. Plucked up and restless,
Hoopoe and the gang make tracks, head south,
attend to their needs, loop back. Love as contraband,
flight as freedom smuggled over invisible thread.
There is no stopping them. Otherwise heard as no one.  xvii 
With numbers in such sharp decline, with the state of
agriculture as it is, with the increased conversion of
arable land to pasture, with the use of increasingly
large machinery, with the sale of  land to developers,
with the melting of the ice caps, with rising sea levels,
with habitat destruction, with weather phenomenon,
with the drainage of wet grassland and the continued
poaching of eggs for the seasonal menus of expensive
restaurants, with the hot weather leading to the early
cutting of grass for silage rather than hay, with the
resurgence of Brideshead Revisited reenacters, with
the gradual but irrevocable estrangement from those
formally known as his flock, tew-it is forced to think
about legacy. Having no solicitor, tew-it, otherwise
known as peet-peet-peet, otherwise known as Vanellus
vanellus of the family Charadriidae, acts as his own
executor, draws up his estate: twig, feather, fluff, dried shit,
corn husk, dried grass, clod, some calcified, some not. Tew-it,
otherwise known as Lapwing, otherwise known as progenitor,
cries out the names of his surviving issue: Peet-Peet-Peet.  xviii 
Some plastic tag, some earmarked ground, some
ready-scraped nest. Lapwing’s young reserve
his gilded cage in twitcher’s paradise. Protection
order, otherwise known as clipped wing, otherwise
known as death knell.  xix 
Litany, otherwise known as requiem, otherwise
known as send off. The last of a dying breed,
up for laugh, king of the preeners, iridescent in
his own light, the mourners peck, as they flutter up
and down on a great, invisible trampoline. Loved
in absentia, lore abounds in the hairline cracks of wings.
Father, bounder, besieged. Euphemisms fall around
like feathers. Lapwing, otherwise heard as panic,
otherwise heard as parry, otherwise heard as parent,
otherwise never seen, lays low in a neighboring field,
prepared for his readmittance to the party.  xx 
Otherwise known as no reply. As silent heron,
silent hookwink, silent coot. A clear Peet-Peet
shrilled alone in a fallow field, otherwise known
as devoid. Knowledge felt as drained pond,
louring sky, slaked grass, flushed clutch, as
otherworld. Lapwing, transmuted, remains
unmoved. Vision begets sound begets touch
begets flight. Tew-it nestled in comfortable
obscurity. Hoopoe culled. Pees-wit shorn open
with the yellow crop. Knowledge as throat, as
beak, as orange foot, as sheen. Knowledge as
exacting science, as lapwing, otherwise known
as lapwing, otherwise known as lapwing, otherwise
known as lapwing, otherwise known as nothing.
 


^^EOP^^

She snaps the heads
off dried anchovies,
their eyes a black
ant hill burying my toes. 
I’m breaking doenjang
with the flat head
of a metal spoon,
stirring the boomerang
silver bodies she drops. 
Whenever she feels
like showing up, we cook
together. She opens
the tofu, smashes
the watery curd with her
foot, and soaks 
a package of dried kelp
in the trash. The brittle
pieces like unspooling
magnetic tape. 
Today, she sticks her white face
through this seaweed curtain,
red lips smearing,
whispering look 
look this is just like my hair. 

^^EOP^^

1 
Pines had been singing but fell silent having been felled, now
           droop lacking impulse as do wires, satellites hang over—
unseasonable insects too
stop their stridulating: did voluntary children leave
                     who’d rubbed sticks, unsheathing
grassblades in their fists to squeal amidst squeals of delight;
or when lipping at a double reed,
           mocked-up deer
frisking aslant of slats of light and dark, were 
taunting the gods, majestic throngs leapt despite themselves:
                     Then it was your voice
           stripped bare, Marsyas, even when
acoustically dead in the skin peeled off and calcified as
           if a shell,
shell stolen by the dissimulating birds that cracked it open,
                     so vengeful!
groaning when tender life within its spiral doubled up,
phantom squeezing by its warm wall,
           when plumped on a pillow stuffed with their journeys,
bolstered by the trees’ sighing reminiscence,
you cast round conspiring to take back their songs:
                     had their repertoire come to seem
too predictable, were the strange poking beaks heard to goad 
you as you wrestled on your back your needle robe:
else flat twang of gut strings stretched across a hollow gourd,
was that so to speak sonorous enough? Here at
           the far limit, pulsing? Where I am all ears?
                                                                              As was. 
           Slats fix up a stroboscope, deer flicker
bounding through attendant pines, dream machine heats up,
                     but the fledged will have requital
instantly in tumbling scuppered onto earth,
the dying song inaudible to one who hears his own cries only,
ear cupped to ear.
                     Come over to this part.
The lens you train is frazzling its specimen. A wall of silence
behind the panorama,
                                             tongues of fire, taunts you.
This I saw, and my seeing holds the scene in its amber varnish.
            Now. 
           His ears quite pulled was his skinful.
           His skin zoomed to his middle ear.
           He was happening on their thought-things
           He was happening on their myth-things/
                      on those sigils
           porch denote, a tended herbal plot,
           mare loitering beside a zinc trough,
           a worship’s cloud shape-shifting to perplex
           the upright set to rob him of his
           dead spectrum heart,
                      pierced with pings and probes,
           O it hurts me so, that it does not hurt,
           the lack of hurt discountenances.
                      It screws me up that as I mount
                      I go under.
           Sands of time trickle and their fragile
           cone heaps high,
                      bonding in its own cement
           happiness of objects it had made fond and
           oft engulfed, greased with blood
           keeping them in play,
           dodging in between bracts.
                      Lackaday. I take forever for my time.
           “In lofty mood I mount the reeking box,”
           the centrifuge sequence grinds,
           flicker box revs up,
                      lees consolidate,
           this heart’s plug feels impermeable.
           Feel it? Feel the thumb-rest?
                      Lights along a distant rim flicker.
           A waterspout
           smacks down from a thundercloud,
           tornadoes score papery soil,
                      crushing keepsakes in cones,
           a clay hexagon from Palmyra
           ten centuries BCE.
           He bindeth up waters in his thick clouds,
           hourglass trembles in his hands
                      for now is time pitching over,
           time inverts,
           now’s time, past time, time it must be,
           hourglass mills mace and conch,
                                 his residence
           offs from under, no iota escapes. 
Now if the secret relative, the disjointed hero turned inside out
as certainly bound to do,
           once woken to say his piece,
once mixing it
amid the crackle of aluminium cans, those canceled trains
starting forward, joining up with people in the room,
                     he must be touched, really—
           if where a finger stops he shrinks and squeals,
where the finger flutters, helplessly squalls,
thoughts not his own disseminate like needles all haphazard: 
touched he can only sing, touched he pitches out
           endless longing in a macaronic of Greek and slang,
listening for his noble voice, hearing only cries of the dying—
pick them up, the shell-like lobes
                     throb as they squeal on deck,
that slippery, sustainable deck,
                                                        such remnants
shall the creaturely world animate, their pipes sound in unity?
           Breathe a zephyr over ice floes,
           sight-read their scattering before a hushed hive. 
2 
May my transmission throw unstinted nimbus, fracture a cell
to leak its thinking-through,
                     conforming to already-strewn scores:
           those brilliant Aztec shafts,
the shattered painted dome, soon their splinters recede,
           and in their place a faint lemon-yellow blur,
                     a new sun
back-projects onto the outshone day,
sigils of the birds insecticides had killed, feathers plucked,
cockaded on pennants
flapping slit along the path to the Museum of Natural History. 
Touch Here dissects their songs, touch dawn and sunset flight
plotted in real-time on-screen,
                     hear, see, kill out of prevision.
Are all put to death?
Elusive yet a zigzag insect scribbles, self-erases,
                                     neither here nor there,
one thing or the other lives in consciousness of scalp or ankle,
skin sending signals in advance,
           did you hear their fuss?
Dying within hearing, dying past hearing, dying to be heard. 
May my transmission glorify each wandering, singular flight.
                     Release came before its time.
Rupturing the screen, predictive codes bounce in plastic tots,
set out rows of analgesic,
           recapitulate hiss of gas in unison with what
sounds alive in trees, red dust sifting between bare branches
                     Neither here nor there.
           Eyebright, you too, reticent against the path.
                                   Aperture. Crosshairs.
Quit the session, pack up, and feel your flesh prickle,
feel advances when called in:
           It is the score they know, they cannot help but respond. 
No mosquito is where we think it is where its mote dissolved
           in full sight, consciously in skin between my fingers,
misidentified as in a dormitory,
nor lit upon a boy jackknifed in a closet, unmissed.
                       Imagine dangling like some flap—
           a penis or false nose, a glove
flies buzz inside, vibrating like foam memory,
the master stroke a wasp nest keeps time with,
           mastery a snake strips in sequence to:
its bandages of yellow skin keep a barber’s pole in their twist,
                                     must mast for all to see.
Marsyas’s trunk too. His mouth filled with insects.
The forest slumps lumber, horizontal in its poles and sleepers. 
May this transmission taste sweet if on the palate metal fizzes.
                       He wore his heart on his sleeve,
one more political factory—
his kidney was that four-stage filter a horde
funneled through—
           you recognize for what, this multitude, this army—
           he sprawls in his termite couvade,
tumulus to a gang of target cells, switched on to assemble
SQL and Python columns, file home to their
                       forest compound—
           depositing a trail of crumpled faces, the mask
of surveillance stripped and stripped, a bare-faced
hide hangs and resonates out loud, he’s got to respond to that— 
           stretch his scalp for a great drum, thump the ground
riddled by the thought of maggots going about their business.
Larvae that never will be flies.
          Parchment where the worm glyphs burrow
silently, as it has been written.
Swipe now. Its yellow glaze intensifies.
                     Swipe again. Just try once more. Soft
instruction squirms beneath a screen protector.
Think you can compete? As birds take flight before the archer,
one flies down a fire break dodging scorching breeze:
                     and the auguries that fall
in our circle, that deflated orb each holds to their face
           like to a mirror’s mockery,
scatter needles in unread scores across the sterile O-horizon. 
The misbegetting Gods fuck in beach-huts of a cement Lethe,
deaf to insects, by a reedless, unwaded pool:
           they ring the pool,
darkness so intense dazzles, light thick as Chinese white,
a glaze smothering light even in emitting it,
hisses at high frequency. Sheer extinction.
                     Sheer
magnetic force, its field a basalt slab:
                                   they turn toward their sacrifice,
hand in hand, hand in the concept of a hand, hand in his idea,
           they have a hand in his hand. Therefore
gloved, if once his thigh is touched it will explode with child.
Or so it ought. All falls quiet. 
In their defeated circle wind cannot rouse or steer to so much
as a faltered gust, nor stops squeal against breath.
Birds drop lumped on needle stooks.
                     Advance, hero, play your part.
His canopic vessel sounds. Letter A the impress of his voice
           burnt out. 
Ruined cities melt to glass in intense heat, theaters
bake to bricks in an earth kiln, flutes thicken,
sinuses of mortar,
           only lost blood hisses from a severed ear.
Stars have been expressed, but he will lie still akimbo,
                     ungloved, dispersing in swarms.
He kicks the shew-stones and little universes break up.
Clay hexagons bide the pool whose ripple will translate them.


^^EOP^^

The chair I chose for me and the chair I chose for you were at a table behind a pillar where I hoped we would not         be seen or heard or smelled or tasted by the women who no doubt were         licking their spoons slipping spoons into the sides of their tights toothpicks in their hair         you came late with a light         step your head a balloon on string          bobbing statically somewhere near the ceiling         your legs listless thin trailing the floor         some men ooze sex and it has nothing to do with their bodies          you were not pretty do not think you are pretty          middle-aged man with no hair with cuticles gnawed down to the rat beds         but when you shook snow off your coat using your shoulders alone when you yes         then every woman in the room stopped rubbing salt         between her fingers remembered her own desire moved the stolen spoon in her tights front and center every woman understood why the girl in floral headscarf had come early and tried out all the chairs         why she stood up when she saw you sat         down stood up and sat down stood up started to cry         you said me too        kissed the pearled hood of each eye in turn before you laughed and laughing snorted so she would know you had once been a boy.


^^EOP^^

           —You prick too liberal into alien pains,
and read too readily a grief  you need to see
in order for the world to be the world
that ratifies the choices you’ve made.
You talk of callings, but a calling should
enlarge the life that it refines,
not grind its spice into some same mustard. 
           —If  we could see the grief of any one life
it would be slag enough to crust a world
and any feeling being buried within.
But grief’s a craft like any other, it seems,
if only indirectly ours:
our skin’s inscripted with what nature knows.
The dead child chiseled in that woman’s cheek,
the battle smoldering off that old man’s brow,
our very mirrors, friend, these aging faces
with their lines of  loneliness like pressured ice:
you would have them silenced? 
                                             —I would have them whole. 
           —As would I. As would anyone
whose life is lit, however dimly, by the light
of survival. 
           —I fear that by survival what you mean
is resignation, or, worse, a fictioned oblivion,
like the bull elephant that has outgrown
the stake that it was tied to as a calf:
it can’t break the rope that it could break
with ease. 
           —And I fear by wholeness what you mean
is merely the will to leaven fate with will,
that constipated sorrow called good cheer.
I won’t relapse from these mild dry lines
whose only consolation is their dryness,
that one might utter calmly utter blood.


^^EOP^^

 

 


^^EOP^^

my mother had two vaginas
one to birth me and one to keep me
inside the first one I had two names
my given name and my other given name
my twat had a name too
it was forgotten because the climate changed
the climate changed because of  God
obviously
we as a society
stopped naming our twats
the old ways make way
for some way of  being again
in this world where we bury the old
inside their baby bodies
this way when we wake up from our dead sleep
we shall be little bright stars
dead to the world and dead to the love
our teeny tiny gods created
their cunts hugging so tenderly at the moment of creation
that I think this world was truly made for us
still we won’t live forever
we won’t know how to tell the others
who will have surely lived like we lived
inside the total darkness of their mothers too
where it doesn’t matter what we know and what we do not


^^EOP^^

There are easier ways to die happy.
One day a monkey wrench zips through a store aisle
begging for contact. The next your lost love finds you
dehydrated in the food court. Isolated,
these incidents teach us the wrong lesson, leaving
only the personal hunch to keep scouring the junkyard
for rare samurai swords among the moldy viscera
of old food and metals, but through fusion
you begin to comprehend the use of random coherence,
like an electron. You think dumb words like “fate,” pick
your spilled body off the cold tiles—bump
on your noggin, kinda woozy—and a council of heads
floating over you asks, “You all right there, bub?”
which is the sonic cousin and connotative villain
of babe. You feel like someone pleasure-reading
in front of a live studio audience, that is, meta, and even more so when it airs
and you’re there to see how stern your eyebrows and forehead
look, as if you were trying to read the backside of the page. 
It says, “If you can read this sign, I can’t see you”—
you, the novelist whose protagonist shares your name,
asserting your non-existence; you, sneaky as the p in raspberry,
building statues of avalanches for a figure drawing class;
or you, blasting Schubert in the Whataburger drive-thru,
condescending to your sandwich. You are a composite
of shit, memory, and nightmare, and the lines between them,
within yourself, blur like lighting when you blink. 
If the mirror were see-through, the empire of invisibility
could train your shadow to be a ghost. Instead,
the road explodes into an octopus of paths,
a lone flame sparked in the center, and you don’t know
which to take. Your magic trick?
Inventing a new magic trick. Pain gurgles back up
the garbage disposal, helplessly whining, “Water,”
encouraging indulgence in confusing image systems
meant to make you think about yourself
when you’ve done nothing wrong. This whole time
you thought you were nerfed by verdict, allergic to insight,
you were actually compromised by an affinity for falling up,
as the meadows that blurred into bushes and blankets
became prototypes for a new kind of landscape,
while that central flame made fire angels of the grass. 
Of course you want the landscape to glimmer,
but you can’t ignore the thousands
of dried-up seeds and scorched roots, and farther out still
some frozen in ice so dense no light could penetrate it enough
to splash them awake. Move out from behind the camera.
Use your hand to block the sun. You’ll see
the trenches in ruin from pole to pole
and only the occasional flashbang from beneath the dirt,
giving you occasion to feel effulgent against the field
but wishing it were greener still—full of fucking flowers!
you can’t believe you think to yourself, you derivate scoundrel!
yet you are here, examining the meadows of dirt, trying to
think of a new word for green. 
Like I said, there are easier ways to die happy.
You could squint through the spyglass backward like a straw
and roll the map peeled off the globe onto the table,
trying to flatten out the sides in denial of the warped world.
Does it look ugly to you, in your head, where you can privately
explore the extremes?


^^EOP^^

The earth said
remember me.
The earth said
don’t let go, 
said it one day
when I was
accidentally
listening, I 
heard it, I felt it
like temperature,
all said in a
whisper—build to- 
morrow, make right be-
fall, you are not
free, other scenes
are not taking 
place, time is not filled,
time is not late, there is
a thing the emptiness
needs as you need 
emptiness, it
shrinks from light again &
again, although all things
are present, a 
fact a day a
bird that warps the
arithmetic of per-
fection with its 
arc, passing again &
again in the evening
air, in the pre-
vailing wind, making no 
mistake—yr in-
difference is yr
principal beauty
the mind says all the 
time—I hear it—I
hear it every-
where. The earth
said remember 
me. I am the
earth it said. Re-
member me.


^^EOP^^

All us girls we agree to be big teen
islands scouring the slips for who came
closest. I tented my sour girl with boy-textured
leans from the could-have bin. Couldn’t let out
what lived in the back with all the trouble rubbing
at my tender. A girl’s sight becomes real
in the flee, her thrum of  identifying marks,
private seams, marbles of  fat for the pillage.
I meet myself at every mask collapse.
Like the old wounds slack on my hiddens I was
the danger I exchanged for my hair, the song
I rubbed against my song.


^^EOP^^

What happens to a heart after death? 
It pounds around the rib cage,
at last leaps through the sternum
into the menacing wood. 
Grows a coat of fur, thickening around the neck.
Becomes crepuscular,
cannot bear to be seen. 
Crumens beneath its beautiful eyes
secrete waxy tears,
its four-chambered stomach barely taking in sustenance. 
From spring on its antlers grow an inch each day,
velvety at first as they emerge
but hardening to woody bone for the anger of the autumn rut. 
At times the stag tips back his majestic crown;
a Christ with hands nailed up, he bellows to the heavens,
then sheds his antlers and begins again. And again.


^^EOP^^

You wanted to
have vision
but the gods 
changed.
You wanted to feel
the fraction of the 
degree of
temperature
enter the 
water, feel the
minute leave the
minutes 
behind.
Why not be
happy. What are 
they doing
to the minutes.
Each one takes 
that minute of you
away. Takes away
hope. We stand 
around, we have the
sensation we
dreamed the whole 
thing up, we
didn’t, & all
around us how alive 
rot is, & damp that
never ceases kissing
everything in- 
discriminately—yr
hands, yr skin fixed to
fit everywhere tight, 
yr lids holding yr
gaze, the rubble, the
anti-microbial skins, 
the layers of cello-
phane, the rare &
treasured paper 
sack, everything
delivered up to us
as if spectacular, as if 
an emergency of the
spectacular,
& new data-sets showing 
more new hours days debt melt
scars faster rising than
ever anticipated, 
also those fleeing
told no no, not you, you
are not allowed, where 
are yr papers—oh
those—I know we
gave them to u but 
here u see we
change our mind—look,
here is a changed 
mind, a mind whose house
burned, here is
melted chromium & ash 
where yr life was—stay
calm, listen to
authorities, re- 
build, imitate, believe,
wait, b/c it will come again,
over the ridge, the 
licking flare, as if
pure hunger, or
curling all over u now 
the fire of the
flashlight, don’t move,
I beg u, never 
move, figure out
what the they is,
what the they wants— 
pretend it’s laughter, it’s a
refrain—pay up—as for the
recent past 
it’s got too much history
a mind can
set the match to—but see, the fire 
prefers not to die, no,
& we oblige, we feed it, we
keep it 
unpayable.


^^EOP^^

Day, you
and then the eve of the evening. 
From the balcony, sliced light
leaves behind an arm. 
Shadow,
in which you for bleeding chrissake put yourself out. 
You look through the glossy-black,
see into the continual flux,
churning up
inside outside side-to-side;
an effluent running river,
insect-filled,
and one truncated tree— 
no square in which to sleep;
you write a brief note. 
Change it. 
Classic, you think,
as you slide 
by means of the motion
in downing the fingers.
Translated from the German


^^EOP^^

The body and its members sway in time with the blood’s beat,
its willing course. I brought the doves to the marketplace
in a wicker basket, to honor the museum’s anniversary.
The shock of recognition effaces the particular, oaks, stones,
each bearing its private inscription. Say a poem is like that,
a bit of silence the world acceded to, for a finite duration.
Say a little bit of everything one takes into one’s hands
remains, the pot smeared with soot, the Mazzolino canvas,
the ripe pear with its pesticide sheen. No other way to play it:
I had begun again, disremarked by the other guests
who stood around the floral displays, talking so animatedly.
Outside it was raining. In my pocket the stub of a ticket,
a pause my fingers idly groped. In the corbels, identical beasts
devoured one another. And I thought, yes, it is like that,
as much as any thing can be like another thing; I thought,
the canon of matter is so vast, it keeps imprinting
its judgments on both guests and hosts. For I was a guest,
as I kept reminding myself, striding away from that dim town.
I copied myself into the legend, not with the strength
of iron gall but such that others, who would come after me,
might scrape the surface and apply their own insignias,
their own ludic anthems fleeing to the skirts of some Welsh
saint, as if she might protect them. As if she understood
their language. And in the negotiations that followed,
the tense exchanges (hollow apart from their brackish rinds),
a tongue precipitates. It is made of flesh, i.e.
it is what I say it is, not merely an image, a trope.
Imagine what a surprise that must have been: a living tongue.
And her gripping half of it, and he gripping the other
half. And the world readjusting all around, as worlds do.


^^EOP^^

The Book of Doves opens to the Chapter of Bridges.
In my youth the most frightening dreams
involved turbid water, something beneath the muddied
surface, something dangerous that remained
unseen. And I was staring down, from a high bank
or some fragile or else broken span. Dream of arches
and of the blind dogs that prowl their stolid footings.
It’s time to offer gifts again, to whomever you like.
Because we have lost the Book of Gifts,
from which we might derive more perfect knowledge.
At some point those dreams ceased, for me,
and others took their places, the restless song service
that will never quite begin, the endless queues.
I place the drugs back in their silk sack, I add more salt
to the grinder. Thus do some days carry their ashes
outside, to the clean place. A cycle is restored.
We can be men and women again, though not without
risk. You may read about it in the Book of  Tongues.


^^EOP^^

And I think he must be drunk, from the sweet way he.
Brother. I think about his XX all the time. It’s like a joke,
that we’ll start dreaming of men once we. My favorite
version is the one where we. We ate citrus on river rock
while others swam out. Stern lady cop found us out-of-
towners naked, our clothes scattered around pine root.
Dampened for days. But he. Inclination surges
through window screen—that wind, you’d think
                        we’d found ourselves in beach town.
If I had the chance, I’d go right to the root of  him.
Shouldn’t I out of anyone feel it with my main medium.
I think there’s something happy and right about us mating.
That night how you. Chest flying. Tonight my house creaks.
Somewhere swings open a gate we all know we all want.


^^EOP^^

I didn’t know the details.
I feared the details.
I loved the details. 
The details, said etymology,
were our first cuttings. De-  tailor, did you know
where you came from?
From taliare, to split:  talea, a stick
companionably unstuck. 
Long enough to look
at the realities
of luck: 
wishbones,
each to one’s own 
taste of it, what’s enough.
In Sanskrit: talah, wine palm,
and in Greek: talis, 
a marriageable girl.
Dividing / 
divining back
as far and old as Thalna, 
goddess of youth 
to the Etruscans, fresh
as any branch begins as 
some loose, unlikely
end of a tendril;
some cleave of a leaf.
___ 
In details lost and found,
there were days of games
and days of fasting 
and although these
were the same days, 
days of feasting
were interlaced like
so many flights of birds 
in that certain composed,
but hurried, hunger. 
How often was it content
to be contested, paradise?
Paradise rained 
into failing soil?
Paradise evaporated?
Did it ever pick up? 
Before starting over new
as a people, the Etruscans, 
waiting 18 years in their old home,
Lydia, gathered half their number—
plus whatever wits they honed 
from hungry days of dice—
and moved.
___ 
They say life is more than starting over.
Maybe it is, Sun.
Maybe it is, Moon on the pines, 
your practiced light on dark,
silvery green needles 
before there were leaves;
before leaving,
the common grace of nights and days 
left to each. Left to search,
through founderings, 
for findings,
whichever can be moved; removed;
replenished or replanted.
___ 
In the beginning of a history,
Herodotus told his story
of the Lydians 
and their famine
and their wise ruler who decided 
there should be games,
games to keep the peace in place
in the turmoil of  hunger. 
Games on days
when food could not be served. 
Playfulness and sustenance,
for however long, happily confused.
Herodotus himself didn’t know 
that the Lydians were Etruscans
in their old life, before the move 
to land they would be known,
and renowned, by. Mystery
finally solved, to the letter. 
Mystery, all the same,
remains in its remains. 
Herodotus,
would you be shocked
to know what DNA can say, 
stretching back through hindsight,
all the way to wonder?


^^EOP^^

money will build anywhere
there’s a view or a coastline
all those tangled shrubs and thorny bushes
your ancestors cut through centuries ago
to claim in the name of a queen
and a king with foul smelling hair
these days even the ecotone
between the living and the dying
has to be privatized & sold at auction
all the steps between next year
and the first human year ever recorded
melted so flagrantly it became stylish to be poetic
for the end of the world
everyone’s collecting coins on every interface
a thousand identical posts about 2019
being the year of paper straws
and reusable cups
indigo dyeing from Kyoto
is the new 36 hours in Tbilisi
all the people with phones
don’t think twice about buying onboard wifi
on their way to the latest Caribbean island
still recovering from last year’s hurricanes
would it be so wrong to wish
everyone with global entry be grounded
until extinction is off the table
I don’t think I can date another
digital nomad or a normie with a dog
who doesn’t know what it’s like
to be too poor to buy their way
out of disaster
why do the rich treat blame
like it’s obscenity
or a fossil
is it because they hate seeing blood
think they are noble for taking
quick little showers
and using silicone at the farmer’s market
I have never seen someone forgive themselves
as elaborately as the wealthy
everyone who paid for their wellness
is infecting the rest of us
yes I am sick sick sick
and want to sterilize all the ruinous overseers
though it is not like me to dream so much
I have managed to hoard something
that cannot be replicated
it will die when I die
let no one say we didn’t try
to let a different kind of  life bloom
and let no one say we didn’t touch
what was there from the beginning


^^EOP^^

             This neighborhood map thrives on rising sentences,
arbitrary Icterid with signified arms; Ventriloquist!
             shook-throated, a rock-hard reed-lance thorn by the landfill—
a bird almost-mistook-for erasure shared in a thin migration,
             like marauding packs of boys who fight or make out, discover song, hinge:
on the talk or sheen of feeling, grass-rooted as if contra-the-wind enough to prevent erasure?
             Its moat of fear, reinvented burps, throbbing streetlamp burst on the fritz,
the self-appointed-like throat, chewed on ambition, held choked as a corn-flavored chip, 
fed and left to dust the milk of the park, where seaward, another earth throws shade:
             the moon, almost, or a hurricane, we dawn and we signify our own sentences’
justice, justice, built on migration from conjugations the winds once institutionally appointed:
             at last—this hurricane!


^^EOP^^

Look what it is to have forgotten
the torn coat of  “Vecchia Zimarra”
from Puccini’s  La bohème and to remember
the other coats from Mt. Horeb on down,
and look what it is to give your own coat away,
three times now, and to walk shivering
in three different countries, oh tears
for the opportunity and tears for a horse,
all bone on a hillside without a blanket and
him laughing at me because there were no tears
left for a freezing gracehoper.


^^EOP^^




For Lucie Brock-Broido



It was delivered to me in the snow. 
The kids were all sleeping
in separate corners of the house
like unfound crystals. 
I wiped the flakes off,
holding what I thought could save me.
My neighbors were afraid 
I was disappearing. The branches above
trembled with hidden birds.
I didn’t know. I read and kept reading
the label 
until you heard me.


^^EOP^^

After most of the bodies were hauled away
and while the FBI and the Fire Department and NYPD
were still haggling about who was in charge, as smoke cleared,
the figures in Tyvek suits came, gloved, gowned, masked,
ghostly figures searching rubble for pieces of people,
bagging, then sending the separate and commingled remains
to the temporary morgue set up on site.
This is where the snip of forefinger began its journey. 
Not alone, of course, but with thousands of other bits not lost
or barged off with the tonnage for sorting at the city landfill.
A delicate tip, burnt and marked "finger, distal" and sent over
to the Medical Examiner's, where forensic anthropologists
sorted human from animal bones from Trade Center restaurants,
all buried together in the Pompeian effect of incinerated dust.  
The bit of finger (that might have once tapped text messages,
potted a geranium, held a glass, stroked a cat, tugged
a kite string along a beach) went to the Bio Lab
where it was profiled, bar-coded, and shelved in a Falcon tube. 
Memorial Park—that is to say: the parking lot behind the ME—
droned with generators for the dozens of refrigerated trucks
filling with human debris, while over on the Hudson at Pier 94
families brought toothbrushes or lined up for DNA swabbing. 
As the year passed, the unidentified remains were dried out
in a desiccation room—humidity pumped out, heat raised high—
shriveled, then vacuum sealed. 
                                                            But the finger tip had
a DNA match in a swab from her brother. She was English.
30 years old. She worked on the 105th floor of the North Tower.
The Times ran a bio. Friends posted blogs. Her father
will not speak about it. Her mother planted a garden in Manhattan.
In that garden is a tree. Some look on it and feel restored.
Others, when the wind lifts its leaves, want to scream. 


^^EOP^^

The salseros, the real-live soneros,
the palo-players that gang-busted
dancehalls with fish-crate yambú;
the tumberos who recorded the earth
in clay jugs, whose steel-beam shoulders
held up skies until shing-a-ling
floors were occupied by the perfect
fourth of democracy; the quintets
that crashed baptisms and plucked
concert hall from park bench and
band shell, who glittered airwaves
without commission, who changed
their names from Joe Loco to Joe
Panama, Joe Ponce to Joe Cuban, who
Castkill'd then Corso'd, who 
vamped it up and whistled evil
out of garden—their Africando
was so hot, co-op boards had to 
call the police

^^EOP^^

Almost nothing has changed
about the world. We're still bound
to go on having this hunch 
everything has left us or is waiting
for the worst possible moment to do so. 
It's still our custom as a people 
to measure our lives by our longing,
our longing by our treasure, our treasure
by the little pieces of jewelry 
we let slip out of our hands
and clink down the drain, gone forever.
The prevailing theory is that if we try 
hard enough an entire history
of diamond stud earrings will gurgle
forth, as lonely for us as we are for them. 
The airplanes of America disembark.
The passengers look up, sensing the first
inch toward that next city. 


^^EOP^^

On the fire escape, one
stupid petunia still blooms,
purple trumpet blowing
high notes at the sky long
after the rest of the band
has packed up
and gone home.


^^EOP^^

We're balancing the heat of the day
on the tops of our heads, walking
along the shoulder of the road
to the new liquor store for Cokes,
which she said would take fifteen minutes tops
but instead is taking over an hour.
On one side, a field of cotton, ready
to be picked, thick and white
with loosened bulbs; on the other, hard dirt
and nothing, then a ditch, a road, some
morbid-looking piece of farm equipment,
and in the distance, the rise of the interstate
and the woozy sound it makes.
In loose reference to a conversation
we've been having off and on all summer,
she says, "Okay, what if we're already dead 
and this is heaven?" The question hangs there
in front of us. We walk through it. A car
passes us from behind, and the hot breeze
hits the backs of our legs. The road curves.
Far ahead, the liquor store flashes
its bottles of booze. "We're here," she sings,
though we're not there and won't be there
for another ten minutes. Between us
and the store, the road waves its fingers
of heat. Beyond the store, the road gets thin
but doesn't disappear. As far as we know,
it goes on forever. 


^^EOP^^

I save my love for what is close,
for the dog's eyes, the depths of brown
when I take a wet cloth to them
to wash his face. I save my love
for the smell of coffee at The Mill,
the roasted near-burn of it, especially
the remnant that stays later
in the fibers of my coat. I save my love
for what stays. The white puff
my breath makes when I stand
at night on my doorstep.
That mist doesn't last, evaporates
like your car turning the corner,
you at the wheel, waving.
Your hand a quick tremble in a
brief illumination. Palm and fingers.
Your face toward me. You had
turned on the over-head light so I would
see you for an instant, see you waving,
see you gone.


^^EOP^^

Ask me, Poet, Did I love her?
Breast against bristle, penny eyes—
I loved Rose the way fours
Exchange blows, the way fractures
Need islands, the way we tremble
In the glow of dead-ass truth—
You wanted to stay awake 
Just to see the end with her. 
Guardian, gladiator & goon—
Skeleton-to-ash—speak, dead.
Forget, always. Ask me again,        Did I love her?
With holy-mouth & hard-hand,
I play like I say: Yes. Yes I did. 

^^EOP^^

Unless hot lunch at school
was serving something special
like corn chowder
and baking powder biscuits
or creamed chipped beef
potatoes and brownies
I went home
to what my
mother made
like most town kids
 
Jack walked the furthest
almost to the river
to his unpainted house
by the railroad tracks
We all knew nobody was there
his mom at the tavern already
He always came back
Just in time for the bell.


^^EOP^^

to love life, to love it even
when you have no stomach for it
and everything you’ve held dear
crumbles like burnt paper in your hands,
your throat filled with the silt of it.
When grief sits with you, its tropical heat
thickening the air, heavy as water
more fit for gills than lungs;
when grief weights you down like your own flesh
only more of it, an obesity of grief,
you think, How can a body withstand this?
Then you hold life like a face
between your palms, a plain face,
no charming smile, no violet eyes,
and you say, yes, I will take you
I will love you, again.


^^EOP^^

Migration is derived from the word “migrate,” which is a verb defined by Merriam-Webster as “to move from one country, place, or locality to another.” Plot twist: migration never ends. My parents moved from Jalisco, México to Chicago in 1987. They were dislocated from México by capitalism, and they arrived in Chicago just in time to be dislocated by capitalism. Question: is migration possible if there is no “other” land to arrive in. My work: to imagine. My family started migrating in 1987 and they never stopped. I was born mid-migration. I’ve made my home in that motion. Let me try again: I tried to become American, but America is toxic. I tried to become Mexican, but México is toxic. My work: to do more than reproduce the toxic stories I inherited and learned. In other words: just because it is art doesn’t mean it is inherently nonviolent. My work: to write poems that make my people feel safe, seen, or otherwise loved. My work: to make my enemies feel afraid, angry, or otherwise ignored. My people: my people. My enemies: capitalism. Susan Sontag: “victims are interested in the representation of their own  sufferings.” Remix: survivors are interested in the representation of their own survival. My work: survival. Question: Why poems? Answer:


^^EOP^^

Near noon in the city in the park
in the salted air in the cold cringe
cringing two hands glued red
to my cheeks. I give away comfort to get it back.
Oh, look at the sun, I must say to myself
over and over, so that I might look at the sun. 
I rent a language guide
to hold my hand
while I sit sneezing
in home’s direction—I am
far away. But I can see
the ocean: not so far. 
Nine children on the playground. Ten trees
planted in a row. So nice
to be a swelling sleeper,
thinking at a jogger’s pace. Bees
born from my fingertips
burst toward all the dying life.


^^EOP^^




After Alexandra Petrova



Trace your son’s left hand
           against construction paper
                     with a nontoxic marker, 
           teaching him the edges
of his bones. Then fill
            the space between 
                     with what shines
           or powders, glitter,
crushed cheerios, flecks 
           of skin even, teaching him
                     his bones remain
           in spite of it. Let him try 
to fit his fingers in the contours,
           teaching him his bones
                      keep growing. And when 
           he makes two fists, afraid
his body can’t keep up
           with what’s inside, clenching 
                      hard as teeth to keep his bones
           just as they are, to keep them
from sprouting out, tell him 
           of  Ukraine’s oldest apple tree
                      that grows its branches
           low into the ground 
until they drink the soil—
           an indiscernible colony
                      of roots or eternally new trees. 
           And when he falls
asleep pressed to your chest,
           trace his right hand 
                      against the tree-house
           rib cage it first grew, teaching him
the endlessness of bones.


^^EOP^^

An arrow does its own form of singing I like to believe
this means nothing          is ever too far
from the bird that it was   I tender the dark
with a hum we cannot die in    a legion
of spells for the Black boys who learned
to make the light sorry     All I have ever wanted
is to be the wound you neon
All I have ever wanted is to die beautiful
in hands I could mistake for yours
All seasons are becoming the season
of my isolation   The green sputters long
into December so I think we are all less invested
in loyalty these days     O you gilded Amistad
the mouth I’d forgive without question froths
with an armada of golden-hulled ships    Excess
I too pretty the interruption when I cannot bear
the elegy any longer     I don’t know how not to love
what would kill me without noticing     I can be
ferocious with my ugly  I can be the knife chanting
silver through the abrasion     I wish I could write
of you as something that would break if I held it
living for too long     O grief-cousin    phantom-chain
wind-throne    blade-choir   What is death to the children
of the forgotten     One day too my mother will die
and my loneliness will be a hyperbole of ravens
all of which will sing like fugitives    Glory   Glory
how much I’ll miss her

^^EOP^^

Pues   es possible que I have learned to fear la lluvia
All of my saddest stories   have the same beginning
Entiendes?    One thing falls into another  I am fallen 
Into all the time     Men enter me like rain
Swing the moon in their hands   until I’m mud
I suck their boots    beg them tranquilase tranquilase 
It was an accident mostly   to have lived this long
I regret the entry   but what choice did I have
Men shove their weapons inside me and only I 
Ever think to call them bastard   All I have ever
Said has been blamed on the wind   como una
Mariposa    I am beautiful because I am surrounded 
Guapísima     I am cherished most by the blade
Yo soy la prima de la tormenta   What rages
against me   used to keep me alive entiendes? 
Es possible que every storm begets women
I am only what memories were buried in me
So I can’t say what’s buried elsewhere 
Una país is only as good as the saddest acres
Of  its deception      Nobody can tell you this
Better than la tierra itself       That night it rained 
They dragged them off the road    El poder de
La tormenta  es en el oscuro y los manos
I howled for a country    I’m mostly made of ghost 
Stories and rumor       The men entered me
What choice did I have but to suck their boots
For this crime   they have only ever called me citizen 
I tremble when the rain comes    De verdad
When the soldiers came back    I mistook the headlights
Of  the truck for lightning  The thunder for acres of batons


^^EOP^^




Para Aracely



despecho rhymes with espejo—
translation: my sibs could be
my twins if
they weren’t so feos.
remix: if i weren’t so ugly
i wouldn’t look so much like mis hermanos. 
let me try again:
this one goes out to my fam
posted at the bar pouring shots
until the ceiling falls apart & reveals
the moon. i’m sorry to break
the news: you can sing all you want,
comadre, you can get Chente himself
to sing on your behalf—she’s gone.
translation: all that’s left to do
llorar y llorar. 
one more time
for those who haven’t caught on:
it’s that time of night where all you have
is your biggest ache & all its nicknames.
our bartender is from Guatemala.
he tells us Spanish is his second language.
his first language is Ixil.
in the entire state of  Iowa
how many people speak Ixil?
question:
is despecho the music he plays
when he cleans the drunks up from the bar
& is despecho what it sounds like
when you cross one strange country
just to land in another & discover
all your words for love are strange & unfamiliar?


^^EOP^^

so when i walk down the street, i hold hands
with the wind. there’s a chimney coughing
up ahead & a sky so honey, i could almost taste it.
a cat struts away from me & two yellow eyes 
become four: just like that,
i’m the loneliest creature on this block.
soon the streetlights will come alive
& television sets will light up with blues. 
stay with me. while the sky is still golden,
hold the ladder so i can climb, & from
the highest rung, i can scrape away a drizzle
of light to wear around my neck. alone 
is the star i follow. in love & in solitude:
alone is the home with the warmest glow.


^^EOP^^

You want a piece of me
to see, from the flesh of me,
a flesh from within me
no one’s ever seen, not me,
nor the mother or the lovers of me.
A piece that will have been me
but then no longer me,
instead a synecdoche of me, 
or possibly metonymy,
a figure of speech of me,
in contiguity or association with me,
a part for the whole of me,
a sliver that once was me,
so you might perceive the end of me.


^^EOP^^

       Long     fing-     ers,       how
       signals   flow      up         them
        from      tip       and       finger-
         print      all       the           way
          up         the      arm        and
          the       neck     to          what
          ever     magic   light       takes
          flame   so       touch      ignites
          as the   palm    smooths    warm
         from one person to another, passes
         sunlight one skin has taken in, which
          the other receives like thirsty soil gulps
          rain and infinite generations of ancestors
           yawn awake asking if it’s time for the line
to         miracle up a new life. They were so young,
and     innocence is a birth gift intended all along
to be    opened with love, promises, and blessing
as you enter the future that only exists if you live
into it. His name was John. His moving muscles
 formed shapes she had not met before. Green
  time laid its fragranced landscape before them.
   So they entered. Married. Irene came soon.
   At eighteen, Gussie was widowed, with a
    toddler older than her youngest siblings.
     The family’s hand opened and closed
       in welcome. But fingers remember.


^^EOP^^

Not long ago the Pope decreed
that unbaptized babies would
no longer be banished to Limbo
and that their little souls languishing
there would be released
Imagine them getting the papal memo
and rising in unison   unsure
of  where to go
except up       twirling like colossal flocks
of  river martins
in dark enormous coils     their outlines
becoming eventually lighter
then translucent         then clear 
We might guess incorrectly
that the accompanying sound
would be the usual celestial
harps and choirs
instead of  the intolerable shriek
that trapped breath makes
when it escapes from a balloon
whose opening is being pulled taut
or tens of thousands of these 
Sebastião Salgado talks about traveling
through parts of  Brazil
where babies died so frequently
that churches rented out coffins for their funerals
and reused them dozens of times
A local vendor might sell bananas
and ice cream alongside shoes in which
babies could be buried
         Salgado also says that when
babies end up in Limbo
it has something to do with whether
or not their eyes are open or closed
when they are buried
              or is it when they die    I’m not sure
       The transcription
of the interview is unclear 
When someone in a movie dies
with their eyes open
the lids are made to look
so easy to close
A priest for instance or a doctor
passes a reverent hand
over the corpse’s face
perhaps not even touching it
and the task is complete 
The morning you died
our friend and your brother and I huddled
in your bed with your body
that overnight had decided
it was no longer you
but some awful machine
designed to lurch and wheeze
until it sucked in one
more breath and did not let it out 
Your eyes were open and when
after a few minutes
no one came to close them
I tried to do it myself
but the lids kept popping back open
like busted window shades
that wouldn’t stay down 
The word limbo derives from the Latin
word  limbus      a border         an edge
It also is a dance   that also is a contest
in which the winning dancer
is the one who doesn’t fall


^^EOP^^

We’ll affirm its arrival
when it’s not in the titles
of recipes in which it figures
quietly, as moderate slivers. 
When it’s always available,
not lumped with root vegetables
nor flecked with blue mold. 
When everyone knows
not to bite the large pieces. 
When everyone preaches
the best means of peeling
(knife, spoon, or not-peeling)
and disagrees, without violence. 
When its unexpected absence
causes fundamental hunger
but it’s like running out of sugar:
you can ask any neighbor. 
When the nation remembers
how it treated as barbaric
the eaters of garlic
as they fled persecution 
and sees its reflection
in black-and-white photos
of  mobs against risotto.


^^EOP^^




Shake some action’s what I need
To let me bust out at full speed
And I’m sure that’s all you need
To make it all right
—Flamin’ Groovies, “Shake Some Action”



To have arrived here, weighed down with fistfuls
of calendar entries, unsuitably
boggle-eyed as if new—
so these are mountains,
there is horror, which is the subway line
where I may lay down my creed
and when will my breath stop
acidulating like this?
Exceed, said 27. In all things exceed.
Shake some action’s what I need. 
27 was animated
but has lately been absent.
With them we raved and with them
came. A dervish verve escorted them
always, which now I feel dribbling out
like the cruel juices of the steak I didn’t feed
on, didn’t slaughter, wouldn’t want to but—.
In a dream I asked permission
and 27 agreed
to let me bust out at full speed. 
That was a dream. The juices a memorial.
At present, I’m perishing—
but mayhap not right now. You too?
Something immense is unwinding a spool of wire.
You trace it and find, what else:
Death on the end of the strand like a bead.
To have arrived by spoonfuls of undecisions,
to have arrived knowing you only fled.
You drool over a bowl of soup, snorting greed
and I’m sure that’s all you need. 
Mayhap not sure. Mayhap
doors swing open even after juicelessness
and soup. They might open onto tigers.
Or a vision of  The Real True—
after the shakes yield to a long loosening stare.
Take hold of the knob: You’re bitten or you bite.
If I, yet untoothless, can chew up despair,
I’ll take a good calm look at the dark I’ve been given.
Is that where I’m headed, with my hairband-searchlight
to make it all right?


^^EOP^^

Genghis Khan, my father says, using a soft G,
Never saw our peninsula with his own eyes.
Don’t quote me on that—
Recall isn’t my strong suit. I’ve convinced myself
Memorizing dates, for example, is outmoded.
Better to learn the overall movements,
Social conventions rising and falling,
Empires and their changing mascots.
Genghis sired so many, they say, his children’s
Children’s children’s genes sowed an entire
Continent of grasslands. If  you press your ear
To my blood’s topography, you’ll hear hooves
Pounding, though I can’t remember when it started, or
Whose king it is coming in the distance.


^^EOP^^

Grandmother remedies & such, absent. So, in absentia, I blind-
Knead the knots in my own back. Pressure point in the palm 
Doesn’t kill the pain, exactly, just distracts. Tugs the pain-
Line from temple to hand. Vaporub, too, works by pulling, 
Mentholating open a passage; in a pinch, will even keep
Bedbugs away. So they claim. In place of old-country cures, 
Search: tea tree warts / melatonin effective / yogurt for yeast
Infection

^^EOP^^

Rejoice in the snowflowers in the veins, rejoice in the bathtub
saltwater clogging the windpipe, its brittle sugar- 
crystals in the lungs, in the petals blooming in the water
after curettage, scarlet rash of ornaments O globular berries staining 
the porcelain. We pass the darkened library on the way
to my mother’s house so the kids can light advent candles— 
I’ve strung Xmas lights to the wall with a Stranger Things alphabet, Ouija to the upside down I’ll scry 
I’ll scream to contact her—girl I heaved
into the toilet bowl, girl I let go each time a man 
fucked me [over]. We pass the library past dark
& the librarians form a line under the exit at closing—I imagine 
habits, I imagine knives for teeth, typewriters for hearts.
The librarians jackrabbit. They devour the dogs. 
My children at my mother’s table love Jesus. The plants
in my mother’s kitchen still bloom on the sill 
while my mother’s tongue wilts on my blue altar &
even Frida from her Santos candle glares in disapproval— 
I’ve drowned them. The leaves blanch, a sick mucus,
a bulbous wax. A loaf of soggy bread around my belly & 
thighs in the milky soapwater I scrub & scrub the pinkening
of poultry I’ve become. There was a hairbrush once, a broom’s 
handle. There was a channeling in a tunnel, O burst O pop O clank
O fuck my swollen bell of  brain. If no candles light 
when we scratch the match, has God forsaken? Where
have the librarians prowled off to—with their curses? Once upon  a time a mother lost her goddamn mind. I scrape the blackened foil
from the cake I’ve burnt O baby I carried to the ledge. 
I’ve brought only the living ones to pray [for strength]
for when their mama hollows a wall, marrows a bone & 
the headless girls return to her & the bodies rise like steam 
from her chest & she flings her rust, her knives & uplifts
the blanket of ribcage to the cavernous tomb of sky.


^^EOP^^




R.I.P. Robert Poston (1891–1924) and Roberta Poston (1924): husband and daughter of Augusta Savage



Our love still young,                              our marriage new,
  Robert and I                                      felt blackness as
    a second vow,                                 a spiritual seal
      between two souls                      who spent long years
        before we met                          wondering if
          we would ever                      find each other.
            Now we were one             and would soon bring
              a life into  being.           A new
                beautiful life,             a black life,
                  we would love        and bring into the
                     Fells family.       Irene’s sibling,
                        a new Negro  beginning.
                          Robert left on assignment
                            to write about Liberia,
                            a foothold in the motherland.
                           He died at sea. Pneumonia.
                          The last letter he wrote to me
                         said Africa   doesn’t want us.
                        Garvey was in  prison for fraud
                       (faked charges).   I was carrying
                      the child I wanted   to share with Robert.
                     Roberta came              early. Grief was
                    our midwife. God          must hate Negroes.
                   Why does God make        our luck so bad?
                   She lived ten days.             Is this the worst?
                  Is worse coming?                  What is the point
                 of making art?                           Flowers on graves?
               Dancing in masks                         to placate death?
              I don’t want it.                                 I don’t want art.
             Take the gift back.                             With everything else.


^^EOP^^

Violation
Wildflowered up the dreams of my captors,
Decorous men, half-moon bedded in my bloodstream.
The object is without objection. It was said
Such knowledge sharpened the Garden’s blurred shush.
The serpent also whispered in the field.
Abandon, the house of the lord, is
Abandoned. Its painted columns leer behind my heels.
The yellow apples underfoot, the flies they waste. 
I am entering the wood.
The goat goes with.
A panic trills, and though the trees throw their limbs
I have no stupefaction for that flute.
I have poured salt in and already set fire to the cloth.


^^EOP^^




After Lucille Clifton



O winged walker,
motley brood
& brood underneath
the underneath. You,
formidable residual,
derelict carried
to this country
by the dread Atlantic
wind. What did you see
to make but yourself
& yourself? Foul
architect, teeming Queen
of rot. Whereas you
survive. Whereas your death
is an industry. Whereas
on the television
in this century
of television
a woman wears you
as a living jewel,
rubied carapace
on a gold leash.
Whereas beauty
was never meant
to be your name—
O harbinger
of harbingers.
O little, unending night.
Whereas murder, too,
was never right—
they’re just a sound
for what we do
to the dark. O
a sound I fear
is the only sound
I know.


^^EOP^^




This unfamiliar place, if we succeed in figuring out what’s going on, could
be the locus of a secret. And it might, assuming that’s the case, then convey
certain things, things we cannot control, things that are fatal, voluntarily
uncontrolled. We need to find a compromise between what we control and
what we provoke.
—Jean Nouvel
What hides in darkness and what truths
it veils.
—Andrew Crozier



0 
That some things are lost
      some occluded 
And of  whether these categories are discrete
or if one may be solved in the other— 
That loss may be a form
      whose element is time 
That, in time, questions of  loss
become questions of faith  i 
      as one passing through Ca’ Rezzonico
Museo del Settecento—the city in decline
             already, the great dream
     turning lucid, eyelids trembling, the lagoon
picking up natural light—may pause
             before Dama Velata:
     Antonio Corradini’s
marble bust of  Purity
             depicted
     according to convention
as a young woman
             but (this is new) with her face covered,
      the veil a device
to show the artist’s skill
             at rendering fluency in stone—
     urge to touch & try its
I want to say ductility;
             ductile: might have meant easily led
     but doesn’t—so it appears to stream
down her forehead & nose,
              sweeping to gather
     at her right shoulder, hang more loose
upon her left, edges embroidered
             with a homely button pattern drawn
      across her breast al cielo e al tempo ...
             A marble veil. Corradini’s specialty.  ii 
      These are the hidden sayings
that the living Yeshua spoke

^^EOP^^

          The United Negro Improvement Association,
        he says, his little bloodshot eyes looking out
       of the dark shadows of his overhanging black
   brow. His eyebrows quizzical, halfway to a smile.
And over them, an uncreased expanse of dark brown
 brain-cover, broad enough to maybe mean genius.
     He talks and talks, a baritone that somehow lilts,
    the Jamaican vowels a soothing music, talks and
      talks, how we are Africans wherever we landed
             in the genocidal kidnap, we belong to each
            other as siblings, all Africa, all Africans, together
          as one nation. We will return, we shall return, the
     Motherland waits for us, she is calling to us in the drum-
beats of our hearts, he says. Don’t you hear it sometimes?
I have to say yes, I sure do sometimes, remembering how
   sometimes I have smiled at insult and injustice, toed the
       yassuh-mister-charley line. Don’t forget a whole continent
       hopes we will return with what we’ve learned, what we
       have become, even our language, our words, even our
images, even our art, he says, is more theirs than ours. Light
falls from the windows through the antique lace curtains onto
a mahogany table set with his collection of antique porcelain.
             His cheeks are silk sleek, his thick lips talking, talking,
the necessity of self-emancipation, only we can free our minds,
think about going home, feeling our Ancestors welcoming
you from the very soil. I smooth gray layers on the wire frame,
       watching his face, watching my fingers. He gives off
       black light, impossible to capture in my medium. Genius,
      genius, yes, and authority. Confidence. And there’s some
      madness in there. I stroke the curves, the heavy jaw, the thick,
      soft lips speaking hymns of affirmation. Something deep inside
        me makes a little ding, like a tiny chime. My black pride
        has awakened. My cramped and crooked inner light
          creaks straight. Those little eyes. That grand ambition.
            I cover the bust with a damp cloth. Same time tomorrow?


^^EOP^^


 




^^EOP^^

More oblique the eagle’s angle
than the osprey’s precipitous fall,
but rose up both and under them dangled
a trout, the point of it all. 
Festooned, a limb on each one’s
favored tree either side of the river,
with chains of bone and lace of skin
the river’s wind made shiver. 
Sat under them both, one in December,
one in July, in diametrical seasonal airs,
and once arrived home, as I remember,
with a thin white fish rib lodged in my hair.


^^EOP^^

In a bleary part of town,
I traverse the blackboard silence of snow. 
Through the slats of the cypresses
Flounce paper-white feathers of snow. 
On the red leaves of my palms
Distend melted messages of snow. 
The road is iron anvil
Stinging with sparks of snow. 
My nocturnal heart thrums
In white wasp whir of snow. 
Moonlight purls like nectar
Sweetening the blandness of snow. 
Glaucous berries hang from the rowans
Like frostbitten pearls of snow. 
Mice hide in the lee of alders,
Shirking the cold tusks of snow. 
Shadows vine like crewelwork
On linen twill of snow. 
Around your black spade pupil
Lurks an avalanche of snow. 
I wish you’d toss your cards
Like fireworks against cumuli of snow. 
Instead, my name catches in your throat,
Congealed in its amnion of snow.


^^EOP^^

I can do anything, so I try yoga nidra
to see if I can find him.
He’s been dead four years now
though I tell people when they ask, two. Just two.
My mind refuses what it wants
even if I haven’t lost anything.
One day I caw like a seagull
swooping in for a long dive.
Another, I am hunger waking up the bear.
Today I go to the trees to listen
and he is an old cedar, but sweeter than that.
When I was a girl, I knew I’d never be a girl exactly.
He was the only one who knew it
and let me run wild, would never tell the others.


^^EOP^^

Wist is wetness
and why, wind,
why. Go and gather quickly
before every shadow
has dispersed to everywhere
but beside you. God governs only
what happens while
it happens: this want
is wine of  your own making.
Loud the quieter times, and quiet
loudest still, and reach
and reach the branches that tree
beside your bedroom window,
growing to grasp you though felled
ago no less than half a decade.
How a day so dear and treasured began
with a fist in your face. Skin-to-skin.
Even the memory of that sound, somehow.


^^EOP^^

Younger, I could go to my friend
when her heart had been pierced 
and she was gasping for breath,
and I could tell her, nothing is lost 
entirely, all experience
in time becomes a window. 
She was twisting the wheel
of  a wooden toy. I’d said more 
than I believed.
Two blocks down, fine pins 
of  ice slurred the brackish water, slowed
the small waves, until on a last 
heave, one
froze, a sheer shell 
in the dark between the reeds.
When I search 
my journals for her,
who melted from my life, 
I’m searching for you, and for this
special faithlessness, I apologize; 
there are so few people
in those soft covers, so many 
descriptions of our four rooms—how they remain
the same, tall and old, quietly beautiful, 
and yet change utterly as the sunlight
fills and abandons them on a clear afternoon. 
Today was cooler. A high film of cloud
calmed me; a letter and an offer came. 
Though I was tired, I brushed varnish on the floors,
let it thicken, then buffed it until it glowed 
with cloths cut from a green flannel shirt
my father sometimes wore.


^^EOP^^




Paradise, California



Whole towns like • horses turnt loose in the bardo of •
« wild » fire’s roiling, locust-clouded « our » stampede—as if
ignoring a war two counties over meant it couldn’t come
closer—plague-black | ened forests consumed by a burnt
• wind: « and untamable » a lithe and lumbering creature cities-
sized, mitosis-prone, come to lick clean the tinder « tender
ly » face of village mid-stampede. Caressing • lost wedding
pictures, kitchen tables, • dogs lured in « runaway » terror in
to the inferno, it leaps roads in its roving. Whole towns re
made over • and far • in « night » parking lots where « away »
wander once-middle-class refugees the fire’s made. Atop
an RV, a parrot’s perched, and for its human from whom
it’s learned, its gift: Fuck you. Its every world of instinct • breach
ed, and black « trust- » its human-made ruin. Hello?


^^EOP^^

You learn to recognize beauty by its frame.
In the gilded hall, in the gilded frame, her milky neck 
extended as she peers over the drawn bath. A target,
a study, a lesson: she requires you 
to be beautiful. You should save her, no matter the price.
No matter the price, the Collector will take it. His collection makes him 
good, when he lends the woman’s image
to the museum, where schoolchildren stand 
before it, anointed with lessons in color and feeling. Pay
attention

^^EOP^^




Considering Sylvia Plath’s “The Jailer”



You have been burning
the cork of yourself. You crawl
the nightboards bare-assed, scratching Negress against the grains, leaving fingernails
in invocation, dabbler, out out 
your damn mind, summoning a phantom
the shape of my granny—that peerless apparition—
her halo of witch hazel and snuff,
her knuckles cracking the whip kept tucked
away in her attic like a hush of bastard fist. 
You slip her on, hot to be hazed
dressed in a distinct leather’s stink.
The gaze of a husband who hates you less
bears down her living midriff, sniffs her
out as he would a bloom 
of mold in your basement, its dank
souvenir. What blood ensues is the pink
in my palms and patter of rebel in my neck
when I, having slept wild again,
awake. About impossibility: 
I am not unsympathetic. I get it.
He beasts you and you feel a need to pass
the buck. In my house, we call this
nothing much after all. When Freud
observed Verschiebung, he wasn’t looking at us, 
how we assault the air with grudges
avoiding talk of our learned tortures.
I will not flash you the rattling quarters
of evening my mothers crowd inside
to seek their penny-wide retreats; 
I’m going to unfatten your pockets.
Remind me again of your ghost ration.
What if you could eat your fill?
Have you? Haven’t you had enough?
What would you do, do, do without us? 
In the poem I’d conjure to carry me
across the finale of my animal life
I can ride no skin but this one.
Sweat stifles its cells until they fungify. 
The night choir-sways down my throat’s red aisle.
My muscles flaccid in felt ventriloquism.
The vessels sing a sequence of chains.
They chew through my confessional face. 
My mouth lopsided as a fainting chaise, 
My mouth clack-clicks back to work my teeth 
Latchbolt into a snigger:     tight     bright     luxe  enuff sighs the blue smoke the grin
cuts out of my bottom lip enuff


^^EOP^^

Go to the window, open
the window, outside
the window 
there I am with you
lying down, in the dead grass,
reading you a sentence as long 
as my life line. You kiss my
forehead, I kiss
your simian crease. 
Go back to the kitchen. Go back
to the magnets. Touch the wood handles.
Touch the spoons 
left in the sink, a sliced lime,
a juiced lime. I won’t wash
anything that isn’t mine. 
The nightjar eats what it eats.
The wide wave finally arrives.
The wet moon leaves me so lonely. 
You can’t tell me what I want or don’t.


^^EOP^^

 
These mountains have stopped
swallowing men & spitting
them back out
 
 
bruised by what
they’ve seen & done.
The men are gone
 
 
litany of used
-to-be.
 
 
I believe
in the body, not its resurrection.
 
 
while I want to die 
quickly, I want my body to linger as long as it can.
 
 
Make certain it’s safe enough, deep enough,
square enough to hold my eternity.
 
 
People are real friendly, but they’ll leave you alone, you know?
 
 
There is no way you can bury me
without entering the earth yourself.


^^EOP^^

Personification is inevitable. It goes hand 
-in-hand with reinventing the wheel.
It reeks of misfortune. Gives a mess 
its mass. Is why slime
never forgets 
its shapelessness,
while memory 
foam must, in what doesn’t leave
an impression. My memory spins 
our negative capabilities round,
round, like a record the dead 
once held, as if listening were human 
invention. Imagine someone who only touched
needle to vinyl. That generation who lost things 
as memories, while I run from thunder,
huddle inside a train long gone 
off the rails. I call for an Uber. A call
I did not even place. It’s all part 
of this new deal, for which I am the delay.
Oh, blissful ooze. Oh, quantum soldier 
of fortune. There will be an app for judgment
that we can’t delete. You correct me:  execution. Let’s get into this. That sentencing
is quite empty. The sentence is doubling 
down. Computerication is enviable. I’m pretty
beetles you’d like to stick a pin through 
& then trash can. Why care
for the shepherd tricked 
into the slaughter pen. Let’s get it out in the open.
Herds. Human. Break. Bliss. Silo. Haze. Quant- 
ify looking forward. To tomorrow, to block
me from negative space. Mince this 
tender. Say slime can be a crown
of onions & it cries into my eyes. 
Say chop away at wing & antenna.
Say leave me alone with my own 
device. Say I’ll refuse rubber shell
& puckered mutton. I try & reinvent 
new spin. It’s a table with too
many hands in it. It’s communal 
as plague. It’s that you were invented,
but came first. The wheel who’ll originate 
the hands that spin it. Say they only reach
a single herd so milky & sweet. Say it grazes 
from beneath the screen,
free of my cutting board, 
where you’re filtering all
of my chemical elements, 
until I’m a looted grave, a generic
greeting for the slaughterhouse & 
day of rest. Say until I press
the air 
like a switch
& ask: when. 
Say you keep all the bells
tolling & line every fence 
in the schoolyard with birds of prey.
Say no car can escape into spacecraft 
or credits.
& you cut 
to blank,
cursor still 
swarming over
whatever dares next.


^^EOP^^

When the wells dry up, my mother is taken
to search for extraterrestrials in the desert. 
The location, like her real age,
is undisclosed. No fake Prada 
stores, no high-
altitude balloon 
conspiracies & no reception. The call, in a sense,
ends the moment I try to claim the apple 
never fell, never fell at all, from either tree. Aba asserts: breathe & then warns me she doesn’t like the word alien. 
I know this well enough, how my mother knows
well enough, that deserts are not prophecy. Or 
a graveyard song for an animal
sanctuary, somewhere far-off, 
founded on second-guessing.
Like it ever mattered which 
side of a fence or war-
head to the last rhino 
left, when he’s blessed with two armed
guards to protect him from everything 
but thirst. Over static, I hiss it’s too late to save
face

^^EOP^^

If you want to know the answer to everything—
& by this I mean how to land on the moon 
styx, the smallest of pluto, just to stick
a wreath in its water-ice 
& leave, without even taking
a photo—then I can tell you 
I too got it wrong, giving all
my attention & ache & ardor 
to the electron, who’s too busy binding matter & clearly
too stable, holding our heads up & keeping our hearts 
in the dark. The electron looks after reality, keeps it going somewhere & doesn’t peacock with mystique, no, that’s you 
pitching salt as you cross the black cat
with a ladder. That’s you & another 
you who have so little belief
in each other that youronly 
bond is whispering Macbeth in the dark 
theatre & rattling
every full house 
for hours, every hand dropping a glass & turning
into the toss of a breath, sleep no more, no less 
than spinning a parasol indoors with one sock on, both shoes on a table.
That’s the unbinding of a human condition. That’s eyes straining to see 
less, before the mirror that breaks itself
every billion years. Think carefully now, 
how you2 are never in the same room & when “you”
are, it’s the only refuge & the other is intruding. 
It doesn’t matter who wins. It’s what can’t quite
end: what is not a thing at all, but a disturbance 
that does not exist
until it’s discovered, 
& yet when it appears,
it ceases to be? Because 
that’s everything, I promise. It’s just *you’ll  * never
have it, since the photon is not receptive or self- 
evident & yet the answer to yourtrillions
of moons that orbit swift disturbances. 
But look at you. Look how even
if {you} get the smallest bit 
close, {u} creep & cant
that they circle urown dust 
& hands, busy sticking everything
with cut flowers & wedding bands. 
As if a surface
digs itself deep 
into the light  u believe *u*
grasp. As if there’s no other 
evidence that life did,
at one time, flash before 
its own
divine.


^^EOP^^

The Censor uses the black crayon
to eradicate sex. On payday, he takes
his wife and son to Shake Shack. Whatever
you want

^^EOP^^

Still, I keep myself, I take
to bed. One lung is red. Cut red
flowers hung in pink water. 
My other lung is out of  line.
From one lung, I tell the truth.
From the other lung, I lie.
Cut pink flowers hung in red water. 
Like a pain, the truth is mine.
The lie is that today I want to die.
Cut red water hung in pink flowers. 
The rest of it is stillness, rest.
A soft cough into a hard pan.
A hard cough into a soft plane.
Cut pink water hung in red flowers


^^EOP^^

1 
The body, like a crowd, moves without a mind. Moves without
an ambit. Tilts without an axis. Pulls without a magnet. A school
of fish could tell you that: the wind is more a rudder than a mast.  2 
The body, like the mind, moves in crowds. [A worm, or wave,
or kiln] could tell you that. [The worm, a solitary iteration of the] fish.
[The wave, a solitary iteration of] the wind. [The kiln is thinking itself
warm.]  3 
The body moves with [a] crowded mind. A worm or wave could tell
you that. The worm [with the mind of a] fish. [The fish with the mind
of a] wave. [The wave with the mind of a] kiln, thinking itself warm.


^^EOP^^

There’s sunshine with blueberries each morning   I sing fortissimo most evenings while we cook   This is a poem
about joy   It’s not neat   My ex-husband had a rare condition
that made him feel fire ants were biting his face
eyebrows first   then the rest of his body
It flared up many times each day   The only way
to calm it was to wash   He had bottles of water
in the car for this purpose   He was convinced
that objects were cursed  because when he touched them
the itching started up   He wrapped these things
in plastic bags   phone   wallet   documents   I helped him
to hide the problem from clients   Our house
was a Turkish bath   steamed up from all the soaking
of  skin   clothing   backpacks   cameras
I tried to be kind but sometimes wasn’t   Paper and fabric
were breeding grounds for fire ants   My books were all cursed
We couldn’t hunt for second-hand gems
or browse antiques   My coats were a problem
Worst was my black Ted Baker one   thick wool
belted   bat-wing sleeves That  fucking coat   It’s in my new wardrobe   five years
since he walked out   —1 am—   but still it seems
polluted   Near the end   everything I owned
was infected   I couldn’t touch him and if  I did
in error   he’d flinch   as though a toxin
had brushed against him   get up with a spittled I swear to GOD and spin to the sink
He’d splash his face   because my hand
touched his   He told me three times in nine years
that he loved me   I had to ask   He wouldn’t go
to the doctor because when he did once try
in LA   the doctor thought it only dry skin   He was
sensitive to smells   He’d cover his mouth and nose
when he was next to me   It snowballed over years
so that secretly    —we were so good in public—
flopped on the sofa   I came to see myself
as a sort of slug   It was important
to pretend to be confident   There’s not enough here
about blueberries   And did he ever   once or twice
hit me?   Throw things?   Bruise?   I forgive it
or try to   He wasn’t sinister   not like
that other man   the one who tried to rape me   in a high room
an office   I’d thought   not an apartment
I’d been looking for work
when it happened   He threw me   rag doll down
and was unshiftable on top of me   A cannonball
on my pelvic mound   I’ve never been so aware
of that bone   I couldn’t kick or twist   Por favor
didn’t work   I thought he’d strangle me   saw
what a murder victim sees   I was a gnat
in his web   I sometimes think I’m still
as dispensable   I don’t know why
he allowed me to run   to that Catalan
backstreet sun   pulsing   clammy
and spinning   I still had the nous
to note his address   —33 San Vincenz—   but felt
stupid   Estupido    I looked up the translation
in the back of the police car   I thought
that the word would help   He wasn’t in the first
photo ID line-up   but was in the second
Ecuadorian   square faced   I took the Metro
to the far side of the city both times   and again to meet
his lawyer   The police had little English   My Spanish
was poor but I was trying   His lawyer asked me
how I ran from his apartment   Was the door unlocked?
And I knew that what she meant is “Was I free to leave whenever
I chose?”   Yes   she was a woman   his defense
I was free   not locked beneath him   not pinned
to the sofa   bone on bone   Our bodies aren’t legally
double bolts   I left when I chose to   left behind
his deep eyes   grizzly hair   Would I still
pick him out from a line-up?   There were photos of his wedding
on the mantelpiece   He had a toddler in a pram
a little girl   and wheeled her to a bedroom
She didn’t cry but must have listened   I think
I was lucky   Sometimes   I catch myself wondering
where he is now   if we’ll meet   This is not
about my ex-husband   his itching   It’s about
separate hurts balling together   a handful
of snowflakes that tumbled down a wintry hill
and after that another hill   another   until they were
a monstrous boulder   encrusted with clods
and rocks   blackened   besmirched   I came
to see myself as a slug   I wouldn’t lean in
to whisper with friends in case my breath was rank
He said it was   No one has agreed   Still
this is miles from blueberries   I sing  scherzando
unchained   when I cook with my partner   We laugh
at terrible wordplay   Nerdplay   Our life
is truer than this poem but I’m trying   Like most families
mine has tales of fierce women   who suffered
but had to get on with it   and kind   tender men   People
who coped and can’t tell me how   They must
have sung   gossiped   mucked in   There are many
ghosts in this poem   I’m one of them   As I write
there’s a dunnock on the bird feeder   It’s been flying
back and forth   from the hedge   I wonder how they manage
little birds like that   with sickness   Life’s cheap
A gnat in the web   Pointlessly
living each second in joy   The sun falls creamy
on the table at breakfast   Milk splashes up the sides
of my bowl   I think we should sing  fortissimo
even if it’s complicated   Lately
everyone’s been taking a stand   This poem
has given me nightmares   The room smells of coffee
cinnamon   blueberries   two and a half scoops.


^^EOP^^

I’m sure as wetness
follows steam.
I’m sure as cold
that follows
wetness
follows steam.
I’m sure as sweat
that follows heat.
The bead
of sweat that
follows steam.
I’m sure as heat,
as surety.
The bleed
and heave of surety. 
____ 
I’m in the midst
of sureness,
sure as bricks.
I’m sure as cold
that follows
wetness follows
mist. The blood
and heft of sureness,
sure as mud.
I’m sure as blood
that follows
wetness follows
sweat. As sure
as heat that follows
wetness follows wet. 
____ 
I’m in the mist
of sureness,
sure as steam.
The hiss and scream
of sureness,
sure as mist.
I’m sure as blood
that follows
meat. I’m sure
as meat.
I’m in the heat
of surety. The bleat
and seethe of surety.
The mist
that follows certainty.


^^EOP^^




After “Crush” and a line from “Pachinko”



                    
                    Every evening, history ruins you.
                               Every fallen leaf is your self-portrait where promises are made
             on yellow suicide notes, petal-soft when palmed, but we’re left with our hands
scattered between blurred centuries. Every evening is another chance
       to be gorgeous. To be human. But is it enough to be beautiful & never once
ask for forgiveness? What am I even saying? I’m saying
                     God forgets you & every lover you leave behind. This is the story we were
                                           given & so we make a maze out of each museum we pass by
& enter the gallery of our bones. This is the painting we step out of. The walls
                                                      we bury ourselves behind, hand-shoveling ourselves in
                until we taste the kissable dirt of a nation that has no choice
                                      but to nation us. The horses in our hometowns gallop headlong
into the backyards of crushed apples. The cities we built along the inner walls
                                                                     of our skin were never there—& here we are
planning the end of our lives. The aspen tree making a forest
      of its shade. Our Father Who Art in Heaven tossing bodies donning your face into my
dreams like bundled newspapers landing in morning mailboxes. Remains Found in an Unplugged
                               Freezer by Two Homeless Men is when they all refuse
             to witness human shadows & panic that countrywide American panic. Here we are
                                                    again at the gates of someone’s kingdom. You are a classified
homicide but they will call your body urgent & emerging. The wind also rises
                             to make the story interesting. To make His call to serve
     ever more divine. Remember how the morning will arrive. Just like every evening & those
                                                                                                         beautiful, lord-
laid leaves in the yard. Our memory rewinds the sky to see that rare, mid-autumn snow
                  reappear in the dark & lift back to the want left amid the stars. This is what happens
             to the boy who appears in your dream—like the shepherd,
                               lamb-like, he is back home with a shining black barrel in his mouth
as if to carve the name
                           of this country to the back of his throat. At last,
                  give him the title he earned: ’ácqa, or him’pe’ewyíin just to say he will survive
                               this episode unraveling into history repeats itself, so lie back down in the field
       broken by the names you forget over & over while the ghosts lift through you
& leave behind the trace of a snow angel lying facedown in its casket of night. Every evening
                        is this: the everlasting image of Him that you tear apart into confetti. Here
                                                 are your rights: your body with its limbs crossed out. Here are
       all the usual & accustomed places that claim you can return to lullaby our ghosts farewell
                  but fail to say who they are. Their glottals & uvular plosives that change táxc, táqc 
                               from táxs & t’áx. They will tell you a country isn’t a country until
it's written in a language only the living can pronounce. Handless prayers. Deliver me
          from the touch of a territory I have no real name for
                                                 but hawáawa because every story I want to tell
begins & ends with blood & us reaching for each other. They will say
                                                                                                     everything you are meant to
                                          understand. That your bones, our bones, His bones, glitter brightest
in the earliest seconds of daybreak. Rain. Here it is again—forgive me. The rain
                   of their Father Almighty, hear it speaking through
                                                              flesh & pinning you against the land. The bombs are
bursting in air this evening. Look how lovely this all is. History
                                          ruins your jaw for the next star-spangled life with a contract
     & enough ink for a single signature. Here’s your family in the register—all newer names
                       with newer terrors that leave them fleeing through the polished windows
            of America. You open the last window wide enough
to let me through. In one dream, I am making dinner for you—your favorite:
                                            stew & bread, but is joy enough to help us survive another night
like tonight? Another dream,
                        I’m talking to you like you
are really here. In your boyish, still-breathing voice. Your hand reaching up & out
                                                                                                                 of my throat as if
                              you climbed my ribs to escape drowning inside me. Last night,
we opened our eyes together, face-to-face, & saw only deer
                                                 leaping out of sight. Your footsteps smaller with each
passing season. The world crosses us
                                       out. Tomorrow, I will find you trapped underwater. I open my eyes &
                   I am right before you & we breathe like uncaught fish. But I wake
& wake & wake & that decade is already a bedroom clock behind me because
                               this evening is always today. The monster claims you—you swallow a god-
awful century of light & we are in slow-
              motion again in that October panorama—running to you
                                                                                            with all your life, in chokecherry red,
       bone-white, & that beautiful unbreakable blue, ’ilcwéew’cix a shard blossoming in the dark
of your skull like language measuring the worth of our
            lives—like your final Fourth of July. I’m as human as you made me
                                                      to be. Tonight, don’t I look as beautiful as you do
                         when dressed in every skinned animal gone missing
to translation? I lie down in bed to mimic you, dead & almost forever. tóota’, don’t I look
                   just gorgeous enough to devour?
                

^^EOP^^

Sometimes alone
someone can see me
         
         When
          I am touching
          I am convinced   I am surveilled   by memory 
         He is above   on top    approaches from the bottom of me
                     he is casting out
                                   his once more 
             I am a wind wound  and between
         two buildings   touching 
                                                              He is back again
                                                                           pawing at
                                                                                 my after-the-fact
                                                                                       my now-unbound no 
The me within only me and me only
          is a difficult one
                 prediction-shy 
                                         A bleak flash
          and then I cannot touch or speak   to anyone 
                                                                        When the hot air fades
                                                            when the dampness comes
                                                                         in sleep   in waking
                         when I am ancient in my movements
                                                a humming corpse   resting on pillows 
              How will I be found
          will they feed me the coins I will need  
                                                               Who will kiss my falling   when I fall


^^EOP^^

                    
                    
                    we used our words we used what words we had
to weld, what words we had we wielded, kneeled,
we knelt. & wept we wrung the wet the sweat
we wracked our lips we rang for words to ward
off sleep to warn to want ourselves. to want
the earth we mouthed it wound our vowels until
it fit, in fits the earth we mounted roused
& rocked we harped we yawned & tried to yawp
& tried to fix, affixed, we facted, felt.
we fattened fanfared anthemed hammered, felt
the words’ worth stagnate, snap in half in heat
the wane the melt what words we’d hoarded halved
& holey, porous. meanwhile tide still tide.
& we: still washed for sounds to mark. & marked.
                

^^EOP^^

Let me tell you, dearest beloved, in the only way I ever could— 
___ 
This failure of tongue: the bloom of  hunger when morning becomes the skin— 
___ 
You walk to a mirror & never see yourself— 
___ 
Have you ached for the world? You stare back into me until I exist— 
___ 
again as a face filled with the swollen quiet of a sky locked in another decade— 
___ 
& I’ve opened every window you shattered here with the hush of a mother
    who named you— 
___ 
after nameless meadow, I hear tekín’me c’íxc’ix  clearing away the remains of
    a summer’s harvest— 
___ 
a life: the fruiting shadow of a bitterroot seared to earth by your god mouthing
    líw líw— 
___ 
-’ce: the history of our bodies is proven wrong in the flicker of an eyelid— 
___ 
Holding steady, my fingerprints stain like cracks— 
___ 
like the briefest coffins opening their lids, revealing only— 
___ 
eyes that want nothing but the day- 
___ 
light now rimming around each shut door in the house— 
___ 
But here’s the poem again, my beloved: the poem will end, I promise, & life
    will—
___ 
go back to how it always was: before you— 
___ 
ever looked in the mirror & forgot me breathing behind its melting tile of
    winter— 
___ 
Look. The kitchen table is ready for you— 
___ 
Your son is in position— 
___ 
to smile as wide as the tire swing he lifts his legs up from to gather & thrust
    to the air— 
___ 
She leaps into the amber of an afternoon gashed with breathing holes— 
___ 
What, Lord, am I doing bearing the back of a mirror no one asked for? 
___ 
Tell me anything, like— 
___  hitxlic’áasa ’ee & these scraps of flame are landing on you, scattering over— 
___ 
you, exploding— 
___ 
Is this the sound of failure, the very beginning, or the faintest celebration
    of  forever? 
___ 
Say láatis. pipísnim c’íxc’ix. Say yoqóx like a distant spring in another
    version of this nation. Listen— 
___ 
Hear my fingerprints dissolve— 
___ 
into the unspeakable names of animals stampeding until— 
___ 
they vanish, until they are looking for you— 
___ 
God, I promised this poem would end— 
___ 
God, I’m only human enough to swallow what your season must offer— 
___ 
You walk toward me, the entrance wound between us still fresh as a welcome— 
___ 
but I am no longer there.


^^EOP^^

Walking through a cathedral of oak trees
and bristlecone pines, scolded by squirrels
in their priestly black, their white collars
wagging with the force of their scolding, I
was struck, simultaneously, in both eyes,
by some sort of flying detritus—pollen or seeds—
and stopped to lean against a rock
to scrub it (I thought) away. It was May, 
it was May, it was May, and the air was sweet
with pine and Island Mountain lilac. The squirrels,
I mentioned them already, etc, and the lizards
ran down the spines of rocks like a bad feeling. I
could see everything: red-headed hummingbirds
dipped their beaks into the little red hoods of penstemon,
and I, a redhead, could hear everything: a red-crested
woodpecker, who was not offended I did not know his name. 
And I could see everything: it was all green, really;
even the red was anti-green, and though my eyes
ached from everything-seeing, I could taste the granite
in the spring (oh yes, I drank water from the ground; I
was wild, even then, though the squirrels scolded
me and tried to convince me I was not). Soon I crested
a rise; the land spread itself greenly for me and I
wished I had seed to toss into that green, just to see 
what would root. My right eye would not close to this
view; why would it; but when I reached up to touch it, I
felt that there was a twig emerging, and another from my
other eye; that they were a part of my body I could not doubt;
they were living and enervated and jutting out. I
sat down, feeling the hairs on the back of my neck,
understanding for the first time they were not hairs, but roots.
I could see everything; it was all green; the twigs in my eyes 
tasted sunlight with my mouth; the roots drew the salt
from my sweat into their vacuum, and I was no longer hungry:
my metamorphosis had rendered me perfectly self-sufficient. I
could see everything; the roots in my skull shifted and I
lay down beneath my own branches. I had to wiggle a bit to
find a place to lay my head; the rock was very hard,
and I needed softer ground—yes, a place for the top
of my head to come off, to nuzzle into the earth, to drink.


^^EOP^^




For Phillip and for Marwa 
Featuring Robert Frost, William Cullen Bryant, and Alice Notley



Now darkness was not upon but was
the deep’s complete face 
and then was roof on the valley that
that which is not valley knocks. 
In darkness, mine was not a linear condition.
Mine was the express mission of uncountable spirits 
reaching in ceaselessly to relink their fingers.
I was architected like a multidimensional radial hemorrhage. 
I dilated on all axes like a dahlia
and was a field of this. 
And then fell the fallacy that the dirt
I worked and from which I ate 
and into which I was delivered
to be devoured could not possibly 
vibrate the notes of my brute living;
so spoke the beast out of the void 
in its god costume. In its compass
there was hematite. In my ears 
the blood murmured.
The protracted aftermath 
expanded as the universe expands—
from all coordinates, from the atomic core. 
Among what I abandoned: the belief
that there would ever again be 
postwar poetry, or a poet born other
-wise than in the time of war, or an alibi 
for where I was if not brutally living
in and off of war. I was impelled 
to create in an era of adept destruction.
I had to begin by deconstructing 
my creation. I saw the waiting peaks.
I knew what the snow was: overblown, 
footloose, excessive, feckless,
not white but a predilection for reflecting 
—absolutely—all light,
obsessed with possessing spectrum 
but impervious to access, and pitifully janused;
occupation was its solitary ache. 
I was a poet then. I lamented the lyric’s
optimism for a sympathetic ear. 
I tried to puzzle the ear, to jigsaw apart
for the snow the sound of snow, its one tenor 
of wind and its monuments to static—
but the ear merely clotted its wax. 
Darkness dampened there in the valley bottom.
I had to maculate the gleam in my eye. 
On either slope, sheer and utter eroded under
meters of endless nonce determined to condense 
a form even blue giants must derive from
but cut it out. I cut a cut of ear and ate of my form 
which was not mine but a fashion called humanity.
The poem’s pursuit was apparently to humanize 
and the poet’s to petition this universal experience.
I saw the universe. It was black and unbothered. 
I smudged the blue from the snow
and the blues from my beautiful jaw, 
their need to coax a cheek left to turn.
                             Cut it out. 
Eventide was over. I had chosen
lunar glamour’s ruptured pantoum 
as occasion to observe the world
sleeping in the dust of its birth. 
Its angsts and clattered growths combing
the trillion distant distant happenings 
that spilled into this bone-quiet basin in unison
hummed. One tongue slid along another. 
The glimpse of galaxy between the rocky shelves
was the scintilla of a velvet pocket pleasuring itself. 
I came to place my voyeurism under black gaze. 
How could I stand the pastoral, standing
on stolen land, propped like a rifle? 
The idyll was a metropole of violence. Verses from
the vantage point of frost were purely blank, not free. 
Suddenly the valley was disaster, every chasm
unconsenting. I could not recover a peace to rest in. 
When I was delivered into the dirt from which I ate
I did not lie down with kings nor wise nor good of ages past. 
I went down like the quarry-slave at night
and got up like the quarry-slave at night 
and, curved as the birch a boy swings,
raided the patriarchs’ rooms for tongues 
to put in my head, which was all jaw and beautiful.
When I was the snake I spake in subterfuge. 
I rolled out the higher register. It had a trapdoor.
I lined the stanzas of sestinas in trip wire and slippage 
but lying fanged on the break
and in the envoi bore no fruit: 
I was “a black” “snake. I had” “black sibilance.”
“I was” “built” “like a loco” “motive of” “blackackackackack.” 
As long as I shed a legible treasure trail of sufferings
my camouflaged linear contortions were of no concern. 
I returned to the valley on my belly, earless,
darkness divining the paper-slit chutes of my pupils 
on its way to stake me in the ground.
I coiled around it, asclepic. Ill with trusting 
nothing—neither what I had inherited nor
what I had imposed—I inhaled my tail 
and devolved into a helix of volta, a Möbius
beast, holding my inertia by the throat. 
It was easy to see from there how madness
could afflict the unwitting witnesses of jazz. 
What could pause emptily in the core
of this pressing omnipresence and resist 
and not be pulverized? Once,
when I was human, I hovered 
my pinhead eardrum within tipping range
of a speaker the breadth of two silverback gorillas 
and have listened to the will-less
rustle of dead leaves ever since. 
I felt it getting in, frenzied as the tremolo
sinuating Coltrane Quartet’s “Inch Worm.” 
So receptive was this life and that
of a mite on the back of a rat in an alley 
while the planet barreled down
its cosmic corridor, its futured birth canal 
—though because theirs simply were not
I had thought mine could not be. 
I hissed. I lifted the lock in the neck
to speak the name of my only in and of, 
to be named myself: 
low highness of sky,
wholly night, 
palette Polydectes,
have-it-all, 
Black. 
Here was the form: a preponderance
of intersecting improvisation, in each 
bereft moment a bequest, every shovel
in my back a new spade head. 
I had slithered hungrily after the end of me
to learn that all I’m made of is beginnings. 
I am the hydra of  I
and soon I will be the next thing. 
I was bred in an animal condition.
I am criminal by nation. 
I come rabidly available to cannibalize 
the traditions of the kings and the wise and good
citizens. Asylum never rested in the lyric. 
It is midnight in the bottom and the winter
is an embolism. Coverlets of frigid civility. 
I carry the seeds in my beautiful jaws
for the milkweed of malcontent. 
There will be no lily here, only venom. 
I will sow the music.
Its trumpets, they will ramify. 
When I arrive I will be always arriving.


^^EOP^^

forgive my geography, it’s true i’m obsessed
with maps. with flags. a Starbucks on the block
means migration. any restaurant with bulletproof glass
is a homecoming. underneath my gym shoes
is a trail of salt. that last sentence is a test.
does the poet mean:
(a) grief
(b) winter
(c) diaspora
(d) this is the wrong question
(e) all of the above
i’m always out south
of somewhere. i know the sun rises
in Lake Michigan and sets out west.
i got primos i’ve never met. there’s a word
for that. (where did they go?) all the steel mills shuttering up
like conquered forts. one day, there will be an urban tour
through South Chicago. picture the soy cappuccino-
sipping cool kids wearing Chicago Over Everything-
branded hoodies taking selfies in front of machines
that once breathed fire. pretending the bones
are the real thing.


^^EOP^^

                    
                    
                    Before the apocalypse, there was the apocalypse of boats:
boats of prisoners, boats cracking under sky-iron, boats making corpses
bloom like algae on the shore. Before the apocalypse, there was the apocalypse
of the bombed mosque. There was the apocalypse of the taxi driver warped
by flame. There was the apocalypse of the leaving, and the having left—
of my mother unsticking herself from her mother’s grave as the plane
barreled down the runway. Before the apocalypse, there was the apocalypse
of planes. There was the apocalypse of pipelines legislating their way
through sacred water, and the apocalypse of the dogs. Before which was
the apocalypse of the dogs and the hoses. Before which, the apocalypse
of dogs and slave catchers whose faces glowed by lantern-light.
Before the apocalypse, the apocalypse of bees. The apocalypse of  buses.
Border fence apocalypse. Coat hanger apocalypse. Apocalypse in
the textbooks’ selective silences. There was the apocalypse of the settlement
and the soda machine; the apocalypse of the settlement and
the jars of scalps; there was the bedlam of the cannery; the radioactive rain;
the chairless martyr demanding a name. I was born from an apocalypse
and have come to tell you what I know—which is that the apocalypse began
when Columbus praised God and lowered his anchor. It began when a continent
was drawn into cutlets. It began when Kublai Khan told Marco, Begin
at the beginning. By the time the apocalypse began, the world had already
ended. It ended every day for a century or two. It ended, and another ending
world spun in its place. It ended, and we woke up and ordered Greek coffees,
drew the hot liquid through our teeth, as everywhere, the apocalypse rumbled,
the apocalypse remembered, our dear, beloved apocalypse—it drifted
slowly from the trees all around us, so loud we stopped hearing it.
                

^^EOP^^


 




^^EOP^^

Some days you wake to the sound of smoke pouring through
the keyhole in the room. Open your eyes. This is only a test. The bluing of 
your hands can be anything you want. The bruised dawn
like a river rising to your windowsill. A purple forgetting how blood leaves 
the body in ruin. A forsaken lip smeared in thirst resting on your lip
as though your skin could salvage the dream of being 
so touched. Listen. I know you’re afraid—I am too. I know how the body
   prays
for beauty but remains a shipwreck you are building in my image. How
   many 
books are enough to tell you you’re alive today? How many days end
up all dark & the monsters of your childhood appear like saints erased 
of their mouths? How the mouth cradles a tongue carved by years
in exile until it’s ready to shape a word like a parting hand- 
ful of promised wildflowers: Happy Mother’s Day. This is you
at the edge of a paradise growing back after being scorched from the face 
of earth. This is us afraid of the men who fail to kiss us goodnight & step
   through
the walls. Some days you are living a nightmare. Some days a miracle as
   wide 
as a spared life. Listen to me. There will be a day when the world will need
   you
most—be alive on that day. I vow your father is as American as 
the bones your mother grew inside you. The gunshot
in your head is only a shadow puppet, a slow explosion of a field 
of qém’es in early June’s bloom. Look. Look at the colors like little gods
on fire—hurdling in & out of each other’s terrified skies. Are you still alone 
in bed? Is it morning yet where you are? The smoke turns
to rain as usual. Listen, my love. This year is just a visitor & next year’s 
ghost. Take care of it because yes—yes, you do deserve flowers for once
in your life. You will be the only one left. So hold my hand & call me  tomorrow. We are all here. It’s okay—it’s okay to be this
afraid. I am you. Can you feel that? Yes, that is the whole world outside 
moving without us. But listen to me. Listen. Here’s the light
an arm’s length away. The ceiling reforming 
above you, like another heaven after its own self-
destruction. Here’s my body & you stretching lifelong 
toward every hole in the house
left as warm as a father running from 
horizon to horizon. Don’t be afraid. Touch me here
where, some days, it hurts. Get up, get dressed, 
open the door.


^^EOP^^

The children of fugitives perhaps lust for nothing
so much as a country where we are faster
than everything else. Here I graceless bouquet
of dark whipping hard through a need
for electric. No one wants to be the negro swan,
the song like all songs    the surrogate
of a man. Above estate upon estate
of storm clouds, to the sides pine
and green and implication. Road
of isolated light, always a storm is possible, always
what I need to know the property of another
dark. No one wants to be the swan who cracks
the quiet, I have been waiting though, I think
all my life to siren like this     tonight
I sound to strike down the tether.
Crowned by elegy, crowned by escape; I am
so tired of ruling my sorrow this way. But
I am practiced, I father the bass
until each branch knows its sovereign
is less of a country than of a sound.
I am coming, toward something
I cannot name but still own. O, Mississippi;
bloodsong again has me singing you
past the curfew of the once-owned. Trust me,
not even the heat can save you now.
When I move like this I am certain nothing
for miles can touch me      I have never let a man
touch me.   Yet I live     in the fact of  touch.
I’m swerving   in the anthem   I play
when I am willing my lone exit into a palace
of doors.       I mean to stain everything
when the war comes. I intend to die
with a blade through every hunger.    What violences
me here, names the tether after love. What wants me
dead can’t decide which me to kill first. I learned
from the soft of the kudzu how to swallow the enemy
and call the color landscape. Let the lyric fool you,
dearest enemy      I kill best to the slow songs.


^^EOP^^

We plant seeds in the ground
And dreams in the sky,
 
Hoping that, someday, the roots of one
Will meet the upstretched limbs of the other.
 
It has not happened yet.
We share the sky, all of us, the whole world:
 
Together, we are a tribe of eyes that look upward,
Even as we stand on uncertain ground.
 
The earth beneath us moves, quiet and wild,
Its boundaries shifting, its muscles wavering.
 
The dream of sky is indifferent to all this,
Impervious to borders, fences, reservations.
 
The sky is our common home, the place we all live.
There we are in the world together.
 
The dream of sky requires no passport.
Blue will not be fenced. Blue will not be a crime.
 
Look up. Stay awhile. Let your breathing slow.
Know that you always have a home here.


^^EOP^^

Christmas Eves our dad would bring
Home from the farm real hay
For the reindeer that didn't exist
And after we were finally asleep
Would get out and take the slabs
Up in his arms and carry them
Back to the bed of his pickup,
Making sure to litter the snow
With chaff so he could show us
In the morning the place where
They'd stood eating, their harness
Bells dulled by the cold, their breath
Steam, all while we were dreaming.


^^EOP^^

you fit into me
like a hook into an eye 
a fish hook
an open eye


^^EOP^^

I'm the first car after the sander.
The cinnamon swirls of fresh sand are intact.
 
Except for that—the sand and the road—
 
The woods look as if they might have
a thousand years ago, except for
 
the absence of tracks.


^^EOP^^

Here you are forty years
later in a white coat
examining my ears.
 
All I can think
is how your tongue once
turned in the tunnel
 
you're peering into.  The
fault is not in my ears,
but between them!
 
No one can see that far.
But could we gaze back
through the years and dead stars
 
to the doorstep of my parents' house,
you bending down with your tall mouth
to make the softest landing on mine,
 
having thrown off my balance
so tenderly, can you explain,
good Doctor, how to regain it?
 


^^EOP^^




for my students



I saw this day coming         class would end       and it would be night
            time to attach         bike lights               tonight I lit my way
with a cigarette                   
                    I asked if petticoat ding a ling         was a fun bar
NO it’s a line from Clairvoyant Journal               YOU GUYS WANT
TO PARTY   that’s what’s happening here          it’s the pneuma of HANNAH
                                                                           ask me if I like parties
and I’m thrown into turmoil         I like parties
that I’m not invited to    best     lack of riposte similar to when Madeline
            Gins asked me if I was a perfectionist      
                          ummmmmmmm
                                                                            R. said she’s going to sit
                                                                            in the front row at my reading
                                                                            let’s try to control our faces 
what’s everyone going to be for Halloween
I’m going       as my eyebrows       
                                                patron saint for the perpetuum mirum              
                                                                                    I am amazed!
by the unity of my limbs   
and by those for whom     “an influx
                        like eros becomes a concrete personal threat”
                                               
                                                                          PUT IT IN THE POEM
                                                                          I WANT TO LENGTHEN YOU
                                                                          if I could morph into a deer
it would be the one on campus
with rhizomatic eyeball
and black socket
 
I ALONE
am responsible for the content and decorum         of my PERSON
O well-ordered ulcer we live in
collectively pointing to a number
                                                                           on a pain chart   
                                                                           pursing our lips      
 
the smell of burning leaves      tonight and their presence         in the bird bath
           reminds me of New Berlin    where 2 old people instilled a work ethic
                        by connecting neat crayons and fear of a mouthful of soap
 
perpetuum mirum why would anyone                         WANT          
                                                                                    to hurt me???
I was at a perfect party      
            no you cannot give edibles         to everyone     where I smoked                  
             weed outside with Joanne Kyger      in the house       Antler        
                          with beads of red wine                 in his beard
                                                                       
                                                                        told me I was mesmerizing
                                                                        and I glanced down from the pine
                                                                        all my moves were acts                                                                         of thinking     having never
                                                                        been loved
 
 
 
                                                                        October 25, 2018
 
 
 


^^EOP^^

                    
                    
                    I thought a tree dying was a sign of pestilence or terror or you’d done something wrong in your life and so your tree died. But no, sometimes, like a pet, they just go. Lifespan different than a dog, how unfair is that, you just get your dog for only this little finger of time and then move on. Whose pets are we? If the lifespan of a tree is significantly longer than ours, does that make us its pet? Like in the concentric circle of lifespans, who wins that contest and is that how you decided to make god a thing? Who am I asking all these questions of, my mother? I am the mother now and have to come up with answers like the way one letter from the word “now” to “not” changes everything: your breakfast is now ready, your breakfast is not ready. Why don’t we speak typos. At the level of the letter. It’s when I saw my hand holding the baby’s head I realized I wasn’t the baby anymore.
 
                

^^EOP^^

The river was deep & wide. 
                                           Wild girls grew along 
the riverbanks. Wild strawberries grew 
          among the wet grass. A girl tramped barefoot. 
Her tips arrowed. The tracks wept 
                                           in the distance. She scavenged 
            wild strawberries. The river water stung her mouth. 
The water turned her skin sky. Alone 
                                                              the girl knelt to sift water 
           through her fingers. There was once a dock 
                                                              with a wooden boat. Once a general. 
                                           Once a sister. Once a mother who hid 
behind the general. Once a machete. 
                                           Once a girl who swallowed the salt. 
She held the resonance of chromatic 
                                           harmony. The quiet of faded mist. 
The lines of riverbank made everything still. 
                    The girl understood the river’s undying blue. 
The river of uncut red flowers. The river 
                                                             flooded & 
                              drowned. Once a sodden hummingbird. 
Once a lone foal. The girl was not allowed 
                                         to speak Spanish. The girl wore a garland 
of speech. She found she was only half 
                                         of everything. Half of her mother. 
The general took her downriver. 
                                                    Scavenging. 
                                         The wild strawberries. It was spring. 
                               The strawberries were held below ice. 
It was winter. The general commanded 
                               her to lie down. The pain 
was a thud of a knife & boot blade 
                                         deep in the hull of her hips. 
The girl left her body. Her spirit rose. 
                                                    She herself  became the crumpled shape 
of a saturated bow. The river 
                              created a halo of sound. 
                                        She still held a strawberry in her hand. 
She looked like a perfect crumpled bow. 
                              She was lying on the ground. 
She thought she was lying on the sky. 
                              The quiet of the faded mist. 
                                                        The lines of riverbank made everything kill. 
                    The girl wanted to escape the undying blue. 
The girl was only half of her mother. The girl was 
                                          strong against tide. The girl learned
                                           
                     to forget. The girl was nothing but water. 
                                                               She lay on the sky.


^^EOP^^

Not books, but
a street opened my mouth like a doctor’s spatula.
One by one, streets introduced themselves
with the names of national
murderers.
In the State Archives, covers
hardened like scabs
over the ledgers. 
Inside a tiny apartment
I built myself
                     into a separate room,
peopled it
                           with the Calibans
of plans for the future. 
Future that runs on the schedule of public buses,
         from the zoo to the circus, what future;
what is your alibi for these ledgers, these streets, this apartment, this future? 
In the purse which held—
          through seven wars—
                     the birth certificates
of the dead, my grandmother
hid—from me—
chocolates. The purse opened like a screaming mouth.
Its two shiny buckles watched me
through doors, through walls, through jazz. 
Who has taught you to be a frightening face, purse?
I kiss your buckles, I swear myself your subject. 
August. Apples. I have nobody.
August. For me, a ripe apple is a little brother. 
For me, a four-legged table is a pet. 
In the temple of Supermarket
I stand
like a candle 
in the line to the priestesses who preserve
the knowledge of sausage prices, the virginity
of milk cartons. My future, small
change after buying necessities. 
Future that runs on the schedule of public buses,
streets introduced themselves with the names
of national murderers. I build myself
into a separate room, where memory—
the illegal migrant in time—cleans up
after imagination. 
In a room where memory strips the beds—
linens that hardened like scabs
on the mattresses—I kiss 
little apples—my brothers—I kiss the buckles
that watch us through walls, through years, through jazz;
chocolates from a purse that held—through seven wars—
birth certificates of the dead! 
Hold me, brother-apple.


^^EOP^^

But then four crows—no, maybe ravens—those large, black birds big as dogs, 
like gentlemen, crossed the path, looking up, contemplating something invisible, 
feathers on their crowns at attention, as if waxed into style, sun polishing each upright stalk, 
asphalt, grass visible between each black spear, the way, when younger, we spiked 
our hair before dancing all night at an after-hours club, but I don’t know
what it means now: Rocking gait: slow procession: pondering a shared question— 
unseen force drawing them across the road or a predator overhead
or walking away from despair hidden in the heart. She looks 
to be holding a miniature man in her lap, the Mary of Kells. He has
two left feet. And she stares, her face a mask of sorrow, eyes flattened, looking ahead. 
The messengers hover. They want to bear her away. They want to sing hosannas.
But they are cramped inside the box of the possible, heads bent sideways, thinking 
of what it means to think. They want to take responsibility. They want
to turn the tide. But they barely fit around her. 
When the angel came, Mary was sitting in time untimely. She was sitting, a creature
uncreaturely. She was sitting in the body maidenly. Her soul was deiform.

^^EOP^^

Cold sunlight tracked me down the moving sidewalk, the city busy with its market routine. It must have been a Saturday in March, the faraway towers gleaming. I was crossing the street of a refugee dream when someone spotted Angela Merkel. Hey look, they said. And a crowd formed around her. She was sweetly obliging. I reached out first to pat her on the back. Nice job, I said. Keep up the good work. Then I couldn’t get the camera on my phone to open. The screen was frozen, the filter slow to load. Around me people took their selfies and dispersed. Angela began to walk away, so I followed at a polite distance, trying to think of a question to ask her, something about her step-grandchildren or the future of democracy, all the while fiddling with my phone. A couple of blocks and she reached her doorstep, was about to slip inside a flower-trimmed townhouse when finally I managed to open the lens. I held out my arm and stood on the brick stairs below her, the tall stout figure of Angela Merkel. She leaned down to get inside the frame. She smiled sweetly. An informal clique gathered to watch Angela Merkel put her arm around my shoulder when someone in this sudden faction shot me with a water pistol. I laughed, but that laugh masked outrage that Chancellor Merkel might get splashed in the doorway of her very own house. And then without a word she slipped inside. The door clicked shut, and I started down the stairs, exceedingly pleased that I had met Angela Merkel. Someone else looming and vigilant patted me on the back. Let’s see, they said. I thumbed through the photos but there were only a few blurry shots of crossbars on windows and crows on streetlights. There was one of me on the brick stoop, gritting my teeth, biting back a laugh, my face wet with tears. But no Angela Merkel. She was nowhere to be seen. The crowd turned away, a slow murmur trailing down the street dissolving into ordinary traffic. Alone, I shuffled glumly toward my hotel. Oh Angela, where have you gone? On whose doorstep will we build our welcome now?


^^EOP^^

She looks at your papers.
She asks your husband to step out.
She asks you where your husband’s birthplace is.
She is testing you. You answer:            we were made in water in free-flowing 
          salt water rich with plankton 
          & we keep a fire 
          in our lungs it burns white 
          red in the center like a hibiscus 
          you must know we are all manic 
          you must know we are not ink 

^^EOP^^

You pick me up late
a viscous outflow 
from the volcanic ledge
of my thinking. 
Me in my duplex-hunger,
in my firestorm-astonished 
dress, the pattern of crisp asphalt,
the pattern, simple condensed 
nuclei, against my dry
lightning ache. You pick me up late 
and we drive through
polyhedronated structures 
of sound and civics-minded lives,
lives bearing fruit with no regard 
for the termination-tables
recently made, vast ledgers 
of waste, of debits,
of human trees.  Debris is my name I say
as we drive past 
the decibels, the altostratusly
hung steeples, debris is 
my name

^^EOP^^

Let's Make

Pyres of brush
as anagram
of spontaneous com-
bustion, cloud
filling with wind
vectors, blasts
of char in my a-
orta, aerial fuels,
how feelings
are an anchor
point on the
aspect, a single
tree, dead.
You were
the wild mech-
anism of the
vortex column
ascending through
a crown of
pines and blinding
the absolute
forbs. Oh mol-
ecules of blue
echolocation
ground down
to stumps, for-
give me, I built
our love on
the fire line
between stra-
ta, the grasses
smoldering, ta-
ta, my radiant
burn, you’re the a-
pex, a charisma, se-
ed, Seer, Edenic
source text, ex-
it, woo
wound round
woe the two-way
radio waves
a fre-
quency never
quenched.
It is not me
searing on
the scaffold,
it is not me in-
side the excruciating
landscape’s crux
and hex. I cannot
hold you dear
anymore, dear
tangential rope,
but what bright
christenings you
bring into swirling
conflagrations,
red flags flapping
in the red fire
where the terrible
climactic descent
is dissected by
an atmospheric
death, an apotheosis
of form retracing
one more minute
one more minute
the guru says
but where am I
torching as vol-
uptuous underburn,
tender water erasing
the rocks, tender
tender water
erasing the granite.
the Water

A phantom
tracking the trip-
tych as pivot as
hydra flows
into hydro, it is my
personal theory of dis-
persion, sensory
overload used for
CIA experiments,
said one tremendous
wave to the next tre-
mendous wave that
came from thousands
of miles away, and
the first raised its voice,
as the second lowered
its voice and so on
and so forth and the waves
had a long conversation
with each other, talked
of what they had lost,
“Have you left anything
in the world you
didn’t wash away
by flood?” asked
the first wave.
“I have been burned
by the vapor
of many stars,” replied
the second. “It is
a sort of sensory
deprivation they
suffer from,” said
the first wave
and then the two waves
softly decayed
on the stretched
beach and they
could tell from the smell
of the sand
in the desert
that it is was spring 
the way sound
fluctuates almost
indefinitely
and they felt
the two sides of
water wrap
around the birds
and they could hear
the oranges
ripening on the trees
more inland
and the gentle
frenzy of bees
and the little
girl walking
toward a mirage,
passing the mirage
into real water
and they could
reach very far
into her little
iris and could
see the entire
ocean in the
background
which was the birthplace
of waves, the little
girl and the story,
a generative
repetition as
the little girl
picked the fruit
and ate it quietly
by herself.
Turn Black

He told the story of
a hang glider who lost
his arm in 1998
not flying but
rather hopping
freights full
of cattle, trains tremb-
ling with agitated
meat that would
not accept the adverse
conditions of their
demise, would not
accept their direction
of travel and when
the man returned home
several months later
to his northern town
of aurora borealis,
huckleberries,
and hang gliders,
all his hang glider
friends had died due
to the defective
wings the company
manufactured,
so we can see
this irony as mythos
on the fringe
of wind, that they
died in the latent
tower’s downdraft,
in the deep cyclonic
ice, in the super-
cooled remnants where
there remains a dense,
vigorous orb, an
iridescence, a cadence
that wraps the flagrant
urge eclipsed
by bites, a spectrum
of trauma-in-
duced reckoning.
Where was
the man’s arm?
He knocked on a hex-
agonal pat-
tern, I mean
he knocked on the door
of what falters,
I mean he knocked
on the door of the poly-
phonic, on what
cannot resonate or est-
ablish itself
in one eloquence,
their mouths, ears,
eyes full of graupel
and graupel on
their tongues as a
charm, as language
spiraling through
waves, fire, centuries
toward earth, turning
round and around
as mechanism, as
phenomenon, how
lucky I am thinks
the man, I would like
an omelet and coffee
thinks the man who
is now content to fade
unlike the others’
manifold omen, a lull
so turbulent—
I fold in
I fold in.
 


^^EOP^^




Ok, I’m gonna go ahead and ask ... have ya’ll ever seen floaters this clean. I’m
not trying to be an a$$ but I HAVE NEVER SEEN FLOATERS LIKE THIS,
could this be another edited photo. We’ve all seen the dems and liberal parties
do some pretty sick things.
—Anonymous post, “I’m 10-15” Border Patrol Facebook group



Like a beer bottle thrown into the river by a boy too drunk to cry,
like the shard of a Styrofoam cup drained of coffee brown as the river,
like the plank of a fishing boat broken in half by the river, the dead float.
And the dead have a name: floaters, say the men of the Border Patrol,
keeping watch all night by the river, hearts pumping coffee as they say
the word floaters, soft as a bubble, hard as a shoe as it nudges the body,
to see if it breathes, to see if it moans, to see if it sits up and speaks. 
And the dead have names, a feast day parade of names, names that
dress all in red, names that twirl skirts, names that blow whistles,
names that shake rattles, names that sing in praise of the saints:
Say Óscar Alberto Martínez Ramírez. Say Angie Valeria Martínez Ávalos.
See how they rise off the tongue, the calling of bird to bird somewhere
in the trees above our heads, trilling in the dark heart of the leaves. 
Say what we know of them now they are dead: Óscar slapped dough
for pizza with oven-blistered fingers. Daughter Valeria sang, banging
a toy guitar. He slipped free of the apron he wore in the blast of the oven,
sold the motorcycle he would kick till it sputtered to life, counted off
pesos for the journey across the river, and the last of his twenty-five
years, and the last of her twenty-three months. There is another name
that beats its wings in the heart of the trees: Say Tania Vanessa Ávalos,
Óscar’s wife and Valeria’s mother, the witness stumbling along the river. 
Now their names rise off her tongue: Say Óscar y Valeria. He swam
from Matamoros across to Brownsville, the girl slung around his neck,
stood her in the weeds on the Texas side of the river, swore to return
with her mother in hand, turning his back as fathers do who later say: I turned around and she was gone. In the time it takes for a bird to hop
from branch to branch, Valeria jumped in the river after her father.
Maybe he called out her name as he swept her up from the river;
maybe the river drowned out his voice as the water swept them away.
Tania called out the names of the saints, but the saints drowsed
in the stupor of birds in the dark, their cages covered with blankets.
The men on patrol would never hear their pleas for asylum, watching
for floaters, hearts pumping coffee all night on the Texas side of the river. 
No one, they say, had ever seen floaters so clean: Óscar’s black shirt
yanked up to the armpits, Valeria’s arm slung around her father’s
neck even after the light left her eyes, both face down in the weeds,
back on the Mexican side of the river. Another edited photo: See how
her head disappears in his shirt, the waterlogged diaper bunched
in her pants, the blue of the blue cans. The radio warned us about
the crisis actors we see at one school shooting after another; the man
called Óscar will breathe, sit up, speak, tug the black shirt over
his head, shower off the mud and shake hands with the photographer. 
Yet, the floaters did not float down the Río Grande like Olympians
showing off the backstroke, nor did their souls float up to Dallas,
land of rumored jobs and a president shot in the head as he waved
from his motorcade. No bubbles rose from their breath in the mud,
light as the iridescent circles of soap that would fascinate a two-year-old. 
And the dead still have names, names that sing in praise of the saints,
names that flower in blossoms of white, a cortege of names dressed
all in black, trailing the coffins to the cemetery. Carve their names
in headlines and gravestones they would never know in the kitchens
of this cacophonous world. Enter their names in the book of names.
Say Óscar Alberto Martínez Ramírez; say Angie Valeria Martínez Ávalos.
Bury them in a corner of the cemetery named for the sainted archbishop
of the poor, shot in the heart saying mass, bullets bought by the taxes
I paid when I worked as a bouncer and fractured my hand forty years
ago, and bumper stickers read: El Salvador Is Spanish for Vietnam. 
When the last bubble of breath escapes the body, may the men
who speak of floaters, who have never seen floaters this clean,
float through the clouds to the heavens, where they paddle the air
as they wait for the saint who flips through the keys on his ring
like a drowsy janitor, till he fingers the key that turns the lock and shuts
the gate on their babble-tongued faces, and they plunge back to earth,
a shower of hailstones pelting the river, the Mexican side of the river.


^^EOP^^

the open room 
where green means
light 
small haves
declared 
informed by patience
or place 
soft, or within
trees 
left, within leaves 
the other haves
were the way I 
the other way
to go from here 
for color, bright
green of fall 
green means light
means green 
pine tiny 
the small halves
the small halfs 
why not


^^EOP^^

Wasn’t it the hidden folk
lived under the barn
that summer when
no one left them
their porridge and sweets
as they were wont to do
when everyone was in
good health and the cows
all sound and giving milk
but no one had asked
the hidden ones’ permission
to use their meadow
when the new folks
moved in and didn’t she say
it was the hidden man so handsome
and dressed better than any of us
with our poor sheepskin shoes
who seduced our daughter
when we were away
and then gave her a son 
And wasn’t it when the boy
whose own father teased him
and called him weak and ergi
who was left alone to watch the sheep
when he disappeared
for many years only to reappear
at his father’s deathbed
dressed in fine clothes
embroidered with gold
to claim his inheritance 
And wasn’t it on Christmas eve
as dark and foggy as it was
when we all went
to the Christian church
that the hidden ones
started a fire that burned the barn
and that same night
when riding home
our brother and neighbor
fell and was lost in a deep crevice
hidden by the snow
as dark and foggy as it was


^^EOP^^

It was summer in Hokkaido.
           The forest stole the wind
           and I swallowed my footsteps.
           Nobody came to the springs.
           Butt naked I sat halfway
           through my life measuring
           this, that.
In Hokkaido it was summer.
           Everything was halved or merged.
           Half-cut fingers, half-foxgloves,
           a marrowbone-cum-cabbage white.
           The daylight moon, split.
           I talked to nobody about
           this, that.
Hokkaido in summer it was.
           Ants were carrying a caterpillar
           home. No bird arguing.
           Nobody said missiles crossing
           so I stayed. The night trees
           stole the seas, canceling
           this, that.


^^EOP^^

At the front of the room I look out at the faces
The light is fluorescent, the faces are lit
The windows in the back of the room are dark
My mouth makes sounds like “ughh” and “thh” and “and”
My tongue shapes to the inside of my mouth and I am aware of it
At the front of the room I’m taller
I stand while others are seated
They look at me while I open my mouth, expectant, as if I will show them something
They ask a question:
The darkness comes in from outside
It seeps though the crack in the door
They ask a question
What it is about:
Behind me the white board feels uncertain, I can cover or uncover
Mosiac, I spell, “mosaic,” they say
I do not erase and replace
My mouth gets hot and makes a sound like “mo,” like “say,” like “this is where you might
second-guess yourself”
We all can hear metal being wiped in the restroom beyond the wall
We all know the cart outside waits for us to finish
They turn to the page or turn to the screen and write
I stand and write and I am aware of looking them over
My tongue folds to the edge of my mouth
 


^^EOP^^

It’s gone thirty years since this light steel disc
                                   warmed to his skin,
sixty and more since I laid my child’s ear
                                   closer to hear
what I could not read (for who goes there?
                                   to Babylon, hourly):
my play-time shortened by the whisper of a tick,
                                   its sprung mechanism,
light-tongued creature, touch-ing, touch-ing
                                   (so whose time is it?)
his wrist’s pale skin, my wondering ear,
                                   and I praying
for more time to play, as the calculating thing
                                   dialed the sunshine’s
livelong light and stole my day
                                   with three thin hands—
nothing like hands, but insect feelers
                                   that rounded up
my first garden’s early dream-time,
                                   snaffled away. 
Then, it was only play-time I’d save
                                   from the scuff of  its count,
its too smooth run of minutes, hours,
                                   its winning way;
now, finding it silent in a drawer,
                                   I bend my ear
and wind the tiny tractor wheel
                                   to hear it still touch-ing, touch-ing, after thirty years,
                                   his wasted wrist
raced to its ending, and the child’s child-wish,
                                   long vanished, dismissed,
to stay in a garden as light diminished.
                                   I strap its cold
close on my wrist-bone, the leather-worn eyelets
                                   stretched (almost torn)
to the buckle-tongue, till the fit’s my own,
                                   my anyone’s timing,
and listen—to the doomsday drummer in it—
                                   just for a tick.


^^EOP^^

in İskenderun or Cairo or God only knows
it fell from my name 
got trampled in dirt, wasn’t
scorpion-crunched but scrambled and scuttled and fashioned 
from dust a magnificent hopalong gung-ho
hop and went 
up
up 
up to a perch in the cleft of a spindly
twig 
not a halo as such nor legible
signage—construed as a fly or an optical 
blur, dashed-off-forever-unfinished notation
inscrutable 
scrap—a blink or a blip, caress, kiss, wince or
half of an upturned 
discarded moustache
who knows? 
but up there for years 
nonchalant
unattributable 
an ahem, an unnoticed notice-me-please 
elliptical 
in the olive trees


^^EOP^^

 



^^EOP^^

or i swear i’m gonna burn this motherfucker down. 
doctor don’t think i’ll do it. he say real
girls like boys. you sure you real?

^^EOP^^

My Mother’s Teeth—died twice, once in 1965, all pulled out from gum disease. Once again on August 3, 2015. The fake teeth sit in a box in the garage. When she died, I touched them, smelled them, thought I heard a whimper. I shoved the teeth into my mouth. But having two sets of teeth only made me hungrier. When my mother died, I saw myself in the mirror, her words in a ring around my mouth, like powder from a donut. Her last words were in English. She asked for a Sprite. I wonder whether her last thought was in Chinese. I wonder what her last thought was. I used to think that a dead person’s words die with them. Now I know that they scatter, looking for meaning to attach to like a scent. My mother used to collect orange blossoms in a small shallow bowl. I pass the tree each spring.  I always knew that grief was something I could smell. But I didn’t know that it’s not actually a noun but a verb. That it moves.


^^EOP^^


 


^^EOP^^

If  I claim this poem presents the tundra
swans we saw at first light, you might,
wrongly, think of  Yeats at Coole. 
Or 9-&-50 other suppositions. In fact,
the blue slate of this lake reflected formerly
some blockchain constellations. Alas 
now for mimesis; a star necklace makes
an atlas, windlass, spyglass, free pass: so
you say. But, come on. I swan, who 
ever took the mark for the squawk,
the squawk for the Ding
                                    an sich? The weird
ding is, the things themselves, swanning 
about, are also mere wavy carboxyl
collusions, un-establishable is-es, noise-marks
hoo-ing, Here! Over here!  Hush up 
your eyes: the swans in their ghost forest,
where long needles inscribed loblolly pines, are vehement enough. Past 
the channel, early savannah shine prisms
on grass heads’ fog. Don’t make
a deal of it. Sun dogs will yap soon. 
Pinions may clatter. Your head may
stop throbbing. Hold fast. Stop who-ing.


^^EOP^^




It is impossible to come up with a fair metric for recompensing slavery ten
generations after slavery’s end.
—Ben Shapiro, Fox News 



What apple, which conquistador
oats? Which ruby red
moat, what filet of bartered goat?
Which glazed carrot caught your nose, 
drew you into the station
w/ blinders on? Horse’s ass.
Quaffed cad. Whatdoya call a
property tax on a revolving 
accessory? What’s a loan
w/o a lessor, B? Which of these
eventualities is not like the other—free
& clear from the shattering / a mast 
of tears makes / when it fractures /
scalpels away / silt / clean off 
a runaway cliff,
before gashing the quarry w/ after-
shot? I’ll take my safety net in breakneck
class action union wage annuity checks 
from Ancestry.com, 23 & Everybody
Who’s Made a Killing Trafficking
in Families & Trees. Run me my knot,
Money. Untie my limbs. Underwrite 
the court costs, plus notary fees
to petition my change of surname.
Now multiply that expense by a modest
interest rate accrued over 154 summers, 
give or take. Or strap weights
to your ankles / go float in a lake.


^^EOP^^




Noun: A uniting or binding element or force.



              The thing about facing your fears head on
is it only really works on TV. As an example, let’s say
              a clawfoot bathtub teeming with arachnids 
is your garden variety anti-fantasy.
              Now, say the sitcom dad in you gets the itch
to do something experiential, something special 
              for your 40th (stay with me), so you willingly
dive into a pool of 10,000 tarantulas, head-
              first. In the Fear Factor version 
of this midlife episode, Ludacris is like
              Man, white people are crazy.
In reality, this sounds like a frightful fucking 
              headache, six ibuprofen & stitches.
Like 80,000 eyeballs all up in your situation,
              if you catch my drift. & I bet, 
the last thing you need is a group of  hairy
              climbers, & their many-legged offspring,
ogling your property. Sniffing up the ol’ oak tree 
              after the acorns you squirreled away
for the fam when the market was healthy.
              Square any beef  between two parties 
& you’ll find money lurking somewhere
              near the root. Of evil & fear,
Aristotle claimed, pain arises 
              from the untoward bracing.
He strikes me as a particularly
              anxious dude. Extreme fear can neither 
fight nor fly

^^EOP^^

It is hard to make this choice
when the room is so small and bright,
and the outside big and deep.
But I have not taught myself
to lie on the earth and feel
how much greater it is than me.
And I can’t help following the sky
with my eyes as it moves past me,
and I can’t help closing my eyes to imagine
the boat that carries me to the middle
of a lake as dark as the gaps between the clouds.
I forget everything I have learned
about how to hold myself
at the last edges of sensation
when not so long ago I held
the small hands of a child
and taught her to play a clapping game,
when I stood before a storm of scalding water
that would have killed me
if I gave it the mistake it looked for.
After all this time, we still must love and eat,
and none of us is alone.
See why I create these places where I am a stone.
In the bed, soft against the side
where I make the dark blanket more beautiful
and the sheet a pale and magnificent drawing,
there is nowhere to wrap the part of myself
that understands the handshake of  joy
in my arms and hold her while she cries.
The sink is running in the next room
and the walls are flashed with what the world does at night.
Too much of us is evident in this hour
and I am sick with a cold fever
that hasn’t broken since I was a girl
who loved how good it was to sleep
on the floor, so near to the silent ground.
Still, the boat, and the dark water
that has its private depth.
It never tries to carry me anywhere.
It makes the wind wait in the trees.


^^EOP^^

   All hands were on deck as we docked
in the nerve church, metaphoric boat
  of soul metamorphic, boat-shaped back
                                                                of
    the oud whose belly we rode in, ety-
mologic boat of soul catastrophic, church
 whose nave we were in. Church cast-
ing color cast a stain on the world. It bore
                                                                 the
   bright light we’d been thru, gone round
and come thru again, metamorphic boat
  of soul metaphoric, of what no one would
                                                                    say ...
    Whatever it was was what soul was, of
which only the asker wanted to know.
   All hands were on deck even so. All had
                                                                gone
 well were it only body nerve church meant,
   well were it only soul it meant, well were
it not a thread of the two, other than either, a
                                                                       thread
    and a third, off to itself. All had gone well
 that way, would’ve gone well were it the way,
  way that it wasn’t, would that it were ... We
                                                                       lay
     held in the oud whose belly was black, all
  hands on deck as we docked, bent neck and
   bent knee de rigueur in the nerve church, co-
nundrum the head it hit. Meat and bone apart
                                                                         from
   meat and bone was the nerve church, soul
unbeknown to itself it also was, a certain some-
  thing not something notwithstanding, asked
                                                                       a-
bout no matter no answer would accrue. All
  hands were on deck proclaiming soul, soul not
 something to be said to be had, soul that was
                                                                       a
   boat and that sat in the boat it was, borne
beknown to itself. All hands were on deck not
 proclaiming soul. The less we boasted the
                                                                     bet-
ter we rode the boat that soul was, the boat that
                                                                           sold
  us thought to be that
boat  
                      •  
 Some were said to have limbo’d below deck,
  the lute’s dark insides a madrigal of sorts, its
back less back than belly. Some were said to
                                                                     have
   bent back while surrounded by singers, bent
back so far their heads were on the floor. The
  backs of their heads were on the floor, it was
                                                                       said,
    brushed it, the back of the head a belly di-
 gesting damage, no way its way a way ... Some
  were said, once on deck, to have jumped, a
shark’s teeth or breathlessness the way, no way,
                                                                        was
 theirs, jumped, some said, or were thrown. We
   knew all this coming into the nerve church, its
nave encyclopedic, no outrage not written down,
                                                                             histo-
   ry a parable of nerve, who
had it     
             ________________ 
   Huff sat at the wheel of the bus calling it a
boat. We were leaving Low Forest again,
 a sea of green he called it, all aboard as he
                                                                  now
called the bus a train. Eleanoir’s blue truck
  it might’ve been, might well have been,
might as well have been, so metamorphic the
                                                                       dock
   whence we embarked ... It was nothing if
not Eleanoir’s dream, the ship we were in, lute
  of the light-lady of night, Eleanoir’s loot, we
                                                                       sur-
   mised. Not since primordial beak met pri-
mordial seed had it so accrued, no mile not
 haunted, no matter what move we made. Our
                                                                            bus
  put-putted a-
long  
                      •  
   A canopy of leaves overhead as we made
our way, the sea of green Huff insisted we
 call it, the bus our boat and all of it the nerve
                                                                        church,
   nothing not inflected by the blood-guzzling
lute whose intestines history was. Wagadu
  lay within sight even so, it or the Eleven Light
City, Eleanoir sitting behind the driver’s seat,
                                                                         whis-
    pering things in Huff’s ear ... Eleanoir and
Huff we’d have never thought but there it was,
 Huff under Eleanoir’s influence, Eleanoir
                                                                 un-
   der his. A boat their bed would be, we
heard him whisper back, his and her wish as
 much ours as theirs, that history give way
                                                                 to
romance, what lit the nerve church. Our bus
  bumped along, vestiges of memory afoot, de-
bris the boat of soul grew laden with, the lute
                                                                       our
  boat also was claiming blood ... The school
     of oud instructed us, taught with drawn strings,
taut cartilage and sinew also known as nerve
 church, our tutorial wherein, we saw, would no
                                                                           time
   soon recess. Eleanoir’s face, which had float-
ed many a boat, now floated Huff’s it came clear
  for us to see, nerve church, whose nave we
docked in, nuptial perhaps, our notional romance
                                                                              call-
   ing history moot, such the way we got by ... 
Such the way we got by proved everyday by soul
 music, Brother B said. Peaches and Herb had
                                                                       come
    on the box. A metaphoric love boat the meta-
morphic boat of soul turned into now. We were
 on our way who knew where, bus, boat, train or
                                                                  truck,
 on our way wherever, soon
come     
                      •  
   We felt the press of consequence inside the
nerve church, the lute’s underbelly the oud,
  the madrig’s underbelly the panther, the deck’s
                                                                           un-
derbelly the hold, metamorphic soul’s under-
belly foreboding. We were far from Low For-
est now, far from Lone Coast, on a train from
                                                                        Bar-
celona to Lyon. Eleanoir slept lying across the
seat across from Itamar and me, her head on
Huff’s lap. Her small feet peeped out beautifully
                                                                            from
under the blanket she lay wrapped up in ... The
train was a boat or it would take us to a boat,
unclear which, the boat of soul that lay docked in the
nerve church, all hands on deck awaiting us, if not,
                                                                                 ac-
cording to some, none other than us. It was night,
nothing visible outside our windows. The commis-
erative dead gauged our quotient of soul, no one able
to say what it was though we rode it, the riding alone
                                                                                    was
clear ... The train ran away with us, took us away,
soul riding us it seemed, warm and humid with the
breath and the breathing of bodies, a blind winding
                                                                                  or
a boat finding its way thru the night. There was
no way to know it but by its effects, Itamar was say-
ing, an array of aromas we took to pertain thereto
                                                                              per-
 vading our
car     
             ________________ 
 Voices fell from the sky, never not
   inflected by the dead on the sea floor,
the dead under leaf, needle and cone in
                                                              Low
     Forest, the dead and how they came
to be that way everywhere ... They spoke
  of this as the bus rattled on, the boat
                                                            cut
thru water, the truck struggled going
    up a mountain, the train cried arkestral,
 soul bumped again and again against
                                                           what
 would not
have it


^^EOP^^

   Eleanoir and Huff served as a marker, their con-
     juncture an imaginal sound no sound could
equal. It was an unkept, unkeepable promise, an
                                                                           un-
   keepable secret as well, the sound of words
on a page. We had gone wordless at the appren-
  tice prez’s antics, albeit much deeper was
                                                                  what
    was hitting the fan. The top was only the
tip, no matter how wide it spread. We worked
  hard remembering that, Nub gone into Nur
                                                                         wide-
eyed where it was going, Nub’s collapse into
    Nur the one-third wanted, a line crossed, cross-
 es burned again ... Words had held forth in the
                                                                          nerve
   church and they held forth now, held forth a-
gain, words on the tips of our tongues and on
  the tips of other tongues, other tongues on the
                                                                             tips
    of our tongues. The imaginal sound no sound
could match kept at us, Nur the noise despite
   which we took our stab at living, hate afoot noth-
ing new. Nub stubs its toe from time to time we
                                                                              knew,
   maybe all the time. “Let’s call it Stub,” Itamar
let out, wording up. We put some music from Zan-
  zibar on the box but took it off, not enough oud.
                                                                                We
    were the school of oud, school of Udhra, the
 fools it took to learn, anything but the monied
  ones. “Con amor todo se puede,” we said, semi-
said, semisang ... We each felt an oud’s back or
                                                                          belly
   against our abdomen, could each feel it verg-
    ing on ribcage theater. Our vehicular ambigu-
ity bothered us not at all. The dead rode with
                                                                       us,
   never not there, just as we, when dead, would
never not be there. The dead’s legendary thirst
  was the imaginal sound no sound could match,
                                                                          syn-
    aesthetic the best we could do trying to speak
 of it, the sound we were driven by. The dead’s
  legendary thirst made us bedouins, lips chapped
no matter the green of Low Forest, the beloved’s
                                                                           lips
    likewise dry ... Otherwise we were silent, true
Pythagoreans, as if we’d been asked about the
  square root of two, sixty-five times two to the
                                                                          sec-
    ond all we’d say about number, be under or
inside more what it was than say. It was song six-
  ty-five times four we were in or were under,
                                                                       bent
    tautological figure, self-reflex, number the
 letter it was. So it was we kissed like we were
  thirsty when we did, incendiary no matter it was,
tongue a jet of flame no matter. We wanted to be
                                                                            fools
   in Stub, where not to be was to prey on others ... 
     Eleanoir and Huff had faded back into the we
we’d be, absorbed, reabsorbed, back to as they’d
  been before, the literalness of number never more
                                                                                irrel-
   evant, a feeling for the none what obtained. They
knew a philosophical readiness riding the curve
  of the belly or back the boat of soul we’d boarded
                                                                              was,
   a feeling for the none no one in Nub, Nur, Stub
wanted to know it was running from. We sought
  what solace there was looking out at the varieties
                                                                               of
 green to be seen in Low For-
est     
             ________________ 
   A feeling for the none seemed to accrue as we
motored on. Mock transit it might’ve been. We
  saw a deer carcass picked at by buzzards on the
                                                                           side
   of the road. “See them as musicians,” Ahdja
remarked, looking out her window, “see them
  as playing the oud, the way their beaks pull at
                                                                          the
   carcass a music we can see but not hear.” We
 indeed did see the none of it, buzzard beaks a
   barrage of plectra, ligament and sinew the strings
plucked and picked. The buzzards were hands and
                                                                              fingers
 whose play grew labored, a divine or demonic
   vehemence made a music we almost heard.
Hawks rendered the sky another Pred Lake, Low
                                                                            For-
   est a kind of heaven e-
ven so  
                      •  
All accruing to the none we knew and bore
   knowing. Was polis only a part of that, we
  wondered, the law of selection an election
                                                                   taken
  away, an outpost on Pred Lake. Elegiac
    roost, elegiac witness, elegy what told us
what time it was, foothold fallen away or
                                                                 taken
   away if not fallen, carcass on the side of
the road ... The putrid music Ahdja made
 us imagine was not the imaginal sound. A
                                                                  rib-
   cage harmonics attended it all, so sad we
laughed in self-defense. An allegorical cast we
  thought it might get, events of which we
                                                                   were
 the terms, the meaning, each an attribute’s
   embodiment albeit none of us could say ex-
actly which. An insensate chill came over
                                                                ev-
   erything, hot, humid day though it was.
    The deer’s ribcage chimed a comedic air,
divine-comedic air. Never had Low Forest
  resounded so ... We bumped along, happy to
                                                                       have
    air to breathe, the green leaves doing their
job, lungs for a time healthy, all of us eventual-
  ly none. Scraps of memory rode what breeze
                                                                       there
   was, chill sonority real but abstract. Scraps
of melody they might have been as well were we
  to hear again, we put Live at the Village Van-
guard Again!

^^EOP^^

My mother warns me not to blow-dry my hair
           too hard, turning it from black to rust, and
I must wear my black hair proudly. Black,
           the color of clothing my grandmother hates,
because young women should always wear red
           or pink, the colors of luck and youth. Black,
the color of wedding dress the reality TV
           starlet circa 2006 wants, but she knows
walking down the aisle in black will break
           her mother’s heart, and fact: red is the color
of wedding dresses in Chinese culture—even
           if the bride wears white for the ceremony,
she’ll change into red for the dinner—hello,
           ten course meal of my dreams that starts 
           with a meat platter of roasted pork, and how
guests go crazy for the abalone and swallow’s
           nest soup with crab meat, and of course there’s
a chicken, a pig, a fish, a duck, and a lobster—
           roll call. And fact: at Chinese funerals, relatives
of the deceased don’t wear black, but white.
           And fact: eight’s the lucky Chinese number,
not seven, and at dim sum, my grandmother
           makes sure she orders eight dishes, not seven,
but nine’s alright too. Eight, like the number of
           legs on a spider—a spider, black, like my hair
that my mother warns me not to blow-dry
           too hard, turning it into rust, and I remember
my sixth-grade science experiment of lighting 
a cigarette, watching how the smoke changed
           the spider’s web spinning. And black, because
it’s hypnotic, like little black dresses on gorgeous
           women, or how I prefer my lingerie in black
over white, but red is probably the best, an ode
           to sexiness—an ode to the color of my culture
and history, and I want to feel like a million
           dollars—be a million dollars. And black, the color
of my late dog, Buzzie, a Skye Terrier, twice as long
           as he was low, my mother once, joking, said he looked
like a giant rat. Or a licorice bunny. Or a furry snake.
           Or a dragon in some iterations of love, majestic in
dreams—how I miss him after these dream visits,
           black, the color of my wet hair in the morning.


^^EOP^^

                    
                    
                    Not broad or gregarious inaccuracy but refined exploratory drift evolved as proto-micro diagnosis. At this plane of sensitivity a dispatch of nerves explore themselves via vigorous angles that subsist as intermingled wave-lengths. For instance, a blue correlation of mirrors that function as impalpable devices empowered by analytical recitation of cellular fire spawned inside of opaque dimensions having nothing in common with utilitarian belief, yet being something that exists beyond registered finding that registers in terms of palpable result. Because the dark remains stored by means of caliginous registration it never beams as a three-dimensional statute that summons itself as an unmoving noun. I am not speaking via grammatical punctuation or the brutality of stationary conquest pattern but as electrical residue claimed as hyper-magnetic insight.
 
                

^^EOP^^

What does it matter that this cold June breaks, another dish
on the kitchen floor, skittering under the table legs. 
So it requires the long strawed broom, the extra stoop.
It will have out. When the sun comes back. When the rain stops.  
But something doesn't fit. Something isn't fitting.
The washing machine jams and hums too loudly. The chickadees
fall from the trees. A swallow is caught in the chimney.
The smallest ram lamb isn't eating. The days pass.  
June is too cold. The spiders threaten to overrun the nest
lodged in the rafters. They can't be eaten fast enough.
The mother, beside herself, has seen this happen only once before,
the eggs draped with gauze.  
No letters come. The small tin flag is down. The house creeps
farther from the road. The grass rises in the rain. The scythes
rust and will not cut. The blades squeak and sigh, nothing
to be done. We close the porch doors, but every night 
they open just a little. We hear it from the bedroom, 
a small creak. no one there. The cold lies down in the meadow
where the sheep are credulous and sturdy and dumb, but
the ram lamb will not eat. His mother has already forgotten him. 
The windows will not stay shut. Even the small nails
we bang in are loose in the morning, and the screens flap
a little in the small cold wind. From under the covers,
I watch you move around the house, fixing the broken things: 
the desk lamp, the toaster, the radio that still will not speak.
The red hens haven't laid in a week. There's nothing we can do. 
Nothing. It could be ten years ago. I could be dreaming.
This could be last winter all over again 
with the wood stacked and the snow rushing from miles away.
Then too, the trees leaned a little funny and the cat
disappeared for days. Nothing would make him come back. 
 


^^EOP^^

Because all energy went into making him breathe
dawn was not noticeable 
though on the beach it was bigger than anywhere
else, awakened stars stowing away in sand, 
low-tide sparkle of a cosmos the sea will take away,
subtraction is basic, the boy's body when movement 
is subtracted becomes less, there is hardly any boy
left, his color drains invisibly; it leaves him 
to arrive nowhere, his chest becomes a sunken basket
for white peaches (out of season) 
through what he's lost, not what he's gained. 
:: 
I loved Jerdy
and if my name's not here,
he won't know it was ever true
love, not that he hasn't been loved
by others 
also not present, subtracted from the picture,
and even if he has been loved by others
perhaps he won't be again 
unless someone falls for a picture;
that has been done (someone I know fell
for a picture of Cindy Song). 
Loving Jerdy now is to love him
in the way that makes most museums mean more
to me, he's not to be touched, ideally 
he's to be observed in silence, perhaps
photographed, probably without flash, 
and if he's not stolen, 
insulting the injury of his having been stolen from,
he can be returned to, sometimes only his outline 
while he's on loan and his permanent space
has a chance to discolor. 
He travels much more this way.
This way, it's not necessary for Jerdy to breathe. 
He hangs.                                    The museum is closed 
on Friday                                     open on Sundays. 
His arms rest                              on nails.                
   
He seems as wide                      as his length. 
Crowds gather.                          On the beach

^^EOP^^

Hearing a low growl in your throat, you'll know that it's started.
It has nothing to ask you. It has only something to say, and
it will speak in your own tongue. 
Locking its arm around you, it will hold you as long as you've ever wanted.
Only this time it will be long enough. It will not let go.
Burying your face in its dark shoulder, you'll smell mud and hair and water. 
You'll taste your mother's sour nipple, your favorite salty cock
and swallow a word you thought you'd spit out once and be done with.
Through half-closed eyes you'll see that its shadow looks like yours, 
a perfect fit. You could weep with gratefulness. It will take you
as you like it best, hard and fast as a slap across your face,
or so sweet and slow you'll scream give it to me give it to me until it does. 
Nothing will ever reach this deep. Nothing will ever clench this hard.
At last (the little girls are clapping, shouting) someone has pulled
the drawstring of your gym bag closed enough and tight. At last 
someone has knotted the lace of your shoe so it won't ever come undone. 
Even as you turn into it, even as you begin to feel yourself stop,
you'll whistle with amazement between your residual teeth oh jesus 
oh sweetheart, oh holy mother, nothing nothing ever felt this good. 


^^EOP^^

My father's oak, three years taller, stands taller now than I. 
Two crows for company.  
One gripping the telephone wire overhead, cries out.
The other, lumbering across the cold dirt like a man in a bar room, answers. 
Blocks away, a cloud of starlings startles and lifts in one great wavering
gesture, from one anonymous tree to another, 
leaves in a deliberate wind, 
and I, standing here, feel for one moment, that the earth does not move. 
The lumbering crow stumbles and flies screeching to the wire near the other.  
The leaves of the oak flutter, tarnished and dumb. 
Speak to me, crows. Teach me to walk like a sailor.
Tell me what this tree superintends. 


^^EOP^^

I. 
She'd start the fires under the bed.
I'd put them out. 
She'd take the broom stick and rape all the little girls.
I'd pull them aside, stroke their cheeks, and comfort them.
—How they would cry. 
Brit would fight the German soldiers.
She'd crouch by the banister waiting for them 
when I was too scared. 
And sometimes, she would push me farther into the back woods than I wanted to go 
But I was glad she did.  
She was mean and she liked it. 
She'd take off her clothes and dance in front of the mirror and she'd say things and she'd swear. 
She'd laugh at the crucifix, turn him upside down and watch him hang.
And she'd unhinge that piece of metal cloth between his legs
and run when she heard somebody coming 
leaving me. 
Mean as she was, I miss her.  
Only twice have I heard her laugh since then. 
Once, lying on my back in a yellow field,
I heard something that sounded like me in the back of my head
but it was Brit, 
and just now, making love with you, it's hard to tell you
but I heard her laugh.   
II. 
It began as a fear. 
There was something, not me, in the room. 
And translated into a dumbfounding
forgetfulness 
that stopped me on the street
puzzling 
over what year it was, what month. 
I began to watch my feet carefully.
Nevertheless, I suffered
accidents. 
The bread knife sliced my thumb
repeatedly 
the water glass shattered on the kitchen floor
and in its breaking there was a low laugh. 
Looking up, I saw no one 
but felt the old cat stretch inside me
feigning indifference.   Marie, I'd hear in a crowd, Marie
the air so thick with ghosts it was hard
breathing.  
One afternoon, the trucks were humming like vacuum cleaners
in the rain.  
It was impossibly lonely,
No one but me there: 
I called out Brit, the city is burning, 
Brit, the soldiers are coming 
and she laughed so sudden and loud I turned
and saw her for one second 
all insolent grace, pretending
she wasn't loving me. 


^^EOP^^

The boys of summer are climbing the building, 
splayed dark against the stone, they are using ropes.
Climbing together, three of them, in T-shirts 
and corduroys, hauling each other up, story
by story, stopping to speak carefully, deciding
direction: who will go first, who will belay, 
who will wait on the ledge they are leaving, climbing
slowly this way, watching each other's sneakers.
Years planning, a few missteps admittedly, 
several mix-ups at bus stations, a few times,
the phone ringing, no one there, but now
the boy are climbing and together, deliberate  
as flies. Below them, the doors open. Grownups
stumble out, dazed from inside the dark, to watch
the boys climbing in the sun, some whistling  
between their teeth, some grumbling a little. 
As women, settling on the grass, spread their skirts,
the boys test their holds, put, each of them, one foot 
on the ledge and bounce on their heels to feel the rope
pull taut and safe, and they don't look down. Some
of the grownups are thinking of calling the police.  
The boys of summer climb, stopping now only
to rest, pressing their faces flat against the stone
to watch each other and wink, wondering 
how they'll hook up to the fourth floor, where they know
there are suddenly windows. The day wanes. It is,
after all, November. The dark comes early. 
Windows, as the expected, open. Hands grab
for their long American legs. The boys, laughing, 
pull up their feet and stand, watching the fingers 
crawl on the sill. Some of these hands they almost
recognize. Finally, there are sirens,
a kind of music. Night falls 
and the boys climb in the searchlights, practicing
for the final ascent. The men directing the beams
caressing them with the incredulity 
boys feel when a fly is caught finally in the fist
after a thousand times trying. The grownups
bundled into lawn chairs, drink coffee.  
The boys hang like spiders and sleep, and all night
the lights caress them as the grownups watch.
At dawn, the boys of summer rise and climb again. 
They are not hungry. They go slower now. There is,
between them, something invisible. Forgetting
the ropes, they stare at each story with the calculated 
glances of serious climbers and they believe
everything they see. They love each other now,
climbing easily, some might say like monkeys, 
they have forgotten the feel of the earth flat
underfoot, climbing like this, into autumn,
their working shoulders impossibly beautiful 
as they squint, shading their eyes with sunburned fists,
the crowd, catching on, muttering story after story,
as the boys climb, by now, almost a fiction, 
too high to be seen clearly. But how they glow 
in their boy's strength and their beauty and their love.
What else would we have them do? They were born for this. 
They know it. The crowd thickening below them
as they scramble finally to the gravelly roof
and stand, stretching they still, for one moment 
before they leap, each of them, or fly, in almost
perfect swan dives, and fall 
like stones, or like boys 
with the thud of sure premonition to the eventual 
pavement, buckling, and man-made, that has been waiting
all this time, for them, with a deep and perfect gravity. 
 


^^EOP^^

With the voice of the fieldmouse
you squeak up to me, 
a sharp
clip,
you bite your way through my shirt to the skin, 
a cloth,
you slide across my mouth
midway through the words
I address to you, shadow,
to give you weight.


^^EOP^^

They multiply, these cities of the heart,
these rooms we lodge our bodies in. 
Brief beds: one California night
I swam between the humpbacked coastal ranges 
and woke Scotch-tinged, wet, newly dreaming
to smokestacks and sharp dawn in Queens. 
Light split the branches of fresh trees.
A stage-set life implied itself from props. 
Now morning— pigeon flocks, construction sites,
a Western freeway's glint, a garden filled 
with verbena, sage, my childhood light—
this midsummer, too, will go so soon. 
O unfinishable homes: You each feel so real so briefly.
I feel you incomplete me, incompletely. 


^^EOP^^

My language is dying the same way  
                  my father did:  
Alone. Night. And there are no storms. Only                     moonlight straining through holes in a tin roof  
And the slight exhalation, lips                     pursed as though to say:  Uwa'm. 


^^EOP^^

Below the skull there is a part of a letter 
shaped like a bone. But the skull is not a skull; 
it is a black dot with white teeth. And the piece 
of the letter under it is not really a bone, 
rather a dark spine. This is not the end of language. 
When it was alive it had a ribcage; 
each rib taken out by small pincers 
the way strands of eyelash are removed 
from eyelids. And the dot used to have eyes— 
white like two grains of salt. But they were dissolved 
by two drops of ink. The way a letter fades  
on the page after many years of reading 
or how it soaks into a fingerprint and forgets itself. 
The way a word tries to breathe inside 
a closed book; the way a letter shivers when 
a page is turned. Because underneath sound 
there is thought. Language, a complete structure 
within the white coffin of paper. If you shake it 
and listen, it will move, rattle like bones on the page. 


^^EOP^^

The start of a new era
Of desperation is starting over.  
Meanwhile you and your bronze friend
Run naked through the yellowed broom sage,
Suspended vaporously above life
Like high pressure systems. A redolent
Cascade of voices from the lawn
As the next new hope something will happen
Ascends the orangerie steps, an endless
Unpunctuated sentence that seems at the time
To illuminate everything, as if a giant
Had stepped between you and the sun,
Sucking the light and punching a hole
In space, revealing infinite vistas
Of anticipation and delay. 
These things have no beginning, or rather
Were set in motion long before we became
Their facsimile, thinking ourselves privileged
To secret information, not sensible
Of how the world contrives with enormous
Duplication of labor to rid itself of us
And perform its little routines
Solo in the galactic swimming pool
That is at last a total stage. It is
The amusing notion life might someday
Not be confusing that coordinates
Our award-winning sentiments these last days
Of summer, preparatory to the paint-by-number
Rush of autumn, the colors balking
Within their lines, which as a kid
Was the hardest part and apparently still is. 
You must do something, though, not caring
What it is, so long as when the day ends,
You're able to claim that this thing
has been accomplished, brought nearer
The perfection toward which it ludicrously 
Aspires, then put aside to be resumed
At a point just over the next rise yonder 
Where suddenly pertinent trees now loom. 


^^EOP^^

Scourging the sea with rods
To punish it for what it has engulfed,
Or running naked with your bronzed friend
Through yellow broom sage:
You can't be sure which remedy will be 
Fatal, or whether the density of the side-effects
Will prevent you from moving backwards
Across the threshold, to read
What the instructions might have said
If anyone had taken time to write them down,
So we could torture the words, make them
Confess their dirty little secret. It's tiered, 
As earth is, with faults perfectly expressing 
A gravitational will that we should stumble
Over them. And all the hints 
Get sponged up at night. Above the land fill—
Stars, glowing zircon strands of dump truck highbeams
Lined up, liquid and radiant, past the last
Open-all-night erotica boutique
Just over the state line of the last state.
Maybe they're the sparks we ignite
Rubbing each other the wrong way, fiery notes
Unwary rhapsodists pluck from the strings
Of incendiary violins. Is that what you think, too?
In truth, I prefer your mistaken identity,
The upside down one I can see at the back of my eyes
Before they flip you into focus, projecting you
Across a space at once so vast and so small
As not to excite even scientific curiosity.
But the light you throw off, out there, 
Is not enough to see you by. The tapered crimps
And ridges, scraped to the wall of the well,
Could be any number of people. Try
To communicate with the dying sometime
And you'll know what I mean. Each one is perfect,
Of its kind. Also, all are alike. Not even they
Can tell you, though, where the similarities end,
Whether it will be any different
For you. All I know is that what you are
To the waxed, limpid air of freak May in December
Or to this room, piled high
With genial household archetypes,
Is a formal relationship only, as the shape
Of an airplane-shaped shrub is
To the living plant it's made of. But to me,
And all I said and did, and all the time
It took me to get here, so much I forgot
The purpose of my visit, but kept in anyway; to me,
As I hold you, and the messy edges
Of our privacy overlap and then withdraw—
Think of me as three persons, and as one, 
But always who I am, ever changing
and complete, in the empire of the air
Or on the street, or with white sails 
Stiff against the wind, 
Whistling far out over the water. 


^^EOP^^

May Whitcomb's children wave from their veranda.
They sling their bicycles against the jhula.
At the door, their saried ayah.                     A bullock-wallah waits with a bullock cart.                   Dressed as pukka sahib, grandfather                   in the shadow of a banyan. 
Along stucco walls in Ahmednagar,
shirtwaisted women pose new babies—
New Englanders born on the Deccan.                    Men cradle guns.                   Around umbrellas, bending coolies,                   tiffins of church-picnic luncheon. 
Beside the stream, mudpies;
near tamarinds, their bungalow.                    New soldiers march beyond the gates.                   The mission quells the Empire's famines. 
(They feel, even then, the shifting:
Gandhi-ji has come from Africa
"and is, it seems, determined to start something," 
writes Great-Grandfather Alden,
noting our World may not be as it's been.)                    May still makes the holiday arrangements.                   The day of Fancy Dress, her cook prepares                   stuffed chicken for American Thanksgiving. 
Small Mary reads her books on Autumn,
and poses as "fallen leaf," while William
is "Red Indian Savage," feather in his cap.                    "And really," May writes, "is a perfect heathen."                   They receive hard cranberries                   from a parish off Cape Cod.                    Summon once again their pilgrim God.
Pray for succor in their wilderness. 


^^EOP^^

The table, lamp, and chair
strain against the ordinary light
that props up the window
spilling needles on the carpet,
shade recomposing on the sill. 
Mother wraps her fear into a towel
and shrinks upon her bed,
denying to the potent afternoon
the touch of quick emotions.
The engines of the house are still. 
The stillness is a bullet in her brain.
Upon the stake the ivy curls
like infant Jesus bloody on the grass.
The countertops are polished bright
and blue-veined as the mirrors. 
Clouds stroke the sky into autumn
while Mother sleeps and hates
the life that hurt her into sleep—
bound to one so much not herself,
she is his body's inarticulate host. 
She feels the pillow crease her cheek,
uncertain in the ache of waking.
No gloss of love dispels
the image of those angels she attends,
bow-tied detectives who take her away.


^^EOP^^




for Seema Kirmani



Nothing told us it would work out
This way, that nothing
Stays put in the drawer of itself. 
Down by the watering can
A squirrel is belief, whatever
He is thinking. And again, and at 
The water's edge, and for a long time
After summer vacation
Pieces of the wreck stabbed the shore
Whose revenue of loss engorged
The ribboned cone of a shell
And played the ear its thousand phrases. 
But the foreseeable future ended
And we are falling backwards 
Into the view from here that is too bashful
To be looked at or taken from a pocket
Ingenious as the heart's restive
Knowledge of the back of your head.
Where were we when a slab of morning
Overturned the previous day's verdict
Now placed in the evidence against us? 
I'm still thinking, the kite that that 
Vertebra of clouds is the tail of, 
Lifting me up like a number
Carried to the top of a column of figures
Sheerly by the logic of it
As a last-gasp oompah note drains
The afternoon of resourcefulness
And fear. The cloned minutes pass,
Each resembling the original 
In everything except
Not having been predicated on prior 
Misgivings, merely beguiled
Out of the need of space to put
Some distance between it
And the people who remained behind
After departing. Theirs is the sum
To be added up, once the 
Indecipherable messages delivered today
Become the sign of how much 
Waits to be said, in buildings
That are torn down and built again
And condemned, then raised by night.
And every flaw is equalized. 


^^EOP^^




for Seema Kirmani



You know me as the lighthousekeeper
Knows the weather, at night, on all sides.
Sometimes the summer sky is a hollow, dark
Socket and I feel as empty as my clothes
When I'm not in them. To feel fresh,
Like blood from a cut, is best, and to look
Up at the stars coming out, like tears 
Coming out of a face, is also best.
Thus each of our gestures amounts 
To a critique of the whole concept of action.
Not one of the spasms of sunlight
Splayed across the bed is undeserving 
Of my attention. We are attached,
Painfully, to the individual histories
Of these things, which count on us,
Like children, to do right by them.  
I should like to become better acquainted
With the facts of your biography, even
The uninteresting chapters where you just
Lie around all day, smoking cigarettes
And thumbing through magazines. The others,
Those in which love or lack of love
Coils your sympathies to a point of flame,
Like sun through a magnifying glass,
Consume themselves in their own intensity
And seem never to have happened. 
Humans cannot bear too much unreality:
The interlude of splendor, when everything
Was on the verge of falling into place
And yielding up, at last, its superabundance
Of pleasure undiluted by pain or pain
From which no particle of pleasure was absent,
Must and should give way to afternoons
Like these, washed out as an old signature,
The negative of dazzling. The voluptuousness
Of the act is in the waiting and the not knowing 
And the wanting and yet not wanting to know
The outcome and the hope that the outcome
This time will be that there will be no outcome
But that time will accommodate itself
To a kind of infinite delay in which
You are moving forward and not standing still,
Yet never approaching or catching sight of,
Through waves of distance, whatever's there. 
If our dreams are unattainable, that is all
The more reason to keep on dreaming,
As there can be no question of the fully achieved
Life or the flawless consummation of anything. 
And there can be no doubt that the only 
Immortality is in not dying and not in what
I write or do, though I wish you could be there
Forever, listening and accepting, as though
None of it were really silly or wrongheaded, 
But somehow beautiful, like the story I heard
Once of someone drifting out of a safe harbor,
Stunned by a million lights, on the Star Ferry. 


^^EOP^^

I.   I, Etheldred Taylor, of sound mind and body
in the presence of God almighty amen
do deed three things: 
                                     Books Negroes Land.

^^EOP^^

Twenty-five hundred tins of tuna,
no can opener. 
Powdered milk that loosened unfamiliar
stomachs speeding death. 
Three thousand Bibles dropped into
Mujahudden children. 
One thousand blankets and sweaters,
sent to tropical hot zone. 
Crates of suturing thread and no needles.
Thousands of candles and no matches.  
Tubes of toothpaste and no toothbrushes.
Boxes of high heeled shoes. 
 


^^EOP^^

'Because I am mad about women
I am mad about the hills,'
Said that wild old wicked man
Who travels where God wills.
'Not to die on the straw at home,
Those hands to close the eyes,
That is all I ask, my dear,
From the old man in the skies.
                                Daybreak and a candle-end. 
'Kind are all your words, my dear,
Do not the rest withhold.
Who can know the year, my dear,
When an old man's blood grows cold?
I have what no young man can have
Because he loves too much.
Words I have that can pierce the heart,
But what can he do but touch?'                                 Daybreak and a candle-end. 
Then said she to that wild old man,
his stout stick under his hand,
'Love to give or to withhold
Is not at my command.
I gave it all to an older man:
That old man in the skies.
Hands that are busy with His beads
can never close those eyes.'                                 Daybreak and a candle-end. 
'Go your ways, O go your ways,
I choose another mark,
Girls down on the seashore
Who understand the dark;
Bawdy talk for the fishermen;
A dance for the fisher-lads;
When dark hangs upon the water
They turn down their beds.                                 Daybreak and a candle-end. 
'A young man in the dark am I,
But a wild old man in the light,
That can make a cat laugh, or
Can touch by mother wit
Things hid in their marrow-bones
From time long passed away,
Hid from all those warty lads
That by their bodies lay.                                 Daybreak and a candle-end. 
'All men live in suffering,
I know as few can know,
Whether they take the upper road
Or stay content on the low,
Rower bent in his row-boat
Or weaver bent at his loom,
Horseman erect upon horseback
Or child hid in the womb.                                 Daybreak and a candle-end. 
'That some stream of lightning
From the old man in the skies
Can burn out that suffering
No right-taught man denies.
But a coarse old man am I,
I choose the second-best,
I forget it all a while
Upon a woman's breast.'                                 Daybreak and a candle-end.
 


^^EOP^^




for Robert Dash



A permanent occasion
Knotted into the clouds: pink, then blue,
Like a baby holding its breath, or colorless 
As the gush and pop of conversations
Under water. You feel handed from clasp to clasp,
A concert carried off by the applause. 
Other times half of you is torn
At the perforated line and mailed away.
You want to say, "Today, the smithereens 
Must fend for themselves,"
And know the ever-skating decimal's joy,
To count on thin ice 
Growing thinner by degrees, taking its own
Sweet time and taking us with it,
To navigate magnetic zones in which 
Intense ecstatic figures touch, like worlds,
But don't collide, it being their devotion
To depend on you to name for each 
A proper sphere. "Today, I turn to silence;
Let the language do the talking."
X the Unknown and his laughable, lovable crew,  
The tumbling balconies of one-of-us-is-a-robot-
And-it's-not-me waves
(Spanking a beach so empty 
If you weren't around to trip me
Would I really fall?) and days
When the wind is a bridge across our power 
To enumerate, to dig, to plant, to hold
And to communicate the twill-and-tweed-
Covered field's coldness 
Toward our game of enticing it indoors,
As if we could erect a rival gate to the departure
Whose uniform destination can't surprise, 
Is blind, speaks not, 
When on those white and sudden afternoons
I take your eyes, and see the sun set twice. 


^^EOP^^

every night
an ancient priest
gives me advice
and in the morning
I’m all alone
with nothing
a universe
I don’t want
to bother you
or to upend
the universe
but your realtors
are getting
a divorce 
the dark
is the dark
the wind
the sound
of the ocean
all relative
to the sensitivity
of a tiny
chain of bones
leading up
to or away from
your eardrum 
like, you say this playlist is
really good 

^^EOP^^

Is shut out on a balcony above the street.
He is a prisoner among us, crying
The awful boredom of observation, the unending
Hours of afternoon empty to a creature
Of smell and chase. His poor eyes see shadows
Pass below; they are unsatisfactory.
Voices come from nowhere. They do not hear him.
Why does he live? He tries to howl but sound
Flattens in a bred-thin throat. Whoever owns him
Consigns him to nothing when they go away. 
Across the street, I hear the constant sound of nothing
Lashing him. He gives up, then gives up 
Giving up, and cries again. Desire
Won't let him alone: to be with the world
Beyond him, to move among things and creatures,
To be where we are passing and meeting. But he is not
One of us; it is not his world. He wears a collar
And prances unnaturally along a fence, pressing
The edge, walking upright begging, and is refused,
Put out, tied up, and kept. 


^^EOP^^

Tonight I am riddled by this thick skull 
this white bowling ball zipped in the sad-sack carrying case of my face,
this overwound bone jack-in-the-box,
this Orlando's zero, Oaxacan offering: cabeza locada, calayera azucarada, clavo jodido, cenote of Mnemosyne,
this sticky sweet guilt hive, piedra blanca del rio oscuro,
this small-town medical mania dispensary, prescribed cranium pill,
this electric blue tom-tom drum ticking like an Acme bomb, hypnotized explosive device, pensive general, scalp-strapped warrior, soldier with a loaded God complex,
this Hotchkiss-obliterated headdress, Gatling-lit labyrinth,
this memory grenade, death epithet, death epitaph, mound of momento mori,
this twenty-two-part talisman wearing a skirt of breasts, giant ball of masa,
this god patella in the long leg of my torso, zoo of canines and Blake's tygers,
this red-skinned apple, lamp illuminated by teeth, gang of grin, spitwad of scheme,
the jawbone of an ass, smiling sliver of smite, David's rock striking the 

^^EOP^^

A kiss. Train ride home from a late dinner,
City Hall and document signing. Wasn't cold
but we cuddled in an empty car, legal.
Last month a couple of guys left a gay bar
and were beaten with poles on the way
to their car. No one called them faggot
so no hate crime's documented. A beat down
is what some pray for, a pulse left to count.
We knew we weren't protected. We knew
our rings were party favors, gold to steal
the shine from. We couldn't protect us, 
knew the law wouldn't know how. Still, his
beard across my brow, the burn of his cologne.
When the train stopped, the people came on. 


^^EOP^^

           [In a Silent Way]
It had been watching you sleep in dreams of excrement
and hard voices. The government gifted it with mute,
unregulated hands. It came to you, father, before 
I was born, my bones bound in the cup of your absence.
Your skin was peeled in a dominion of wolves. 
           [Illegal Business]
When it came it came wearing familial faces.
House after house, noses took in this new air.
A brother OD'd, a father, a mother, an uncle, a sister —
House after house cataracted with snow-veiled skulls.
On the corner, police officers licked their white fingers.  
          [Will O' the Wisp]
I was four when I committed your face
to memory. I made into reason what was
once rumor. Diaspora, meaning this time
what father-source had left me pliant had
returned so that I could return and turn to it. 
          [Dead Presidents II]
Poverty gave reason to hustle. A dealer's
frozen wrists, weighted by stones, flipped
through green pages of an anemic bible
that catalogued white men who once jeweled their own
properties in varicose coffles toward cotton coffins.  
          [Black Comedy]
Father, you were summarized by your veins' laughter. 
Last time I saw you your face was cratered
with breathless mouths collaborating with dust.
Behold the white horse, hoof over oof
dispersing the circus of our communal horror. 
          [Ten Crack Commandments]
It's offensive, our most brilliant forced to pray
to getting paid, forced to spray or get sprayed.
It got so bad folks was scraping and sniffing
the ash off their knees. Cities full of prophets
that could only see as far as their own decease. 
          [Inamorata]
Whom did you love most: Lady Caine, Mama Coca,
White Lady, Girlfriend, Lady Snow, Pearl,
Aunt Nora, Angie, Carrie Nation, Percia, Mujer,
Corrinne, Gift-of-the-Sun-God, Snow White, Her? 
          [Dope]
Cain't be capitalism. No suh! No suh! u u u u u u u
Must be the Devil! Cain't be white supremacy! No suh!
Couldn'ta been the Iran-ContraaffairandReaganlooking
underTOWmisslesforhostageswhileCIAbreaksloaves
ofcokealloverthisGodfearinland no suh! u u u u u owowoo! 
          [Sorcerer]
Father, I have sewn my eyes to an allegiance
with worms. I am still incredulous of light.
The city of my teeth has softened its curses. 
If you arrived elemental, shapeless and aquiver, 
I'd fashion you a suit from my hollow's frame. 
          [C.R.E.A.M]
How much for the faux Bearden of a Lexus collaged
over a crack house, addicts clawing the air like trees?
When weight moves like poltergeists a triple beam
gets its wings, but not all caine is able. 
          [On the Corner]
The moon unbraids a man's hair. His Solo Cup
of Jack Daniels catches light, shakes to the bass
rattle of speakers stacked on the porch like die.
His woman leans on his shoulder. When he kisses
her forehead he leaves a bouquet of stars. 
          [Street Dreams]
Her blunt unrolled itself on the floor. Its entrails rose
and configured like a burning church in reverse. 
Then her grandpa's voice: Baby, this ain't no place
of worship

^^EOP^^

By the time I started writing,
I had just come in
From the back patio,
Where I had seen
The moon's reflection
In the water feature. I laughed
To myself, wondered
How the water caught
The moon, which seemed 
Pitched at too queer
An angle. & what
Was being featured?
I once wrote,
"Nothing is too anything,"
I'm thinking tonight that
I'm right.
But I'm not sad.
Just saddened. I
Breathe. I circulate.
My body would like to tell you
How much it can't 
Stand to tell you
What it wants to tell you.
Here's a sample: Teeth. Stomach.
Skin. Application.
Yard. Wood trim.
Gutters. Teeth.
Teeth stomach teeth.
I spend all of my time
Creating novel ways
To distract myself
From the need to
Distract myself.
One minute goes like this:
You don't want to know.
That's the hardest part,
Conveying how just being
Just feels.
My latest concern
Is our son. Seeing him
Alone
Pinned against
The wall at Willowwind
By some apparitional collector
Of lost souls, the kid who
Was the first to locate an
Afterlife for Sacha. It sounded,
From his lips,
Like melodrama. We all see
Some kind of light & we
Tunnel toward it & how did this
Even happen? I wept
Later that night.
I know it's just a moment among
The millions, & there is
James & he is always
Thinking about.
Stereo-death, little Telemachus,
Defending a ghost most
Of his life, his mother
Obsessed with
Subtle refractions of light. 
(She's a Rayist at heart).
I'm not saying you're
Unraveling a weave
Every night. I think
That's what I do
These evenings, 
Typing pixels
Unto oblivion.
Sitting Lotus
On a massive lily pad
On a pond
Somewhere in fifth century 
China.
Dentist. Acid reflux. Dentist.
Stillpoint . . .
I hold the chakra
Position as long
As possible.
I imagine
All my obsessions
Abstracting into a color,
Sometimes
A version of blue,
Sometimes
I can't work it out,
I have such
An impoverished 
Color palette
To work with, so I get
Caught up
In this, my inability to see
Color in any interesting way,
& then
The whole thing falls
Apart & I am back
In here, where
The walls are pink
& the pixels
Laugh like dropsied clowns.
Some kind of plague
Takes hold.
Some kind of plague riots
In the grid I can't keep 
Track my teeth need immediate
Attention do I look fat
In this shirt where
Is my focus? Stillpoint. Hellish
Laughter rings through my ears
Teeth, teeth, migraine,
A reprieve, I can
Go to sleep
For a moment once I
Stomach dentist root canal
Like the worst kind of comedy
You expect to laugh
But the laugh
Never comes.
As it were, the moon
Did that, this glint
Stomach still point do you
& will I ever be
More than the sum
Of my regressions
Which compile
Like maggots 
Of data
Eating through
A server in Reston, Virginia
Where teeth annul &
Stomachs inhere
& I think I am inventing 
In ultimate
Infinity
A category of 
Sadness
As I punch
These keys
& I hope you have
A really
Wonderful reading


^^EOP^^

As we stood
In the unreflective
Pall of the canvas
Neatly pocketed by broken
Plates, light
Swallowed by
The sickly sweet strokes
Of crap paint
Clumsily
Slapped across it,
I picked up Sacha
& asked 
Him 
If it might be
A bit much,
The painting's title? but 
He already had designs
On the Brancusi
He had glimpsed  
In the Des Moines Art Center
Catalogue, which he then pawed
On the floor of the 
Entrance room—
So plush were the couches
I fell asleep 
Reclining into one.
Woke in a fright,
Turned off the lights!
Walked into a courtyard
Terrifically cold—the water-
Fall tending my dreams
Froze midstream, 
Reflecting brilliant
Fresnel light!
The artist
I follow from year
To year, sometimes
Years pass
But I find him
Launching another
Lantern down the river
Frozen to river-
Bottom
& so I
Whispered into 
Sacha's delicate 
Ear—are we able
To meet these 
Monuments as is?
What if, say, you had happened
Upon a David Salle painting
(Rarer these days)?
What if your stepmother
Was in the same art class
In high school as Salle, 
Doodled the same
Inane nothing-of-notes,
Desperate for a way
Out, not just of this class
But of this gap
Between herself &
What she might
Want to become.
David Salle, don't 
Sweat the small
Devils detailing
Your
Lamborghini Countach
(Sounds so garish, 
To talk this way
About the '80s, I mean
That model was like
The Ford Escort
Of the Jet Set)
& then David Salle 
Went on to snort
The entire decade
Into his rectum. She
Demurred
Rightly, the pain
Ticked into my
Stepmother &
Soon enough her spine
Began off-gassing
A barbiturate haze
Five miles in every
Direction.
This feeling we all
Know each other
From some past life
Spent holding hands
Walking over the precipice
Into the volcanic bowels
Of Hell, this otherness,
Fixed into a buried
Set of neurons native
To homo sapiens sapiens, 
Has surfaced surfaced
With a fury,
Furious with spouts
Of pepper spray
Spraying
The frozen air
Waiting for history's
Next victim to occupy,
Occupies the space
In front of it.
The snow,
I wrote,
To paraphrase
Myself, to interpret or
Delay
My words, to rework,
Remix, mash up, 
Redifine, defile, 
Lift, smash, plagiarize,
Borrow, beg, steal,
Augment, as homage I
Distill my words
Into a bitter rye,
Drink it to bottoms
Up!
I looked out,
I had my protagonist
Look out of a wintry
Window, each snowflake
Like a soldier whipping
A horse yoked
To a chariot,
This Greece,
This Rome,
This vatic
Impulse to stay
Connected swirling
All round, said
In passing,
My soul swooned
Slowly
As I heard
The snow
Falling faintly,
Through
The universe
& faintly falling,
Like the descent
Of its last end.
So you
Tell me
How your
Radical formalism
Saves lives
Exactly?
What I've got on view
Out my office window
Is luxurious paradisiacal
Snow stirring in me
A soul-destroying
Desire to snort some
Adderall,
After all.
This could be your
Legacy, Sacha,
This art
You have been
Forced to feed on
For eons.
               I
               Sink into the
               Couch in my office,
               Fall asleep
               Watching Stalker,
               Slowly fall
               To the bottom
               Of the never-ending
               Well,
               This tonic,
               Murmur—
               Something about making
               Sure all the locks were
               Locked.
               I don't know
If I checked them.
So I check them
Repeatedly.
This bedroom farce
A ray of sun
Fazing across
The televised haze
Of some future
My son takes out
A second, maybe
Third mortgage on,
He plugs into the din—
His cryo-mortal coil.
I can't wait
Until he goes loco
Slurping snow cones, 
Lisps with asps
In ancient Egypt. 
The overdub
Is imperfect, a few frames
Late, so when
Sacha looks at
"The Death of Fashion"
Hanging against this 
Well-lit wall &
Says, "This looks like
Garbage," the only word
That matches his mouth
Is the end of everything.
No one goes out
Like this


^^EOP^^

My lips are clay, for centuries unkissed.
I thought middle age would not pass so quickly.
Time is cruel. I look in the mirror. 
Now the word cruel scares me. 
My ambition was once
to write the starlit poems of our age,
our final words, which in any case
are just graffiti from here on out,
yesteryear straight through to the afterlife
(though wasn't the middle part
supposed to be longer?). 
I wanted words to contain consciousness, 
so I was a child until I was old. 


^^EOP^^

I've described it as
"A silence as white
As hospital clouds."
I've tended to think
Of it as akin to
Occupying space,
Which is not like
Taking up space,
Which implies volition.
As you know,
I sat on a bench
In the mall, while
My friends were passing
Time in class.
High & thus utterly
Imprecise. Moments
Before I sat on the bench,
I had leafed through
The several copies of
The latest issue of Details
At the magazine kiosk
Because Dale had tipped
Us that there was an insert
In it that you could rip
From its perforation
& redeem anywhere 
For a free pack of
True cigarettes.
I unperfed six of them
& redeemed them
Immediately. I con-
Sidered this a non-
Trivial event. I
Destroyed this task.
How many ways
Can I tell you I
Killed time? You'd
Cringe to hear even
One story, its
Trace still
Tracking down
My spine,
Even now, twenty
Years later, like
Still doves. 


^^EOP^^

I live on the flank of Vesuvius, in Pompeii.
Each day the sky fills with leaflets,
smokelets, prayers to powers
aglitter whether storming or still
(the old ones mica,
the new ones who-cares-what). 
Everyone knows there's more than one
kind of consciousness. Everyone knows
that in the snow-globe of Vesuvius,
the "snow" is really ash—
each time, the volcano buries the town. 
Would you meet me in a world like that?
If not there, where?


^^EOP^^

How dare you!
How dare you pull this mantle from your sloven
sleeve and think it worthy enough to cover my boy.
How dare you judge when you also wallow in this mud.
Society has turned its power over to you,
relinquishing its rule, turned it over
to the man in the mask, whose face never changes,
always distorts, who does not live where I live, 
but commands the corners, who does not have to await
the nightmares, the street chants, the bullets,
the early-morning calls, but looks over at us
and demeans, calls us animals, not worthy
of his presence, and I have to say: How dare you!
My son deserves a future and a job. He deserves
contemplation. I can't turn away as you.
Yet you govern us? Hear my son's talk.
Hear his plea within his pronouncement, 
his cry between the breach of his hard words. 
My son speaks in two voices, one of a boy, 
the other of a man. One is breaking through,
the other just hangs. Listen, you who can turn away, 
who can make such a choice; you who have sons
of your own, but do not hear them!
My son has a face too dark, features too foreign,
a tongue to tangled, yet he reveals, he truths, 
he sings your demented rage, but he sings.
You have nothing to rage because it is outside of you. 
He is inside of me. His horror is mine. I see what
he sees. And if my son dreams, if he plays, if he smirks
in the mist of moon-glow, there I will be, smiling
through the blackened, cluttered and snarling pathway
toward your wilted heart. 


^^EOP^^

It's Upstate New York in the 1950s,
land of amusements,
natural wonders like Ausable Chasm
and High Falls Gorge,
and tourist traps, kiddie parks
like Land of Makebelieve,
a castle with a dungeon, and train cars
just wide enough for one kid.
You can still see pink turrets through the trees,
and under the eaves the paper lanterns of wasps. 
At 1,000 Animals you could drive a cart
pulled by an ostrich, or pose for a Polaroid
with a boa at the Serpentarium,
then feed him a mouse. Or watch
boys in a pit milk snakes for venom. 
Nothing's left but Santa's Workshop,
June through August. Frontier Town's gone.
The antique stagecoach
jounced on a flatbed out of town. 
When I can't sleep or am trying to stay
awake in the car, I slip back
into the traffic of children roaming
the child-sized streets, floating
past their parents on the carousel.
I hand-feed the deer.  
I walk in and out of the fake jail, 
and climb the castle's stucco tower. 
I don't stay too long.
I don't want to end up
trapped in a place where 
childhood never ends.


^^EOP^^

Old friends are a steady spring rain,
or late summer sunshine edging into fall,
or frosted leaves along a snowy path—
a voice for all seasons saying, I know you.
The older I grow, the more I fear I'll lose my old friends,
as if too many years have scrolled by
since the day we sprang forth, seeking each other.
 
Old friend, I knew you before we met.
I saw you at the window of my soul—
I heard you in the steady millstone of my heart
grinding grain for our daily bread.
You are sedimentary, rock-solid cousin earth,
where I stand firmly, astonished by your grace and truth.
And gratitude comes to me and says:
 
"Tell me anything and I will listen.
Ask me anything, and I will answer you."


^^EOP^^

Walking the river back home at the end
of May, locust in bloom, an oriole flitting
through dusky crowns, and the early night sky
going peach, day's late glow the color of that fruit's
flesh, dribbling down over everything, christening
my sons, the two of them walking before me
after a day of fishing, one of them placing a hand
on the other's shoulder, pointing toward a planet
that's just appeared, or the swift movement
of that yellow and black bird disappearing
into the growing dark, and now the light, pink
as a crabapple's flower, and my legs tired
from wading the higher water, and the rocks
that keep turning over, nearly spilling me
into the river, but still thankful for now
when I have enough strength to stay
a few yards behind them, loving this time
of day that shows me the breadth
of their backs, their lean, strong legs
striding, how we all go on in this cold water,
heading home to the sound of the last few
trout splashing, as mayflies float
through the shadowed riffles.


^^EOP^^

Tonight I want to return to Elizabeth,
New Jersey, where Stephen Crane lies
under a stone, and my father,
after twenty years of skimping wages, finally 
opened his own dry-goods store. 
I worked there after school, on weekends,
but it didn't take a genius to see
from the sad look of the place—
dim light, threadbare "goods"—where it was headed.
In all the time I spent in that smog-sucking town
of wan bargain hunters and hangdog merchants,
I never knew of, let alone visited,
Crane's grave. Then, I was more enamored of
that other Crane, Hart (lovely name!),
whose grave is in the belly of the South Atlantic. 
Besides, I couldn't imagine any reason why
anyone would want to stop off, never mind
die, in Elizabeth, New Jersey. It seemed
nobody there cared about, much less
knew, the color of the sky. 

^^EOP^^

A jumper knitted throughout, a sweater's overcoming mimesis
                                                                                                                      Less 
"Chapter 1 has been suspended in a warehouse / of textiles for 1000th of a second"—at
         once a sentence and a sentence in poetics.
                                                                                         Lesser 
at once a linguistic event and a linguistic event styled after installation.
                                                                                                                                      Least 
Impossible work finds hypothetical situations.                                                                                          Good 
Situations impersonating a book, speech acts walking across stage                                                                                                                       Better 
situations impersonating a boot, speech acts walking across a stag.                                                                                                                        Best 
Suspended in a warehouse, a literacy campaign                                                                                          Loudest 
suspended in a disused textile factory, textiles and a second literacy campaign          after cultural evisceration.
                                                        Louder. 
A woman removing her jumper (sweater) in a textile factory                                                                                                                      Loud 
removes a jumper (sweater), then another pulled inside out, says aloud, 
         "And now, for the retrograde inversion."

^^EOP^^

A path formatted. A chapter.
                                                      "There cannot be a chapter formatted differently," 
she said, "like a sore thumb."
                                            "A chapter formatted differently from these is not a sore thumb," 
I said, "but an opposable thumb, an opposable thumb with its own instrumentality."
                                                                                                                                                        A train 
". . hear that train strumming . . ."
                                                                 "without the doubt of a shadow" 
Agora shadowless and "shadowless"
                                                                   path. 
Which?
                 "In recent years he has researched the share" 
a path formatted across a wave.
                                                           There cannot be a wave formatted otherwise 
she said, like a wheel. 
                                            A wave in syntax such as that is no sore wheel, 
I said, but a solemn wheel (no one-sided wheel, I said, a level) with its own instrumentality.                                                                                                                                                          A door 
"folded like a sheet of paper . . ."
                                                          "You were the most beautiful of them all." 
"Now I begin to paint shadows in."
                                                             Out-of-print— 
which?
              In recent years he has researched the interval 
which?               In recent years he has researched the inconvenience 
a path formatted across hot water.

^^EOP^^

as if it were a scene made up by my need
for a city, viaducts July-sweating sweat not 
mine as the city is no longer mine, was never,
but it holds me near to its metallic, junkyard
pasture and junkie song so hollow it's a hall 
I dare not walk through, this tragic place
wherefrom the people with my face fall. 
Wherefrom fall all the architectures I am
I say are my people's people and my people
whose houses tremble as thunderous bass passes. 
The blacktopped roads sop up heat for double
Dutch feet to greet, rope slapped down
by a child's hand. I used to know her name. 
It is only a dream of trees, their propeller seeds
blown west through batches of weeds crocheted
yellow-green with dandelions and cigarette butts 
once erect from a mouth stressed over rent due,
dried spit the tincture of wait and liquor stores.  
Often I am permitted to return to this city
as if it were a gift for which I forgot the means
to augur into clarity, always wrapped in cool violence, 
neighbors' frowns cauterized into cul-de-sacs,
omen outcasting what lives to give relief. 


^^EOP^^

When my nineteen-year-old son turns on the kitchen tap
and leans down over the sink and tilts his head sideways
to drink directly from the stream of cool water,
I think of my older brother, now almost ten years gone,
who used to do the same thing at that age;
 
And when he lifts his head back up and, satisfied,
wipes the water dripping from his cheek
with his shirtsleeve, it's the same casual gesture
my brother used to make; and I don't tell him
to use a glass, the way our father told my brother,
 
because I like remembering my brother
when he was young, decades before anything
went wrong, and I like the way my son
becomes a little more my brother for a moment
through this small habit born of a simple need,
 
which, natural and unprompted, ties them together
across the bounds of death, and across time . . .
as if the clear stream flowed between two worlds
and entered this one through the kitchen faucet,
my son and brother drinking the same water.


^^EOP^^

Here's a small gray woman
in an enormous beaver coat
 
standing at the end of the curb
of a street in Brooklyn, her strapped heel
 
about to be lowered to asphalt.
 
I'm strolling beside her carrying a sack,
 
the sidewalk shaded by cranked out awnings:
butchers, bakeries, shoe repair shops
 
the smell of rotting eggs,
 
as we climb up to her sixth floor apartment
with its plastic slip-covered chairs,
 
the long chain for a toilet flusher,
pocks in the plaster ceiling.
 
She is my Romanian grandmother
who speaks little English,
 
but taught me to crochet,
 
now lost among the broken headstones
of the old gated Jewish cemetery
 
we passed by that day
after buying our milk and our bread.


^^EOP^^

The Easter hats usually exploited gardens
and even when I took mine off, artificial bluebells
were braided into hair 
just as they were (white lie)
when Deirdre's son dropped petals
into his mother's casket: one landed
as useless improvement of her mouth,  
Years before, Deirdre and I ducked out of service
went to Little Italy's Murray Hill and slurped
things marinara with our decaf to support her crush
on Hill Street Blues' Ed Marinaro who played Coffey                  who wasn't quite the palest thing in her life                 considering what breathed down our necks                 the most inhospitable air they had                  but we anticipated bad breath,                 we had assumed a garlicky existence 
because miracles we then believed in made vampirism
just as plausible. No flowers on the checked-top table 
wilted because of atmosphere. From a distance
the beret we saw on a stranger was telling us
walking wounded 
and images from former Persian and Ottoman empires
say the same thing, distance failing to be what it was. 
We learned Tigris and Euphrates
to help us learn the flowering of existence. 
We learned fertile crescent
and we are somehow still amazed 
by the fertility of experience: fully-swaddled
babies shaken like perverse maracas     to silence 
instead of make the music of rupture persistent:
light bulbs bandaged then fractured under wraps
and again and again those instruments 
for crude concerts that parents applauded
with crackle that amplified the filaments' pitiful fizzle:  
We didn't have to go much further to love Batman,
Spiderman, Zorro, the Lone Ranger, all masked men
illicitly patronizing convenience 
stores 
as I do for the implication that merchandise
has been skewed for the expediency of customers: 
heads shrunken 
and wrapped in price tags, Styrofoam, satin,
and certificates of authenticity. Real  
old-school prissy passengers 
in ling-finned convertibles wore nets on their heads
that when wind-whipped became fully bagged 
as nets changed position, flimsy umpires appeared
stricken, the net a prototype of shrink-wrap 
on these Sunday drives. 


^^EOP^^

the black people left, and took with them their furious             hurricanes and their fire-breathing rap songs melting the polar ice caps. they left behind the mining jobs,            but took that nasty black lung disease and the insurance regulations that loop around everything concerning            health and care, giant holes of text that all the coverage falls through. the brown people left, and took with            them the pesticides collecting like a sheen on the skins of fruit. they went packing, and packed off with them            went all the miserable low-paying gigs, the pre-dawn commutes, the children with expensive special needs            and the hard-up public schools that tried to meet them. the brown people left, railroaded into carting off those            tests that keep your average bright young student outside the leagues of ivy-lined classrooms, and also hauled off            their concentrated campuses, their great expectations, their invasive technology, and the outrageous pay gap between            a company’s c.e.o. and its not-quite-full-time workers. they took their fragile endangered pandas and species extinction            and got the hell outta dodge. the black people left and took hiv/aids, the rest of their plagues, and all that deviant            sexuality with them. they took their beat-down matriarchies and endless teen pregnancies, too. those monster-sized            extended families, the brown people took those. the brown people boxed up their turbans and suspicious sheet-like            coverings, their terrifying gun violence, cluster bombs, and drones, and took the whole bloody mess with them,            they took war and religious brow-beating tucked under their robes. they took theocracy and their cruel, unusual            punishments right back where they came from. finally, the white people left, as serenely unburdened as when           they arrived, sailing off from plymouth rock with nothing in their hands but a recipe for cranberry sauce, a bit            of corn seed, and the dream of a better life. there were only certain kinds of people here, after the exodus, left            to wander the underdeveloped wilderness in search of buffalo, tobacco, and potable water, following old            migratory patterns that would have been better left alone.


^^EOP^^

Only a beige slat of sun
above the horizon, like a shade
pulled not quite down. Otherwise,
clouds. Sea rippled here and
there. Birds reluctant to fly.
The mind wants a shaft of sun to
stir the grey porridge of clouds,
an osprey to stitch sea to sky
with its barred wings, some dramatic
music: a symphony, perhaps
a Chinese gong.
 
But the mind always
wants more than it has—
one more bright day of sun,
one more clear night in bed
with the moon; one more hour
to get the words right; one
more chance for the heart in hiding
to emerge from its thicket
in dried grasses—as if this quiet day
with its tentative light weren't enough,
as if joy weren't strewn all around.


^^EOP^^

Maybe night is about to come
calling, but right now
the sun is still high in the sky.
It's half-past October, the woods
are on fire, blue skies stretch
all the way to heaven. Of course,
we know that winter is coming, its thin
winding sheets and its hard narrow bed.
But right now, the season's fermented
to fullness, so slip into something
light, like your skeleton; while these old
bones are still working, my darling,
let's dance.


^^EOP^^

A bowl of rose water dreams itself empty
on the radiator: It's December and we can
hardly afford the heat, our milk money
crinkling hungry over the cold counter
of our convenience store, the very last
of our cash for creamer, for pleasantries,
for cheap tea and cigarettes, for the barely-
there scent of roses burning softly. We trade
our hungers for hearth, for the clank and hiss
of warmth. Small fires, these, but even we,
in our clamorous poverty, demand pleasure:
steal sugar, our neighbor's flowers, and never,
ever are caught thankless in better weather.


^^EOP^^

The sky a pure river of dawn
and the red goose wakes, the
breeze weaving, interweaving
leaves newly turned.
In the valley a song,
with no one to sing it,
some voice of the past
or the future. The red goose
sets her wings and answering
some promise she's made
to the WILD, enters that river
of sky, neck stretched
toward heaven, maybe beyond,
tail nothing but a carnelian
nubbin fading to sunglow.
And you, stunned to a silence
the size of the world.


^^EOP^^

My mother holds the wriggling mouse
in her gloved hand
thumb poised above its vertebrae 
My father in his white coat behind her
whispers the right places to break 
She shakes her head—No, no 
Mercy is the small name
we give an animal not ourselves 
I knew she had it in her, my mother
holding me all those years ago
in the chair as my father cut my hair—  So you don’t look like a girl  
Against the back of my skull
he made a fist & pulled 
Like a magician & his assistant
they did the act together—Transformation
Dismemberment & Shove Her in a Hat! 
The girl vanished under the black scrim
& a boy was lifted by the neck 
That cowlick—
it was the only thing wild about me 
In my twenties I grew my hair out
& slathered perm salt to break
the disulfide bonds 
I stroked my curls, each strand
a helix hissing secrets 
I thought if I looked foreign enough
no one could claim me 
not even shame
which, as all things
must grow from the root


^^EOP^^

In Hebrew, the word women is the word men
with the first letter dropped. Not just any letter
but the first first letter, the aleph of the aleph-bet:  אנשים       anashim—men
נשים           nashim—women

^^EOP^^

This morning, a light
so full, so complete
we might ask why 
the god of sun
is also god of plague,
why the god of healing 
also god of archery.
The children under trees—
unaware their hearts 
have become targets
red and inflamed
as the eyes of men in thrones— 
find sticks in the grass
to fashion into guns. Some brandish
a branch-saber. They are sniping 
the golden light
with squinting faces.
And everywhere 
they do not look,
fences and more fences.
There are no arrows 
to point the way
as they scythe
through a woods or dart 
between cars in parking lots.
The miles of fence-links grow
more & more impassable 
even as the children try
to follow the voices
calling them now, at first 
with tenderness and then
with fierce intensity.


^^EOP^^




After sam sax



Sometimes I pronounce aubade: obeyed
for the way this particular desire stumbles
the tongue. Hunger’s vocabulary is a fickle 
thing. How many lovers have said that
they adore me, but meant instead they saw
in me a door? A thing to be entered. Language 
shifts an image like the light. To lash can mean
both beat & bind. I’m lashed against the bed
by dawn’s red blaze. The whole room welted 
tidy by the sky between the blinds. To cuff
can also mean to hold or harm, each word
doubled—body & a body’s shadow. I want 
& all at once I flicker beneath you. I beg you
to bruise me & so exchange faggot for fruit.
O, how gentle lust alters a body, conjugates 
prey into prayer. The history of handcuffs
is old as myth if memory serves. The legend
goes, Greek hero invented them to steal 
prophecy from the mouth of a shapeshifter
god & the story gathered blood from there.
The root of the word religion is a Latin verb 
meaning to bind. As in, the worshipper is bound
to their god. Two hands paired in steel or prayer.
When I say obey, I mean we have chosen 
the softer side of every verb, dulled the sharp
edge of a memory, sea glass against the tongue.
For the first time, when the handcuffs’ steel 
lips unkiss my wrists as morning stains every
surface a fading bruise, I am already free
as the first breath after confession.


^^EOP^^

In watery nets
the convent of childhood
was reborn to me. 
Where are you,
white stair?
I descended you
among the locust trees
and the earth
had no trenches. 
Now on distant paths
a companion staggers,
carrying a dead man.
On his face
his eyelids fall
like lifeless violets. 
Where are you
white stair?
A scream
slips from me:
the ground is gone. 
Flames of perfumed smoke
along the way
no longer give shelter
in this rain.
Translated from the Italian


^^EOP^^

Someone standing at the mouth had
the idea to enter. To go further 
than light or language could
go. As they followed
the idea, light and language followed 
like two wolves—panting, hearing themselves
panting. A shapeless scent
in the damp air ...  Keep going, the idea said. 
Someone kept going. Deeper and deeper, they saw
others had been there. Others had left 
objects that couldn’t have found their way
there alone. Ocher-stained shells. Bird bones. Grounded
hematite. On the walls, 
as if stepping into history, someone saw
their purpose: cows. Bulls. Bison. Deer. Horses—
some pregnant, some slaughtered. 
The wild-
life seemed wild and alive, moving 
when someone moved, casting their shadows
on the shadows stretching
in every direction. Keep going, 
the idea said again. Go ... 
Someone continued. They followed the idea so far inside that
outside was another idea.


^^EOP^^

They the product they pack, 
     chronic culprit in love with bullets 
          plucked like stars.  
They the glance at each other 
      crossing the street, the way they know 
          their fathers will never come back.  
     Profanity, yes. Illiterate, ill-nourished,
          
          most of them, most definitely. In addition 
           the brilliant genesis of Odysseus.  
They small ghosts
     
     like pale plates of water abandoned 
          under the brush. It might as well 
          be a jar of snares          mosquitoes 
              damn mosquitoes to get rid of, 
              draining the blood for eggs.  
They
                                     the memory of a stowaway 
                                     hitting the ground again 
                                     and again.


^^EOP^^

Howl something
you want heard, 
guaranteed
you’ll be hunted. 
Howl something
sweet and it won’t
matter either. 
Someone will start
a murder club built
for your friends, 
holding contests
for the most killed. 
They’ll shoot, yell,
smoke you out of
your own company, 
take a sharp right
when they could’ve
made a left turn, 
leaving the cold
meats of a movement
quelling in the sun. 
Gunned-up hides,
dogs barking backward. 
Our growls only get
more bountiful from
here, honey. 
A gust through a forest
of lowered eternities. 
When a baby comes,
they’re born on behalf
of the lost.


^^EOP^^




^^EOP^^

One morning a charred ink line
            in the botanist’s notebook: 
after the invasion, a garden planted in Cairo.
            The French army recording the distance 
between beast and cotton seed.
            Napoleon had wings, flew as Mercury above the pyramids 
a sprig of blue inventing atmosphere.
            The text speaks it and so it becomes 
image and imagine and the people beneath;
            pool of statives beating                 know known know known.  
One morning my birth is an ink line
            in the language of plantations. 
I grow to watch the memory assemble me:
            a fiction of poppies and idolatry, 
gradient in supernumerary fervor,
            bloody at the footnote. There is a door that betweens 
me and then, the authors say the door is always open,
            the ghosts say the door is not for us.


^^EOP^^

I am the flower of
who knows what buried log
that to be alive
creates children
up from the dark
womb of the earth— 
I am an icy flower—
estranged
from every human mercy or prayer
and the air around me
is empty—
breathless—
shaded
by mournful cypresses— 
O who will give to the flower
to its painful corolla
the final strength
to bury the self?
Translated from the Italian


^^EOP^^

Beauty again
presents itself 
as if
for the first time. 
It begins, “When I
look up,” 
and goes on,
“the wet eucalyptus 
is tossing, twinkling
like the sea.” 
It puts words in our mouths.
Similes. 
Displaced,
it returns. 
It can appear
in human form, 
but is most often
elsewhere. 
Those paired
circles of light 
winking
from a shady branch.


^^EOP^^

It wasn’t him
but what he did
that lived on 
inside me.
I had to
learn that. 
I had to
cleave  action
from figure, 
the verb  do
from the noun  doll.
I had to 
imagine
the double ll
not as two walls 
closing in,
two bodies
side by side 
in a twin bed,
two mirrors
facing 
each other,
two tally marks
for the first and second 
time I was ...
but a road
through 
Hell—this
near contraction
of  he and  will— 
where the difference
punctuation makes
could be missed.


^^EOP^^

In school, we read a ridiculous story by Aesop,
one not involving wise or foolish animals or insects, but one in which a god allocates emotions
to the parts of the body. Intellect to the mind, Love
to the heart, etc. etc., until only the asshole is left,
to which the god assigns Shame. Understandably, Shame is unhappy
with the accommodations, but it’s too late. Shame
curses, “If Eros should ever seek to occupy that place,
I will leave the body for good.” This is why
homosexuals have no shame, according to Aesop,
or one of his Victorian translators. According to me, this is why
there is no moral order
to my sexual imagination, and why, praising my looks and hair
and white flesh as I lie with you, then falling
silent for days at a time, you really are the master of my pain.


^^EOP^^

Early days after mourning her father
                                          it sat in its purple-stained case
above the baby in his cradle
            looking more like an amputated horn
                                          or a bladeless dagger
                                          than a ritual mark of manhood 
so small in her long-fingered hand              so graceless
It stuck on without fuss
                                            a glue of fermented grain
that dried clear       even soothed the skin 
She started wearing it nightly            alone with the baby
and for his part the tiny prince loved
                    to reach up and swat at it
                           giggling and rolling his eyes to follow 
And so at least when she’d worked up the nerve
to wear it into the throne room
                           the infant in her arms
                                              thought nothing of it
She claimed his calm
as her first sign of divine right
Advisors couldn’t argue
with the future king
                                   this baby who could separate
                                             the two beings in the body
one without a beard
who cuddled, coddled, and cooed
              and one with the gold-banded cylinder on the chin
who clutched him close to her chest
where he dozed
                          against the growl behind her sternum
              the rocking
of her shoulders
                            as she flung one arm wide a finger
and a parallel chin                    pointing where the workers
carved her likeness
                   with long eyelashes                small breasts
            no hint of glue on high cheeks or jaw


^^EOP^^




Prague, 2018



if the heart of the bell breaks
catastrophe will strike: that is the legend 
last time, a flood;
next, who can know but the bell, its cloven meat
quiet crack of bronze anticipating its own demise
drowned in the clang-like fist & metal murmur 
what other creature keeps its heart inside its head full
of the hour’s secrets & tender prayers? 
I do not doubt the stories—
how bells say & say even after
they have been lost
in the rubble or at sea 
say & say how they paced
into hiding, or grieved their knell siblings
melted for war’s hungry rounds,
how they stilled their blood
in the chill of state restraint,
that longest & most silent hour
of the body’s yearning, say:
a silver bell is really a thumbscrew, no
heart at all, say: touch me,
I am no longer a bell if I do not ring 
how bells say & say
perfectly tuned by centuries, their
hammered & quarreling overtures
haunting ringent ears
calling the forgotten, calling me, I’m called 
to pray in the clamor, holy brazen speech
carapaced in its stony tower, devout lick of metal
to the ferrous brim, its chime sway waking my deadest earth 
to pray which is to taste you ring you
loud to greet you a thousand times
offer my heart to your mouth & bellow the walls—
anything that reminds me how small we are: 
to be swallowed by the boom of fullest sound,
the agony & wonder of wanting the Beloved’s more
crisp break of a mere day off the year’s chanted yearnings,
intonations that we will never last
longer than a breath in the face of the infinite 
to want to be pealed by the hour, to say & say
to invite the lightning by this thunderlust,
lure the cry of livening a shatter
near to feel the crack of the ampersand
organ in the vesper’s dusky light 
to know the catastrophe to come
but nonetheless
ring & ring & ring & ring


^^EOP^^

                    
                    
                         In the month of cleaning family plots, I learned football among graves. All summer, fangs were plentiful. I fed only on fruit and acorns next to a nest built in a discarded doll marking the 50-yard line.
     From snakes licking my ears, sounds of trees, and whispers from the dead, I learned to read plays by how the opposing team huddled.
     On the field, I gave the appearance of lightning, a wardrobe of open wounds. Magical goon who knew a love that outlasted bottles of tequila and all the Cure albums. It, too, was true.
 
                

^^EOP^^




After Monica Youn



I had a form. 
The form said  Name of  victim. 
The form named me. 
The form was a form of naming. 
Naming gave me form. 
The form said  Time of  incident. 
Time could be measured. 
The Incident could be defined. 
Both had a form. 
Both were a form of naming. 
The form said Age. 
Age could be measured by Time. 
Age could be defined by the Incident. 
The Incident occurred on the night before my twenty-first birthday. 
The Time was night as night became night. 
The Incident occurred in my room at the Time. 
The Time occurred to me after the Incident. 
The form said  Race or ethnicity. 
Both were constructed. 
Both marked me. 
Both had a form. 
Both were a form of naming. 
Naming was marking. 
I marked the form.  (Asian. Bottom. 4  Now.) 
I constructed myself.  (Looking 4 Fun. No Strings Attached.) 
I was unremarkable. 
The form said Sex. 
The form listed my options. 
I had no option. 
I went along with the Sex. 
The Sex had a Name.  (I  won’t say the Name.) 
Both marked me. 
The form said  Affiliation. 
Everything started out fine. 
The form said Residence. 
I unlocked the door. 
I misread Affiliation as Affliction. 
The Name entered. 
I misread Residence as Residual. 
The Name kissed me. 
The form said  Alcohol or drugs used at the time of incident. 
I was having a good time. 
The form said  Relationship with the assailant prior to incident. 
I did the thing I was good at. 
The form said  Type of coercion or force involved. 
The Name hit me. 
The form said  Please specify. 
The Name choked me. 
The form said  Ability to consent was inhibited by. 
The Name pressed a white towel against my face. 
The form said  Please specify. 
The towel smelled like sugar.  Please specify. 
An ice cream truck drove by.  (Please.) 
I heard the song.


^^EOP^^

                    
                    
                         The wagon and mule, Time and Eternity, stop to change places. Their lean and slope-back shadow, my reservation. The moon moves like infested flour. At the river, bloody victories meet bloody massacres. They tell each other about their dead.
     Grandmothers eat buffalo instead of hamburger. After supper, guitar chords bite through gravestone. Then the one grandfather interrupts, walking  off with his own skull as a lantern into the polar night. Snowshoe hare cleans the ears of the sleeping and leaves prophetic dreams.
     It is quiet. One can hear the hair of the dead grow. The woods, itself, dressed in frozen children’s clothes. Few of the living disguise themselves as pawned beadwork.
 
                

^^EOP^^




^^EOP^^

the city not yet shielded in ice     the harbor not yet
frozen enough     to walk across     trees without leaves
prismatic    the thing no one 
thought would happen     happened     in a vast hall
I watch the walled city made rubble
prophecy     everyone ignores        
women     who’d rather plunge knives
into their breasts     than be raped by the Greeks
the supertitles in clipped language 
American English     it is a dress rehearsal     daylight
outside     impossible to banish
the day’s news from my mind     Cassandre 
ascends the bulwarks     squints     the famed skyline
of her city in wreckage
a heap of dirty wood     dislodged stones 
her soprano bombards the dark
no one believes the woman     then
94 choristers are singing in horror 
Cassandre kills herself
the women follow
Énée (it is his story 
now) flees the burning city
through the wings
as everyone scrolls through their phones 
when the final three acts premiered
the curtain rose on an ancient time
the work scarcely stageable 
impossible music     enormous orchestra
two full-scale ballets     an empire     holding on
in France     theaters built 
along the widened streets     stripped of their shadows
while the dancers gyrated      mimicking
the animal     love 
of the handsome refugee
and the noble Queen Didon
Énée seeks shelter     water to drink     a body to put his lust in 
she is a stopping point
Didon drunk     she is helpless     she begs
the ships waiting 
in the harbor     with their hundred oarsmen
the curved bow
enormous white sails      caught 
in the stillness      the wind’s power     Didon
in a royal blue pant suit
Hillary had conceded     the hour before 
and so it was Hillary’s
rage I saw     in Didon’s     her great American mezzo
pushed     to the limits


^^EOP^^

Today, green ’96 Subaru, corner of Washington & Alden—six blocks from my house—a boy punches his car horn & screams wordless from the window as if to test my fight or flight & which side of that blade I’ll topple from. I keep a list of details & locations in the back of my head. Red Honda Civic, twelve blocks. Black Grand Cherokee, half-mile. Yesterday, six drunks followed me into the subway shouting slurs. Tall blond with tribal tattoos—babyface almost-beautiful if not for the hunger—his voice the loudest, echoing against the damp cement & tile: What the fuck is that thing?  Last week, a block away from Pride, a street preacher frothed at the jowls & stuffed my hands with pamphlets describing me hell-bound, a shirtless man masturbated across from me on the red line, a commuter in pinstripes & oxfords kicked my cane from beneath my feet while passing through the fare gates. Each time, I felt lucky. It could be worse. [I know the difference between assault & battery—one violence & another—is proximity to measurable harm. This law itself another kind of violence, weapon smelted from a certain bloodline’s  fear.] The week before, a stranger spat on my feet on my way to work, another stalked me through the station yelling Chick dick, chick dick, chick dick, repeating it almost as if it were a prayer. Today, I slide the dead bolt shut behind me—exhale a breath I don’t remember holding. Tomorrow, who knows? Forgive me. I cannot find the poem in all of this, but I can’t bear to let it go unspoken. I want to make this violence a stranger in my mouth. I want to make it something worth remembering.


^^EOP^^

I was Little Albert.
Nine months old in the famous film.
In a white cotton nightie, on a lab
table sitting upright
facing a camera.
Remember me? Sure.
You do. 
First, you saw that I was a “curious” baby.
You saw that I blinked and stared
with all the intensity of an infant-brain
eager to suck into its galaxy of neurons
all of the world. You saw that
I was you. 
You saw that I was a “fearless” baby.
You saw that I was not frightened
of a burning newspaper held before me
at an alarmingly close range.
Though indeed my rapt infant face
expressed the classic wariness of our species. 
Next, you saw that I was not frightened
of a frisky monkey darting close about me
on a leash. You saw
that I was not frightened
by a large dog brought close to me
nor by a quivering rabbit, nor
a small white rat—
nor even a Santa Claus mask
worn by a menacing male figure
clad in white, shoved close
to my infant face. 
You saw that I was attracted to the small white rat.
You saw that I reached out to touch the small white rat.
And as I reached for the small white rat
behind my head came an explosion of noise—
the shock of it sent me sprawling, cringing,
face contorted in terror, mouth
a perfect O of anguish, howling—
as the experimenter John Watson struck
a metal pipe with a hammer.
What a shock!—how terror
rushed through me. How
desperately I crawled
to escape almost toppling
off the edge of the table—
except adult hands restrained me. Children naturally fear loud noises.
Children naturally fear surprises.
Children naturally fear the unknown.
Children can be taught to fear the known.

^^EOP^^




Fiberglass reinforced resin, Luciano Garbati, 2008



1 
I do not want to speak about the beginning
                   of this story. Were my scalp a wreath or crown
of mouths, still, I would not open.
                   But you already know the myth: Rape
that made the body punishment for itself.  2 
Instead begin with the body—itself a kind
                   of ending. A new mythology, the severance
of two heads. Where her thighs meet, no
                   gash, sex mouthed into injury, no coiled
viper against her groin. Instead, a pale gap
                   in stone’s imagination—a dream my body
swallows. Each pill a small cut,
                   a slow beheading.  3 
My mother says her first crime was beauty,
                   that my father’s was how he imagined himself
a god. Call me bloodcurse, fair hair shriveled
                   & sprouting teeth, stain across the temple
floor. Do not make me tell this story
                   without a forked tongue. Before me
there was a mother & a god—I mean
                   a man—& a choice. Imagine, her body a home.
Call my father burglar, my birth a breaking
                   & entering

^^EOP^^




מקווה



     There is a cistern
          on the synagogue’s roof
     and a drain pipe in the wall
leading to a small basement pool.
There are two witnesses, a rabbi
    and one not-yet-Jew. 
       They are all women.
                  No one feigns modesty.
The convert waits
       naked and trimmed,
              no minerals on the skin,
     shadow down the drain.
              There is no magic in plain water. 
All the exile of the world
             comes from the back of the tongue.
      Give a palate enough dirt
                       and it will soil on its own.
    The choke of someone unused
                 to eating dirt
                     is quieter than it should be. 
        However loud, there is no one around.
                         Maybe there is an ancestor to listen.
     Certainly somewhere is a child
     who would not recognize this building
           unless it were on fire.
Learning to read from engravings
             on blackened stones,
what would you do
    when presented a book? 
Do not mistake the rabbi
      for the one who condemns.
  Damnation is often
                             a personal choice.
          Witnesses turn toward the empty pool,
the convert curls her toes. 
     She may think this drowning
is all that’s left
          but there is no magic
   in plain water.
        This is a ritual
                        not a spell.
                 The words
                    are less important: 
          “Ghetto was first our island.
         When we entered the ocean,
                    whether to bathe
                      or to drown,
   we always knew which shore
      we’d wash up on. 
“We taught our children
    to tuck stars under their shirts.
         Our god let the slaves die
    in the desert 
              and we called it mercy.
         We only fell in love
     with those who knew
        how to run.” 
She doesn’t look up,
         doesn’t nod,
               takes the smooth steps
         into the pool
           and pauses to breathe 
                before pulling her hair under
       and lifting her feet
         so it’s water only
                           all around.


^^EOP^^




After David Hammons



A shine to the bark, silver leaves aflicker
and the wound that made the basketball hoop:
a bicycle’s metal wheel gouged in the tree,
the trunk’s burred lip that clamps it. 
Whose childhood monument is this?
In the foreground of whose childhood home,
its blind-drawn windows? Where is the adolescent
of the grass and weeds, after school? The adolescent 
of the fluid leap and jump shot? Of the glissando
stride and lay-up? The plosive woop woop cries sent up
when the body satisfies the calculating eye?
O the tree ashimmer in hypotheticals’ blooms— 
where’s the undissuaded youth who sought
a scarce grace here? Who sought to make bank?
The shoulder and arm and wrist on repeat
even as day went thoroughly dark 
who refused to come inside until they exhausted
the audience of their mind? O extraordinary dunk, O hard slam, shudder the immovable tree.
Where is the glimmer of a sign 
one might one day rise among the ordinals
to be ranked  first, first, first? Wouldn’t
it be possible? Because if not, if not, if not.


^^EOP^^

I would not have thought I would have needed to say this.

Once upon a time, there was an English mole. I say mole, I mean vole, or guilty black hole. Not so much a mole as a disaffected young teacher, or a sheaf of important papers, or a strategy session in the wine bar with Giles, or a traffic jam. Or a lie as big as a bus.

A mole as in a foal, as in a dinner, when it’s wanted. A mole as a drink, when it’s needed. A mole as in a queue, for food? A mole of practical use, or pragmatic scruples and sharp manners. A mole what uses myth, like money, to store, in order, to never have to think of it. Mole as in wealth, as in forgetfulness. Mole as in memory, memory as confidence.

Or the idea of an island which grew its own people.

Or up to no good. No doubt.

I say Mole, I mean Arthur. I mean Uther, Oswald, George.

Love of country was her name.

I have no love for this country, was her name.

She almost certainly said she didn’t understand anything, names nor countries.

She could see, and was hungry.

I’d like to see you spit on your face, she said.

He could not reconcile the deep appreciation, the lusty, unquenchable affection she felt for the landscape of this country with the political history and present of the place which he found so revolting. This mole was caught between this love and this inability to love, and felt they must reach around and become one. They must be the same thing. They smelt the same, if the mole was being honest. I say mole, I mean populace oblivious to propaganda, self-interest or personal gain, an animal made of millions, released from the dark tunnels of capitalism’s dying gasps. A mythical beast. A joke.

Regret was her lightline. She would not ask, do I ask what my actions are asking for right now? For she was historical, in the tunnels, lightless with her line, a paw with a sore, holding a cage, with a budgie. Yellow in the dark. Animals too, moles digging coals, downing tools, hearing singing as warning, and not listening. The mole as the last night, not last night, and getting upset that the hole wasn’t looking at the mole, in the dark, when she couldn’t see his face but he could see hers. The mole had to look at where he thought her eyes were.

Revolting is a strong word.

I say mole, I mean National Trust, national freedom pass for the national bus, a proper hoo-ha, a national fuss.

I say mole, I mean Sharpe, Sean Bean as Sharpe, I mean people are dying while you go full-bore Cockerhoop. I mean it wasn’t like that when I was around, when I was younger. I mean a certain kind of touch, of look. I mean a freedom pass. I mean blindness to the estate. I mean, have you been in prisons, lately? They don’t really. I mean you aren’t talking of who fixes what you’re using?

I mean an acre of English ground, a sugarcoated Dacre homeward bound.

I say mole I mean Yarl’s Wood and all who work there who will never get to any heaven English or heathen.

I say mole. I mean a deliberate lie. I mean an act of aggression against the thing that sustains the world, ad infinitum. A Möbius strip of endless U-turns.

You say mole, you mean if you make people think they’re thinking, they’ll turn for you. Turn over, their backs to the ground. So much back to the ground it undergrounds. U-turns under the earth. You say mole but the term is not applied to all talpids; e.g., desmans and shrew moles differ from the common definition of “mole.”

He happened upon a postcard from her grandmother, and climbed into a gray watercolor and pencil forest, and felt in there, in the late-life, lonely work of a man gone to war and come back godly, a certain sort of English sanity. Faith. Totally mad, but beautifully truthful. She smelt it closer and heard it, ridiculous scripture. Three is the magic number. I say mole, I mean that rare thing, a true eccentric with a genuinely good heart. Kindness. Grace. I say mole but I mean pilgrim.

He happens upon a feeling of pride and says out loud, I am where I am supposed to be. I am creating foreign englands to leave my own. I am creating land from sea. A mole as in earth on water, to dig, to live on it and make it better. He says you can read this anywhere, anywhere you want to read.

A mole as in a memory, emailed. As is decent, constant, cancer or rain same complaint. As in deference, unpretentiousness. As in you wouldn’t want to see the old peoples voting history. As in when he was young, if you were to say one more thing to him, one more loose from your mouth, then he would’ve burst you, like a mole in a digger, and washed in your ashes and no one would’ve cared. Eccentric as in soldier, war as in mole.

He realized he must eat it. All of it. The poisonous and the palatable. She was hungry, and only by eating a great many things would she start to understand this love that could encompass shame, and was no longer made of country lanes, trees, flowers and small fellow-mammals. I say mole I mean server. I mean brochure. I mean pixels. Not a mole, more of a wood, more of a community, more of a teenager alone in a room staring at a screen, more a meeting in a Little Chef, more a surveyor, or an elaborate scam coded into the way a digital advert works, or a pipe, or not a pipe.

More of a nation, outside of papers, an anti-net where still no one will bat a lash. He is national enough to say, out loud, I am where it is. As in, a bit smaller, but still, impressive historically hmm? A skin disease as in moles are crawling all over me. A mole as in a confession, without any Catholics present. As in I need someone to hold me down. I’m pulling out my hair mole. As in I’d love you, but you’d tell everyone. You’d tell them of my brass. Of my salt in the earth, which poisons moles.

A mole is a spy, is a green-leather seat in a chamber of bullshit.

A mole is a sleep like baby logs. An apologies, a baby moles is a mole, we mean. The auld moldwarp. The new male moles are called “boars,” females are called “sows.” A group of moles is called a “labour.”

If you look closely you’ll see the mole is charitable. I say mole I mean sure start. I mean good bloke doing his thing keeping his head down. I mean wonderful pretentious twat.

Closely looked I was born riffraff, and I’ve grown old as the stuff. That’s what shouldn’t be allowed. You hear that. Let that be forbidden in the future. Man is born in order to think. Who is them? I don’t understand this thing. If I’m happy, mole is unhappy. If mole is happy, man is unhappy. Except he imagines he’ll be able to wriggle out of it.

Less a mole than an intimate examination of the sore bit inside a person’s eyelid. I say mole, but I mean any child, any parent, any person in a position of responsibility or utter carelessness. I mean prisoner. I mean patient. I mean the architect of a lie and he or she who believes the falsity and suffers while the deceiver profits. Mole as in poor and getting poorer, the little animal who is rich, and gets richer. Mole mole, caught in a hole. One mole, two moles, three moles, four, try to shut us out, there’s a mole in the door.

The mole folds into a shadow, of course, because he’s underfoot, where shadows start.

“For treatment of warts and cysts on the throat for a man take a she-mole, & for a woman a he-mole & setting by a good fire let the party put the moles head in his mouth & biting it, sucke the blood out of the moles mouth as lively as it can for treatment of warts and cysts on the throat.”

Prester John. Hermes Trismegistus. The Golden Legend. Whatever.

Angels with eyes like abscesses. But that’s the only thing. The only noticeable visual impairment. All else is not noticeable, so I assume, looking over my shoulder, symmetrical.

Mole as in English fact. As in how we keep changing, how we’ve always been like this.

Mole as in you’ll thank me in the end.

Lie Mole.

Lay Mole.

History mole.

King mole’s vicious campaign against himself.

Regret is not his guide line, backward through his history. Disease has never been a respecter of historical odds.

I say mole I mean news. I think you have a fairly good sense of who the mole is.

You’d say them.

I mean us.


^^EOP^^




Central America is a region of great importance to the United States. And it is so close: San Salvador is closer to Houston, Texas than Houston is to Washington, DC.
—Ronald Reagan
País mío no existes.
—Roque Dalton



1 
I’m not sorry, not at all,
for the highway I’ve taken,
rapacious, moldering,
hollow husk of a highway.
My destination deemed
perfect, where everybody
collides, so says the law,
whether I’m a criminal
or not, the math doesn’t add up
to exchange a few nothings
for a heaven I’ve never seen,
always heard of, right?
No maps nor numbers,
no possible word written
or spoken to keep you
from thinking I’m putting
a dent in your narrow
pockets. This is how
I do it, while the bald
mountains arch their backs,
darkness coming in fast,
something to chew
while my body rots.  2 
You come in like the Spanish flu
ravaging the blossoms’ water supply. 
Our rejection out of old rage begins
as if a mayflower found itself 
unanchored, a searing crucible
with no return. The story you claim 
disturbing and enchanting,
such a rotten thing. May you find 
your whole way back
through the black dogs of gunfire, 
harken back to the sounds
of your native flowers. Chances are 
if you fall, you’ll disappear
or pass. Yet like a hawk 
I will coin myself vigilant, dig you out
before your weeds, blackening, 
spawn your way of life. Our bodies
settled here first.  3 
If there’s no body left, there’s no crime,
no court case, so bury the filthy bastard.
Don’t fuss about it. It’s just a quick blow,
down he goes. You see the brains 
unclogged like leafed rainwater
in the gutters. My bag. My haunt of flies.
Thinking of nothing will make nothing
happen, so nothing will
do precisely. Nothing.  4 
Here by the northern peak, they cut
the chine of another country, blue
pre-dawn, darkened highway, and then nothing
or everything like roadkill. 
Another checkpoint, and whatever
they carry speaks of cadavers—
all those vanishings
by whatever means necessary— 
not our Eden, crushed forest
of mangled trees and brush
brushed aside, not you asleep
as if beneath the fields.  5 
The sun foaming with too much hissing
mirrors the indifference of scrub,
mountain gut, scorching haze
as they snake through thorns,
vanish through trees and, on the rocks,
settle like dust.
                       With light sleep,
with music and argot unheard,
merely behaving on instinct, they
puncture their countries, not knowing
what it means, and why would they,
after all they were taught to eat
everything, including the roaches.  6 
I must tell you the truth,
sometimes I want nothing more
than the continent capsized; north
down there, south the top of the head,
between you & me not a line,
no scrape of rust clogging
the mind. Who’s to say? Me,
the dark design
                       of a collarbone.
Of a country and without a country. 
You, total gratification
for the ants congregating
down the carcass. 
                        How small
the countries of our bodies. 
A polygon
as old as you started this. 
It’s hard to grasp the God-awful hunger
of those who don’t see it, don’t need it,
rather bury it, the body
as the greatest instrument.  7 
A match light like a bold,
faded gold leaf falling
in a painting. There
in the back streets
failing once again to form
a lucid thought. That’s
the only way to carry out
before you tread, watch
the landscape change.
How else is it possible
to obliterate one’s country.
Not completely, just enough
to feel dead or almost
in the flesh. How once
you rose on the other side
only to hear a shout babble
a language you didn’t know;
words you knew lost their worth.
The roof of your mouth ossified,
tongue only the space it used
to take. At ease with dark.
At ease with your reflection
blurred in public restrooms.
That’s the only way to go.
No grasp of what it is like
to leave without wanting
to come back, to leave
without all you know, all you are,
as if the doctor has cut a wedge
out of the brain. It’s getting here
that makes it difficult to ignore,
the flicker of a thought
discarded like a cigarette.  8 
You heard this before,
country of volcanoes
and lakes, country of
I break your ass, I pry
you open with rocks,
out of ravines, out of
tangled hills of my mind,
without a guide on all
fours I walk. Illegitimate
country of legs and arms,
in a way a rosary I have
nothing to say, nothing
to add, except I’m ashamed
I lost it. Country of piece-
of-shit Coca-Cola, torso
and head, I piece you
like a forsaken blanket,
over the shoulder, how
does one forget such
weight, how does leaving
mean much more than
returning. I want to say
a voice well-crafted
and resurrected said
you don’t exist. I think
I know what he meant.
Country that is no
country, crevice so far
and so close to—
here is the thing. Maybe
I’ll never get there, but
when I do, no doubt
I’ll look back, thinking
someone is following.


^^EOP^^




^^EOP^^

Severed finger of a convicted murderer uncurls like a waking pet.
Demonic compass points toward the most dangerous direction to get home. 
Its long yellow fingernail can pick any lock. 
On the fishhook, the finger resembles a long, fat mealworm.
Most times, it’s lodged in the throats of my enemies
or hiding among the tampons of cops’ wives. 
It avoids gold rings, bad luck. 
When wearing this rot relic on a chain,
sunlight smells like stale curtains in a worn-out hearse.
Rain never hits my clothes. 
Rooms seem hotter.
Radios turn on by themselves, always to the same Lucinda Williams song. 
Use any mirror as a doorway, I come out into the same sweaty
bedroom from a previous life. I forget who is wearing whom. 
I pierce the fingertip to draw up a will. 
I dip the finger in water. I point it toward the sun. I flick it to make it rain. 
Hanging on the wall,
I sleep under this bird, booger-picker, dream catcher,
missing piece of an inverted crucifix, rotting pencil. 
It sleeps over me like an accusative God. 
Around midnight, I wake up, the finger is typing in the next room.
What is it composing at this time of night? 
Letters to a parole board,
love letters to the rest of the hand,
midnight sermons,
ransom notes pertaining to me,
memoirs about life, hanging from my neck ...


^^EOP^^

When the mirror swings open, it calls me obscenely shapely. A ruby wing slaps the glass. Soft smear. Since,
like the drowning trick in reverse, I learned to float 
outside myself from a certain, mostly bearable height,
I watch terror push its anthem into the skin under
my dress, and the noise I obscure obscures my body 
still slimming to a petal. After his performance,
which is a hand tucking my performance into the pink
void between the heart’s line and the fate’s, I flower 
on command, a damp palm forcing a ghost to act out
the life my habit takes. Like cathedrals too haunted
and lovely to uplift or abandon, my fluted, parted legs 
offend and seem to be carved past clear expectations
of naturality. A bloody wing striking the mirror’s roof
reflecting the tops of your heads, lofted with wonder. 
Like hatred, the secret is only as hidden as the stage
disguising it—my hand bewitches since my magician
had a dream in which I tricked him into fucking me 
then holstered the theater’s box with blood’s jewelry
all exposed. Captivity stabbed through with singing,
the hollow weeping, I watch his hands as you watch 
my words for chasming midnight and wild morning
needling in. When he twists my arm, I can’t forgive
the direction in which I thrust the other. This lyric 
admits one appetite for my transformation. The birds
survive it, bright monsters in the fourth wall’s forest.
But I am not a trapdoor shut, not white globes alight 
in little cages screwed to the balcony. I was both wings
watching you suck that slick, sugared slice of laughter
when my violation hit the floor, inspiring a vague storm 
of applause. Thunder split something like rain over
this sorry house. Tenants in the first row went home
when they left, but red and wet from heel to crown.


^^EOP^^




^^EOP^^

Ok, we’ve rendered
the rendition 
how often? 
What were we trying
to get rid of? 
We exposed the homeless
character of desire
to the weather. 
Shall we talk
about the weather 
worsening four times
faster than expected, 
eight times, 
until the joy
of pattern recognition
kicks in? 
            Until the crest
            of the next ridge
            is what remains
            of division.
 


^^EOP^^

Now I can’t
get past the mezzanine,
never know who’s waiting
for me downstairs
by the revolving door
covered in shields or crosses
like the blood drive. Will this
be the year they finally succeed
in harvesting these last
self-organs, I ask, as they
tell me it’s for a cause?
As if I’m not the swollen one
smiling on their pamphlets.
Don’t bother with this logic
of sameness as you eye me
like the platter at labor lunch.
I used to envy the trees
wearing mists as veils,
modest trunks exploding into
thousands of muscle-bound
legs soon as they reach
the soil. Now even trees
seem docile and susceptible.
So too for the quasi-
goddesses with half-lives
shorter than a hair’s.
When we still had hair
and partners my partner
shaving said hair said we should be made of light. 
While every morning I
wake hoping to uncover
some slab of my body
hollowed out and encased
in steel. Everyone’s entitled
to her own magic bullet
theory of self. There’s
the get-to-know-you
game we play no longer
for we lost get-to and know-you.
If you had to press further into
the future in what county what
province would you elect
what version of what self? 
A half-frozen field late
January. Tall, spare, lone
turbine thrashing by
the abandoned interstate. 
I play my game. 
I await the next campaign.


^^EOP^^

Now you want me to tell you
a history of fish
while the lake clouds over?
But don’t you see
how thirst beats in the throat
of the lizards on the crushed leaves?
On the ground
autumn’s dead hedgehogs
have plunged through the periwinkles.
And you chew
the parched stalks:
already the corner of your lip is bleeding a bit.
And now
you want me to tell you
the history of birds?
But in the heat
of noon, the wild cuckoo
flies alone.
And still
the lost puppy howls among the brambles:
perhaps the bay horse, running,
struck him with a black hoof
on his snout.
Translated from the Italian


^^EOP^^

            Like any spell for bringing everyone you’ve ever loved back,
said the wind last night. What is it, about nighttime and fragment
seeming made for each other? It’s morning, now. The wind is just 
wind again, saying nothing, of course. The bomb cyclone, as it’s
called when there’s a more powerful than usual mashup of warm
and cold air leading to “hurricane-force wind events” hasn’t 
happened yet, but there’s an ominous bending and failing to rise
up that the bamboo keeps doing, that makes me think Sure,
anything could happen, but when isn’t that true? So many poems 
waiting for flight, grounded variously until better weather or until
the latest glitch (in vision, technique, both) that caused the latest
disaster gets worked out, the way it can seem impossible, during 
the intricate steps of dressage, that the horses ever do things like
trot into a barn or casually walk to any field’s other end—yet
they do, eventually. What’s difficult resolves. Disaster is almost 
never tragedy. The snowbells (that appeared overnight? or am I
just now noticing them?) are only snowbells if I call them that.
I could as easily call them Don’t tell me the worst I’d expected 
is true, or Lo, the queen’s bodice, borne unobtrusively aloft, or—
or I can say it’s spring again, with its first shy flowers, meaning
color, not bearing. Not mood. Hopkins thought flowers expressed 
devotion the only way they could: they turn toward the sun. From
humans, he suggested, God expects more—no, is owed more,
because we have more to give. Leaving out God and science, 
I suppose I get that, a version maybe of what Campion says: All
do not all things well—as in we do what we can. I had a house
near the sea, once, for example; now I live where there’s no sea 
at all, in a house with a yard filled with trees, among them this
barren pear tree from which I long ago hung a set of wind chimes
designed to sound like a cross between a ship’s bells and the sort of 
music tapped out by the rigging’s cable blocks as they hit their
masts unobstructed, sails down in a storm. If I close my eyes, it really
can seem I’m home again—the sea not far, the wind in the leaves 
standing in for the waves getting rougher than forecast, Rough
the way once you liked it, I can almost hear the waves choiring
back at me like an accusation of what I don’t deny, nor am I 
shamed of it, bring the boats to shore, friends, lay me down on
the shore. This far into the country, though, a boat’s pretty much
useless. Hence the pioneers with their teetered wagons that they 
called prairie schooners out of sheer nostalgia, already missing
the sea. Is that nostalgia? Or is it more like what Xenophanes
says, how if cows could draw, the gods in their pictures would have 
horns, the gods of birds would have feathers everywhere, each
would brandish, for stateliness, two wings for mastering a wind
strong enough to bring the stars down, as we used to say, before 
to touch meant collision, back when sex was what mattered
most; seemed to. Now precision does—specifically, that precision
with which love, felt honestly, deploys itself as if it hadn’t 
planned to. So that it feels like chance: chance as a boy with
a sash marked Fate across the promise that his chest is, or soon
will be, give it time, there’s time, still. The truth is, there aren’t 
that many people I can say I have loved, not in any way that matters
or stands memorable, really, and of those few I’m not so certain
I’d bring any of them back. At best, they wouldn’t find me 
anything close to who I was when I loved them, which is to say
I’d disappoint them all over again, just differently, so there’d at
least be that. What is happening, they used to ask me. Could you 
rephrase the question, I’d sort of mumble back, in a way it was
like dancing, when both people know how to dance, what I
mean is there was grace to it, a real grace, despite the mumbling, 
which is maybe why it took so long, for one of us to stop, if here
to stop doesn’t have to mean letting go; more like: I am grateful
for you, let neither of us wish for or do the other harm. Let sex— 
for, though I meant what I said about it not mattering most now,
it still matters—let sex be governed by that same restraint from
any harm unasked for. It almost sounds like prayer sometimes, 
he said, describing light on water. He said it like the sort of thing,
after sex, one simply says. Entering the body, pulling gently back
out of it—is that so little for a life to have come to? That, and 
the more than a few names long since scattered like those leaves
across which the Sibyl’s prophecies are written clearly enough,
if only the leaves would stop moving, if I could read and know, 
for once, what? what’s left for me, in terms of time, directions
of fortune, who I am? Who am I, the hero says to himself,
looking past his reflection on the lake’s surface down to where 
the darker greens give way at last to darkness. A light wind stirs
the surface. The reflection trembles without breaking apart. As if
this late in the long apprenticeship, “When I Change My Life” 
had stopped being a song anymore worth singing. I believe
and refuse to believe that, equally. Speak to me; speak into me,
the wind said, when I woke this morning, Let’s see what happens.


^^EOP^^

1 
A product can be authentic;
an object cannot. 
This presents a problem. 
An identity can be authentic;
an experience cannot. 
“How was your sleep experience?”
asks Marriott. 
Praise or blame
is the only legitimate response.  2 
Vultures wheel over Miami. 
A sign that appears
day after day
is not a sign. 
The library boasts a fine collection
of books written in private
languages.  3 
Identity is made
of select experiences.  4 
If you are genuinely sick,
the leaves recede 
and the flickering holes between them
come forward— 
not angels, but
unnamed objects


^^EOP^^

                    
                    
                    In the rowboat I tied her shoes.
And the river cussed and spat.
 
Our feet swelled and our bellies begged.

The end is never how you expect.
 
This is where I lose her:

at the shoreline, in sweet water.
 
We fed wild dogs overripe apples and herring.

My hands shine with hunger.
 
Her hair hung in willow boughs, mine in wild onion.

I reel the small fish of time.
 
The end never happens and always happens.

In winter we suet the trees. The cardinals arrive like snow.
 
I braid her willow hair. I tie her shoes once more.

It is winter again. The birches like crooked combs.
 
Why are you crying?        Why are you crying?
Begin but start with the end:
 
in spring she is pregnant. In summer she is not.

The baby swims in every room.
 
See where our steps wet the hallway?

That was when we were swept away.


^^EOP^^

It felt so normal to be ‘inspected,’ ‘looked at,’
‘examined,’ ‘explored,’ ‘interrogated’—
why does the perceptually deprived brain play such tricks?
Still firing off, cleaning up the sopping wetness
of the clouds with a snuffed-out candle wick. The spider
can’t be frightened into a jar. Imagine remembering anything
about those years other than pure sensation—
could the tree do it? The stump of one fallen
nourished for centuries by its surroundings. After some
time I learned to pay attention to ah and oh
and hey—body demanding a toll when another
eventually wanted to enter. At last, to guess instead
of knowing—saying now when the feeling came
strongest: how I miss the future, it’s sideways surrender.
I have since only rarely seen the tree—it puts into my ears
the sounds of all the people living without me:
the dark oaks of the dining room, every knife buried
among the airport car park—letterboxes
where there should have been a lake. Imagine if
afterwards everything can be pure sensation:
sugar-fed and alive in its dismantling.
 


^^EOP^^

As winter went on, every morning’s spoon of buckwheat honey
resembled more the taste of that isosceles at midpoint
of your weight, its smell brought sweetly back the pendulum-like pace
moving us from windowsill to floor, from floor to bed, and back
to floor, mapping haste’s measure of the room, our smell, but also meubles, book dust, hanging smoke, an open bottle, everything
connecting now for me, as smells will do, things that don’t connect,
may not be mine in memory, like childhood’s corridors, cats,
other’s bodies, and maybe other minds. All this from the spoon:
sweet, grassy in my nose, cloying almost, bitter on the tongue.
Yet, as clear as memory of pace, of smell, of movement made—
strange: where is the sound of us as we moved with one another?
 


^^EOP^^




All who have stood in a mother’s hand are sure to die because they were born
—Zhai Yongming



Between us bobs the baby, solemn in her infant wet suit.
The pool is the only place where
              screaming does not indicate terror. 
The neighbor’s pansy beds—O to lie down in those beds
and doze. Greener than grass, says Sappho,
              originator of envy. 
My sleep is pollinated by the baby’s wails: dreams
sprouting voices in peril. Mind sped up and emaciated
              like a greyhound 
in the track. The end of growth is death.
The painting begins with a scribble. Or is a scribble
              the finishing touch? 
Call your plants by their names, 10,000 words a day.
We feed, we weed, we read her books about owls.
              What am I minding 
but stillness? What have I grown except loss?


^^EOP^^

Good morning, daddy!
Ain’t you heard
The boogie-woogie rumble
Of a dream deferred?
 
Listen closely:
You’ll hear their feet
Beating out and beating out a—
 
            You think             It’s a happy beat?
 
Listen to it closely:
Ain’t you heard
something underneath
like a—
 
            What did I say?
 
Sure,
I’m happy!
Take it away!
 
            Hey, pop!             Re-bop!             Mop!
              Y-e-a-h!
 


^^EOP^^

Little cullud boys with beards
re-bop be-bop mop and stop.
 
Little cullud boys with fears,
frantic, kick their CC years
into flatted fifths and flatter beers
that at a sudden change become
sparkling Oriental wines
rich and strange
silken bathrobes with gold twines
and Heilbroner, Crawford,
Nat-undreamed-of Lewis combines
in silver thread and diamond notes
on trade-marks inside
Howard coats.
 
Little cullud boys in berets
            oop pop-a-da
horse a fantasy of days
            ool ya koo
and dig all plays.
 


^^EOP^^

Freedom will not come
Today, this year
            Nor ever
Through compromise and fear.
 
I have as much right
As the other fellow has
            To stand
On my two feet
And own the land.
 
I tire so of hearing people say, Let things take their course. Tomorrow is another day.
I do not need my freedom when I’m dead.
I cannot live on tomorrow’s bread.
            Freedom
            Is a strong seed
            Planted
            In a great need.
            I live here, too.
            I want my freedom
            Just as you.   
 


^^EOP^^

He came home from middle school
with a wet kitten tucked inside
his black leather jacket.
He'd found it shivering in the tall grass
flattened by rain.
It could only belong to him
for fifteen minutes
and it understood that, I think.
Though just a few weeks old,
already it expected disappointment.
Yet it began to purr,
this scrap of cloud-gray fur,
as he drew it forth to show me.
Castaway (its name
he said), so lonely and hungry
after the shipwreck of
another day at school.


^^EOP^^

Tinkling treble,
Rolling bass,
High noon teeth
In a midnight face,
Great long fingers
On great big hands,
Screaming pedals
Where his twelve-shoe lands,
Looks like his eyes
Are teasing pain,
A few minutes late
For the Freedom Train.
 
 


^^EOP^^

Hold fast to dreams
For if dreams die
Life is a broken-winged bird
That cannot fly.
 
Hold fast to dreams
For when dreams go
Life is a barren field
Frozen with snow.
 


^^EOP^^

Good evening, daddy!
I know you’ve heard
The boogie-woogie rumble
Of a dream deferred
Trilling the treble
And twining the bass
Into midnight ruffles
Of cat-gut lace.
 


^^EOP^^

My old man’s a white old man
And my old mother’s black.
If ever I cursed my white old man
I take my curses back.
 
If ever I cursed my black old mother
And wished she were in hell,
I’m sorry for that evil wish
And now I wish her well.
 
My old man died in a fine big house.
My ma died in a shack.
I wonder where I’m gonna die,
Being neither white nor black?
 
 


^^EOP^^

Gather out of star-dust
            Earth-dust,
            Cloud-dust,
And splinters of hail,
One handful of dream-dust
            Not for sale.
 


^^EOP^^

Down in the bass
That steady beat
Walking walking walking
Like marching feet.
 
Down in the bass
That easy roll,
Rolling like I like it
In my soul.
 
            Riffs, smears, breaks.
 
Hey, Lawdy, Mama!
Do you hear what I said?
Easy like I rock it
In my bed!
 


^^EOP^^

Sometimes when I’m lonely,
Don’t know why,
Keep thinkin’ I won’t be lonely
By and by.


^^EOP^^

If I had some small change
I’d buy me a mule,
Get on that mule and
Ride like a fool.
 
If I had some greenbacks
I’d buy me a Packard,
Fill it up with gas and
Drive that baby backward.
 
If I had a million
I’d get me a plane
And everybody in America’d
Think I was insane.
 
But I ain’t got a million,
Fact is, ain’t got a dime—
So just by if-ing
I have a good time!
 


^^EOP^^

See that lady
Dressed so fine?
She ain’t got boogie-woogie
On her mind—
 
But if she was to listen
I bet she’d hear,
Way up in the treble
The tingle of a tear.
 
            Be-Bach!
 


^^EOP^^

I play it cool
And dig all jive
That’s the reason
I stay alive.
 
My motto,
As I live and learn,
            is: Dig And Be Dug In Return.
 


^^EOP^^

Little snail,
Dreaming you go.
Weather and rose
Is all you know.
 
Weather and rose
Is all you see,
Drinking
The dewdrop’s
Mystery.
 


^^EOP^^

When I get to be a colored composer
I'm gonna write me some music about
Daybreak in Alabama
And I'm gonna put the purtiest songs in it
Rising out of the ground like a swamp mist
And falling out of heaven like soft dew
I'm gonna put some tall tall trees in it
And the scent of pine needles
And the smell of red clay after rain
And long red necks
And poppy colored faces
And big brown arms
And the field daisy eyes
Of black and white black white black people
And I'm gonna put white hands
And black hands and brown and yellow hands
And red clay earth hands in it
Touching everybody with kind fingers
Touching each other natural as dew
In that dawn of music when I
Get to be a colored composer
And write about daybreak
In Alabama.


^^EOP^^

The head of Lincoln looks down from the wall
While movies echo dramas on the screen.
The head of Lincoln is serenely tall
Above a crowd of black folk, humble, mean.
The movies end. The lights flash gaily on.
The band down in the pit bursts into jazz.
The crowd applauds a plump brown-skin bleached
blonde
Who sings the troubles every woman has.
She snaps her fingers, slowly shakes her hips,
And cries, all careless-like from reddened lips!
De man I loves has
Gone and done me wrong ...
While girls who wash rich white folks clothes by day
And sleek-haired boys who deal in love for pay
Press hands together, laughing at her song.
 


^^EOP^^

How thin and sharp is the moon tonight!
How thin and sharp and ghostly white
Is the slim curved crook of the moon tonight!


^^EOP^^

When she died, I took my mother's socks,
those fuzzy polka-dotted ones she'd worn
 
in hospice. I wore them all through winter.
 
Maybe that's creepy. But is it really so different
from the necklace she willed to me,
 
that single pearl clinging to its strand of silver?
 
The necklace isn't creepy. Every day for a year
I hung it over my heart, even in the shower,
 
even when it felt heavy as a beggar's first coin.
 
I want to say that having these things was like having a scar
but worse. In winter, socks are as inevitable as scars,
 
except there's more choice in it: when I was cold,
I chose which socks, and whose.
 
But I'm wrong. These tokens I harvested
from her deathbed are more like the pearl,
 
or rather, what makes a pearl:
 
that piece of sand, the irritant that the nacre
builds itself around, that tiny, everyday object
 
that, little by little, learns to glow.


^^EOP^^

                        for JA
 
I flutter in order
to enter
the phrase’s silver.
  Jackdaws have launched nearby
this time, silk green and ripped,
the movement a kind of chafing thinking.
 
Oh he’s marking
terrain right there—
right there with his
 
unmade song. The shadow kids
whip fronds, froth air up
into heat, pure and simple
 
“violence of the eye.” Wild iris
ink, wet in the margin’s stage.
Well, hadn’t this testament begun
 
to carry its chime in stripes?
That’s when I knew he was going away
from me, towards the sound.
 
Like the ring on the table
it can’t be decentered.
Rim around the recent.
 
Ashes, ashes,
A bright tangled seeming.
 


^^EOP^^

1 
After the beautiful boy killed himself I killed myself
and lived in the trash vortex, the j’accuse of the US
with gear and the beclouded night kindness and a mind
like a mule deer in the poorest of zips. My affection
got only so close before I withdrew into self-protection,
my white tail an insolent so long. I lived by borrowing
the stillness and dominion and circumference and how dare I
be anything at all, mud under his boot sole, the roux
of the cookbooks he borrowed from the library,
and I returned and wanted stew and the simmering of him.  2 
Where was the equipment for living? Where was the witness?
And where was the Very Rich Hours: the exchange of rings,
the gathering of flowers? Both beautiful and boy and April
gone the way of trumpeting May and ghost structures
of the Gothic, costly blue and gold depicting ...
Could you say beautiful and boy after the beautiful boy
killed himself? April felt like retrograde February,
impoverished color fields of angry, blowing on our hands
in the Middle Ages of Syracuse where we lived in a university
city, joining faith to magical thinking to tactics for fleeing.  3 
After the beautiful boy killed himself was
became impossible to hold in one mind, my mind,
and I could not look directly at is, the wind
and the thinly branched sapling that is/was his height
and others wore shoes like his shoes, like
was legal and the swellings of April illegal
made up as it was [was] of gaps and lapses.
I depended on the vertical hell of other people
for story, for a narrative however broken,
a tolerance that could be that charmed or bitter,
could be what takes the place of nouns and verbs.  4 
After the beautiful boy killed himself I was a mackle
of presence, a blurred capital letter that marked
a person’s breathing, while he was immaculately
gone except for all the damage to our throats
and to our umbilical selves. Touch was too much
or not enough. White space was obliterated by April’s
mute riot or was it organized into caravans stopped ...
Ah, what luxury to have his crossed letters on paper,
rationed wartime material we have now in abundance,
and map what we know in scratches and around that what?  5 
Cuts, knots, rips, fissures, dots, the ink drips
from the person after the beautiful boy killed himself,
stopgap concept, the grief counselor kept it together
or at arm’s length so the ________ can’t find the ________.
I asked her for experience and I got a view from above—
grace, I’ll take it, the casserole, the pepper pot;
I’ll take the fix, the unopened bills for the services
rendered, the renderings billed. Any fix is myopic,
like a mother’s look at the child’s flaws as virtues,
as self-incrimination, the crime being the rich
attachments of subjects, objects, finishes.  6 
Clouds blocked the sun all April
after the beautiful boy killed himself,
blocked by the body and the next steps, blocked
the pronouns, blocked and, blocked then, although, before, so after the beautiful boy
we loved the jagged now for its promise and threat,
for its torn map of Detroit and its alternate plans
of duration and what was it yesterday I said
after the beautiful boy killed himself about stopping
me while I was weeping to say ghost = get = go on.  7 
What energies and economies of the daily,
the obvious snows and obliteration and shoveling
disrupted when the beautiful boy killed himself?
He keeps moving down or is it up? Is there up
in the pedestrian advance to the drugstore for more
pain medication, buying a coffee to go and a doughnut?
Why not start from the start, from the hesitant
and make a progress that’s disrupted by the end,
disrupted by the currency? Are you paying for what
you break or the opposite? How do you intend to pay?  8 
Come back, come back—we’re asking the highest power
of corporate capital to make you vertical once more
without metaphor—the corporeal you. We will assign the pronoun
by shareholders and trustees who will agree to your exceptional
growth potential, no, growth imperative, to the cult of you
and the evangelism of the ask. We burn, we spread like disease
but the brutal agglomeration of you we love, we pull you up
by your bootstraps, we trade in the sublime machine for you.
We will endure you as you did not endure the terrible world,
I thought after the beautiful boy killed himself.


^^EOP^^

That summer, smoke gorged
itself on sky. Two silver 
sleeves of “boy” flung fire.
Hungry ravines echoed the Stop— 
don’t rush rock’s rough hewn
shrubs, O     Burning bush. That summer 
was one after the last clearing
orange to blue, animal brains wet 
as walnut slabs refusing to burn.
Between us—Stop. Look, if I could 
pause the—O      Wild
here you would choose me over 
a People, oiled blackberries purpling
our wet hands pressed to wetter 
lips. Only you could stop the smoke signals
lisping through the rain. In the pause you could 
ask: How do you autopsy a branch?
O      Ash already peopling the sky 
that was the summer before
Anthropocene chic & if I could 
freeze our branching away
if I could take dead coral off walls 
if I could pull all of it back
To us      To ocean      To ice 
O      What humidity would hold
still between us, our bodies luminous 
as heat snapping through clouds
electric eels echoing elsewhere: 
“O”      “O”      “O”      “O”


^^EOP^^

A bridge used to be there, someone recalled,
before the war:
an old pedestrian bridge.
The patrol passes every five hours.
Evening will be dry and pleasant. 
Two older guys, and a young one.
He read twilight like a book,
rejoice, he repeated to himself, be joyful:
you’ll still sleep
in your bed today. 
Today you’ll still wake up in a room
listening carefully to your body.
Today you’ll still be looking at the steel mill
standing idle all summer. 
Home that is always with you like a sin.
Parents that will never grow older.
Today you’ll still see one of your people,
whomever you call your people. 
He recalled the city he’d escaped from,
the scorched terrain he searched by hand.
He recalled a weeping man
saved by the squad. 
Life will be quiet, not terrifying.
He should have returned a while ago.
What could happen to him, exactly?
What could happen? 
The patrol will let him through,
and god will forgive.
God’s got other things to do. 
They all were killed at once—both older guys,
and the young one.
Silence between the riverbanks.
You won’t explain anything to anyone. 
The bomb landed right between them—
on that riverbank
closer to home. 
The moon appeared between clouds,
listened to the melody of insects.
A quiet, sleepy medic
loaded the bodies into a military truck. 
He quarreled with his stick shift.
Sought the leftover poison in a first-aid kit.
And an English-speaking observer
expertly looked at the corpses. 
Even tan.
Nervous mouth.
He closed the eyes of the young one.
He thought to himself: a strange people,
the locals.
Translated from the Ukrainian


^^EOP^^

Have psalter and breviary. Have hymnbook. Have laid
fingers on rosary strings, plucked
like lyres their clatterwood. Coughed incense. Adored
precisely as instructed. Stood Passiontide vigil, then sexted
at noon. Cast bone die to prophesy
dyings, told
beads their more sorrowful mysteries. Rehallowed
insomnia to Compline then Matins,
August sky vested in purple surplice. Had
ears to hear stern sermons, and so sang-
back-against utter depravity, anti-antiphonal. Droned undersong’s
cacophony during Evensong.
Left breadcrumb trails
through wine chalices. Deified,
defiled: sprayed
holy water from the bristles of an aspergillum
as if flailing a scourge. Reconsecrated
curse tablets to ever more
jealous gods. Desooted
candlesnuffer’s silver, chanted
Exorcism Rites at my self: Begone,
begone, begone, and all
thy fell companions. Told
What-Cannot-Not-Be
not to be. Laid
votive amulets like this
one on little-seen altars, into bog-slurp, waited
centuries for their resurfacing
and interpreting,
archaic, ill-
understandable and still
resurrectant, mnemonic, delivered
out of and back in to oblivion.


^^EOP^^




^^EOP^^




After Bruno Schulz



like my father i was intensely awkward around the unwell.
he had a single pair of shoes—saddle brown leather.
he handled these as carefully
as neolithic skulls. 
he first reappeared as an insect. arriving home, we opened the box, with its punched-in air holes,
and there he was, very green and flat as a tapeworm, mother relieved by the attentiveness
of his small yellow eyes, concerned, as always, that his size
implied inanition. 
he was so small and silent he could be easily lost around the house, sometimes for days.
until he reappeared on a chair leg or doorframe, gently pulsing in a way that struck me as
uncomfortably sexual—he was still my father, after all. he seemed to like the spots
where the sunlight hit the wallpaper, following them for hours across the flaking peonies. 
these periods of loss frightened my mother. i came home one day to find his body, so very like
a blade of grass, pinned to the noticeboard above the receipt
for a recently-purchased oscillating fan.  “coming to terms,” my mother said, is a diplomatic metaphor.


^^EOP^^

lies on the shoulder
by my drive to work.
I wondered first hell
is

^^EOP^^




^^EOP^^

                    
                    
                    Dear reader,

I’ve been thinking
a lot about stretch denim
that doesn’t also have a stretchy waistband
(by which I mean nature’s cruelest disagreements)
and I’ve been thinking
about the slobbering of  heat that is the promise of spring. Today, to wear out the woozy, to giddy the skittish dizzy into a steady simple rush of stillness I buttered
around the city listening to the Cranberries
as the air around me bounded
into its summer self
but literally two weeks ago there was a blizzard
that thawed into a song.

Plants have the most complicated biochemistry in nature—it’s not explicit, their influence, but powerful as passive aggression. Family
like a forest, like home it grows
wherever I go. Trees of forests of families gabbing at the root. Wild tobacco developing nicotine as a toxin to shoo away insects who feed on the leaves.

I guess this is a dirge
to the future I thought we could have
Not all plants were meant to grow together
in the same microclimate. Some things grow apart instead.

Walking the High Line not far from where we first met, in the seats by the popsicle stand. Blackberry ones were the best. Mango, second to the best. Coconut was trash. “I think you want to be with someone, so clearly so deep. It just doesn’t feel like you want to be with me.” Leo looked up at me full Eeyore face. “I been thinkin the same thing.”

Nations are always outlived by their cities

The train stopped running. Interstate trucking, global air travel, containerized shipping left the hanging train hanging And even there, to have engines of appetites in a city in a state in a nation in a world in a solar system in a galaxy in a universe where the only constant is change—body roll with the punches and the punch lines and the I can’t stand the rains. Yes, our High Line stopped running, but it didn’t go away

Because you see dear reader, in the garden
dry foliage from the previous year’s growth gives its sugars
to the new generation. Helps protect
plants from desiccating and freezing in the winter.
Shelter for birds, hibernating
butterflies, and other insects.

Death cycle interwoven with the spring.

It took time to forget
about who we were together, so we could come back
with intention and not surrender

Jiddy says that makes sense across from me at the Echo Park vegan brunch spot mid sorrel-bowl hoovering. Your pheromones have to recalibrate

Spring is a season of reconciliation, a suture
for the loss of winter and the summer’s sweaty
promises. Sparklers
on the beach
It’s July 4th and we’ve said no
to imperialism but yes
to public sex

We drive for hours because it’s an excuse to sing
together and I forget other people
are around and we’re driving
to the coast and the radio is cranked all the way up
and our inhibitions cranked all the way
down
Our layered associations, our accidental landscape.

I’ve tended to the garden
of our memories, like a recipe
for feelings. The derelict railroad I see when I close my eyes
grown wild with Queen Anne’s Lace—

I’m almost always talking to someone but almost never seeing anyone, I say as me n Leo pass through the Chelsea Market Passage and our voices bounce around the thrum of the crowd shuffling about us now. Our passage between and through the gently stalling masses like an obstacle course of bodies. I mean the last time I really dated someone was ... I look up at him while trailing off, which is becoming a pebble feature of our patter. Anyway, the wedding looked gorgeous, from what I saw on Insta, I say like a Hawaiian shirt in the winter: not quite believable but go off. He shakes his head and eyes into me like shards of glass. That’s not what you really think. Stalled behind a double-wide stroller I stop and turn to him. Leo, for the love of god you had flip-flops made for the guests with both yr freaking initials on them. I was praying that I would choke to death on my own vomit so I would never have to see it again. Leo grins wide as the High Line

In order to see
what we would become, what we were supposed to be, we
had to abandon
ourselves. We had to go derelict,
go wild. Let the living dynamics
of the world outside us grow over us, separately—
and then recreate our wilderness
with a shimmery wildness

Not constantly recreating our memory

—

Dear reader,

A roux, I’ve learned tonight in this mid-city dinner party apartment tucked somewhat safely away from asthmatic LA freeways, is the mixture of butter and flour used to swell sauces and soups and Paul’s baked sage mac n cheese that I’m whisking alive like an al dente Evanescence cheese-rock bop. Whistle while you whisk away the rage scrunched in yr boulders. I says to them around the table I says—

I don’t have food stories. With you, I say, I’m cooking new ones.

Being protective
of yr recipes is only natural. Things get stolen.

So much butter. Butter, butter, butter, butter rockin everywhere am I rite?

One stick, two stick, red stick, blue stick. I thought maybe half a stick? No, it’s half a stick for the sausages, but a whole one for the tomato sauce. Butter the bread, get yr sea salt rocks off. The water shd taste Atlantic. Monica’s kid practically revs himself into the tabletop behind us in her Albany Park apartment with Popeye’s “come hither” musk wafting in through the open window. Says she didn’t know how to cook before she got married, that trying new dishes was a way she and her husband bonded. Keeping kids alive is some shit, I think while remembering when we’d duct-tape 40s to our palms in college.

Mom does not want to be hooked up to no machines she texts
day after Auntie passes That’s not prolonging life that’s extending death

The garlic the green
pepper the onion—which! I just learned how to cut: Claw hands. Cracked my first egg ever for a cooking show in Berkeley where I made a spaghetti and chard frittata to serve a boy the morning after we’ve presumably played dick-butt. The basics are my revelation. The andouille sausage, the bacon
tips, the ham hock, the scallions, the smoked
paprika bubble bubble’s the gumbo in Roy’s Concordia apartment by the
bakery where the dad, just after a run, bought me a coffee while I was in line and slipped me his number

whale dies in thailand after swallowing 80 plastic bags

Dear reader, let’s make a culture!
Let’s make a dough. Like anyone whose culture has been scrubbed
from history, you can scrub my apple crumble
But you can never scrub my hunger

Let’s get bubbling
Let’s get wet
Let’s bold the buttock loaves @ Kristina’s Bernal Heights abode
Jess pulls meat from the rib cage
like her grandmother
The most flavorful parts are
closest
to the bone. Everything smells
like fuzzy comfort Insulin

is a polypeptide hormone produced by the beta cells of the islets of  Langerhans of the pancreas, tiny islands that regulate the metabolism of sugar in the blood. Insulin resistance begins when too many sugars are introduced too often into the body—the beta cells shoot their load so often the body is like, damn insulin! Why are you so obsessed with me?

Undigested sugar molecules rage around the blood, doing all sorts of crimes

Insulin, from the Latin insula: isle
Island—sugar—
Dad’s hair started to fall out. His long black trickster locks Tufts of it in the trash on the brush
Auntie’s sister goes in to get her foot cut off
Auntie goes in for dialysis. They told her stick a needle in the orange for practice. It’s porous, like skin. Auntie, you’ve been injecting the orange this whole time? What the heck?

I am the recipe I protect.

—

Dear reader,

We are in a pot.
One of us is the vegetables and one of us is the water. I can’t tell
who is cooking who, like a late 80s Aretha Franklin song—we give ourselves up to each other. Into each other. Throughout each other. Cutting

is decisive and precise. In what other context do you get to grip a knife like you do when preparing ceviche. Prep is so violent, right?

Scrape out the tomato
Smash the lemons and the limes
Rip off the shrimp tails
Slice open the cucumber, the onions, the chilies into smaller and smaller minces

We bust
the olives before shaving meat sleeves
from its pit. I can feel the chili seeds
from the backseat
of the maroon Honda in Santa Fe 25 years ago.

The ubiquity of garlic
breath.

I’m obsessed with softening, the going in between.

Simple ingredients orchid the kitchen-thing: an hour among the citrus and the onions and the cucumber and the chilies, shrimps bud from sickly gray to scrumptious punky pink

Dear reader,

It’s about family. Everything’s about family if you have enough string. Sitting in yr little chair while aunties flutter about the stove, the butcher block, the cutting board. We’re a country club in Durango. We’re a wedding cake in Mexico City. We’re a hole in the wall in Tijuana.

Btw why’s it called a pie-hole? Why not a stew-hole? Or a hoagie-hole? Or a roe-hole? Apparently imagination is the wages of dessert culture.

Me n Becky nibble De La Rosa cookies and blast La India, art denaturing our circuit of gray matter.
                

^^EOP^^

After the sewage flowed into the sea
and took the oxygen away, the fishes fled,
but the jellies didn’t mind. They stayed
and ate up the food the fishes left behind.
I sat on the beach in my red pajamas
and listened to the sparkling foam,
like feelings being fustigated. Nearby,
a crayfish tugged on a string. In the distance,
a man waved. Unnatural cycles seemed to be
establishing themselves, without regard to our lives.
Deep inside, I could feel a needle skip:
                 Autumn dark.
              Murmur of the saw.
                 Poor humans. 
 


^^EOP^^

You could say it wrong, like my wracked
brain, or with the wrong g
like gag or Garamond.
Some words are nearly in ruins.
Yesterday the gynecologist told me
I spell my name wrong—should have an o between the f and u.
Am I trying to get pregnant?
In my country, he begins.
And then, between my parted legs, tells me that over there
they do everything that we do,
just behind closed doors.
Am I anxious?
Well, someone is tweeting at me from a burner account,
or my step-grandma’s trying to troll me again.
But I’ve already gone quick-violet.
On the plane, beside me
is a healer who tells me about her interest
in belly dancing. Belly good is what my grandpa says instead of very.
Not his accent, just a joke.
We approach the fertile crescent: Hewlêr, Kirkuk, Baghdad—three neon shocks.
Across the aisle a woman opens up
a document that just says ART.
Then selects the text in baby blue
and makes it shrink.
Timing, says the healer. Such a powerful force in life.


^^EOP^^

The shortest sentence, I believe, in the New Testament.
Having to do with the raising of  Lazarus, and no less
the crucifixion of  Jesus himself once the Pharisees
realize the power of a voice that can call forth the dead.
Jesus seems to be identifying with this brother of Martha
and Mary, with in fact the whole weeping community. Take away the stone, Lazarus come forth, and he that was
dead came forth, bound hand and foot with graveclothes;
and his face was bound about with a napkin. Loose him
and let him go.

^^EOP^^

Gravity-defying, the lark in the clear air of a June morning stays aloft on a hoist of song only, and only when song goes as breath gives out does the bird let itself down the blue chute of air in such an aftermath silence so profound you’d think it was a double-life creature: one life aloft in blue, all clarity, the other hidden in the green swaddle of any rocky field out here where, when summer happens, you’d almost see the long silver ribbons of song the bird braids as if binding lit air to earth that is all shadows, to keep us (as we walk our grounded passages down here) alive to what is over our heads—song and silence—and the lot of us leaning up: mind-defeated again, just harking to it.


^^EOP^^

I can’t love them if their hands aren’t all tore up
From something, guitar strings, kitchen knives & grease 
Burns, heaving the window ACs onto their crooked old
Sills come June. Fighting back. That porchlight’s browned 
Inside with moth husks again & I can’t climb a ladder
To save my life, i.e., the world spins. Even when it’s lit, 
It’s half ash. Full-drunk under a half-moon & I’m dazed
We’re all still here. Most of us, least. For the one & every 
Girl gone, I sticker gold stars behind my front teeth so
I can taste just how good we were. I swear I can’t 
Love them if they can’t fathom why an unlit ambulance
On a late highway means good luck. I hold my cigarette- 
Smoking arm upright like I’m trying to keep blood
From rushing to a cut. What’s true is my shift’s over & 
I’m here with you now & I’m wrapped up tight
On the steps like a top sheet like the morning paper 
Before it’s morning. Look up & smile. What does it matter
That the stars we see are already dead. If that’s the case well 
Then the people are too. Alive is a little present I
Give myself once a day. Baby, don’t think I won’t doll 
Up & look myself fresh in the eyes, in the vermilion
Pincurl of my still heart & say: It’s happening again.


^^EOP^^




For Arthur Sze



] the full moon is two half-moons joined
the old word for such a joint is harmony
harmony joins the two halves of the moon together
and makes the moon whole [  ] there’s a lot of emptiness
inside the moon the moon is made of this emptiness
and it is glazed a blinding white eyeless as the open
eyes of gods when hearing a heart beat
they open their eyes on the animal they hunt [  ] some
times they hunt the moon and sometimes
the moon is the hunter [  ] the moon
has a heart and that heart thinks and pulses
and I who am saying I with you as you say I
am an echo of that pulse or am I a thought
that is the moon’s thought
                                   (  )
life borrows light borrows life
I like the riddle even if I have no choice but to be it [  ] or
so I sometimes think [  ] building so much by hand
building the moon by hand
building by hand my hands and building these thoughts [  ] my
head is feet and hands [  ] the moon has a foot and a lip
and when the harmony limps or lisps
the moon needs a dark crutch to stay full and bright [  ] some
times the moon is a bow drawn back
sometimes it’s the string of the lyre [  ] some
times the moon is a pot filled with smaller moons
rings and earrings and some other singing that has no name
but adorns the emptiness [  ] adores and
adorns the emptiness as it grows inside us [


^^EOP^^

Morning she comes, mother of all balms. 
Only the news reporter says it wrong:
but aren’t you strung: little ping 
and doesn’t memory embalm
                           your most-hurt city: 
those yellow creeks                                of your rickety holm
where your mater: your salve: 
left all her selves behind
so she could surrender to a lifetime 
of Septembering: what she members most: 
yellow grapes and celeries
and visiting her father’s glove 
a balm, to be by absence so enclaved: 
your mender
a follower, devoted 
to what she cannot see. O air miles,
how can it be real? 
How uncertain you should
be             if it existed, if there are no photos left 
of her playing
on her childhood lawn— 
burned are all the documents, or eaten— 
this ink,
like memory,
an ancient unguent, 
enshrining what cannot be held
of what went missing—the dog, her hat of hay, 
one brother.                              She was in prism, 
your mother says—and that’s how you will write her, 
atoning her, just in fluorite a figurine caught 
to fracture                                  her stolen years,
                                                        her brother, 
all her once-upon-a-chimes.


^^EOP^^

This first-light mountain, its east peak and west peak. 
Its first-light creeks:
Lagunitas, Redwood, Fern. Their fishes and mosses. 
Its night and day hawk-life, slope-life, fogs, coyote, tan oaks,
white-speckled amanita. Its spiderwebs’ sequins. 
To be personal is easy:
Wake. Slip arms and legs from sleep into name, into story. 
I wanted to be mountainal, wateral, wrenal.


^^EOP^^




For Eileen Myles



away from joy
you walk a little
missing a tooth
discussing famous
black dogs
on the dead
chests of lovers
I just finally
heard
that unnoticed
silence
of never having
one again
it’s been with me
all my life
I saw mine
named after
a god
his body laid
out on the lawn
brown fur
dried blood
yes it’s wise pathos
this want to live
in my body
like a dog
not thinking
if stones
for human deaths
then what
for the other ones


^^EOP^^

No wind, no rain,
the tree
just fell, as a piece of fruit does. 
But no, not fruit. Not ripe.
Not fell. 
It broke. It shattered. 
One cone’s
addition of resinous cell-sap,
one small-bodied bird
arriving to tap for a beetle. 
It shattered. 
What word, what act,
was it we thought did not matter?


^^EOP^^

It waits now for snows to fall
upward, into a summer
whose green leaves
vanish,
but back into branch, into sap, into rain. 
It waits for the old
to grow young, fed and unfearful,
for freighters to carry their hold-held oil
back into unfractured ground,
for fires to return
their shoeboxes of photos and risen homes. 
It unbuilds the power line’s towers
before the switch can be toggled,
puts the child, rock still in hand, back into his bed. 
A single gesture of erasure
pours back into trucks and then river
the concrete wall,
unrivets the derrick,
replenishes whale stocks and corals. 
And why not—it is easy—restore the lost nurse herds
of mammoths to grazing,
the hatched pterodactyl to flight?
Let each drowned and mud-silted ammonite once again swim? 
One by one unspoken, greed’s syllables, grievance’s insult.
One by one unsewn, each insignia’s dividing stitch.
One by one unimagined,
unmanufactured: the bullet, the knife, the colors, the concept. 
Reversal commands: undo this directional grammar of subject and object.
Reversal commands: unlearn the alphabet of bludgeon and blindness.
Reversal commands: revise, rephrase, reconsider. 
And the ink, malleable, obedient, does what is asked.


^^EOP^^




A torchon after Indigo Weller



Some need some Body
or more to ape sweat
on some site. Bloody 
purl or dirty spit
hocked up for to show
who gets eaten. Rig 
Body up. Bough bow
to breeze a lazed jig
and sway to grig’s good 
fiddling. Pine-deep
dusk, a spot where stood
Body. Thus they clap 
— 
when I mount banc’, jig
up the lectern. Bow
to say, “it’s all good,” 
we, gathered, withstood
the bends of dives deep
er, darker. They clap 
as I get down. Sweat
highlights my body,
how meats dyed bloody 
look fresher for show
ing, I got deep, spit
out my mouth, a rig 
— 
id red rind. Bloody
melon. Ha! No sweat!
Joking! Nobody 
knows the trouble. Rig
full o’ Deus. “Sho
gwine fix dis mess.” Spit 
in tragedy’s good
eye! “This one’s called ...” Jig
ger gogglers then bow 
housefully. They clap.
“... be misundeeeerstoooood!”
Hang notes high or deep, 
— 
make my tongue a bow—
what’s the gift?! My good
song vox? The gift?!?! Jig 
gle nickels from deep
down my craw. They clap.
I’se so jolly! Stood 
on that bank. Body
picked over, blood E
rato! Braxton’s sweat  y brow syndrome®, spit
out a sax bell wring
a negrocious show 
— 
of feels. Fa show, sweat
equals work. Bloody
inkpot of Body, 
I stay nib dipped, show
never run dry! Rig
orously, I spit 
out stressed feet. Lines jig!
Ha ha ha ha!!!! Good
one [that/I] is, bow 
deep but not out. Stood,
shining, dim. They clap,
waves slapping hulls. Deep 
— 
don’t mean sunken; good’s
not yummy, right?! Bow,
blanched with foam, jig-jigs. 
“This one’s called ...”—they clap—
“‘_ _ _  _ _ _ _ _ _   _ _ _ _ _barrow.’ So much dep
ends / upon / dead _ _ _ _ _ _ _” Stood, 
I on that bloody
rise of sweet Body;
there you is, too. Sweat 
it, let’s. They clap—“Rig
ht?” some ask, post. Spit
tle-lipped: I said: “Sho.”


^^EOP^^

                    
                    
                    writings on the wall
 
*

I was the one who said
the ditch in the backyard was maybe a river
that had flowed from somewhere else and was flowing to
somewhere else
 
*

I was the one who said where are you now?
 
*

I was the one who told about the one whose photograph in
the book of Eakins’s photographs was of
a guy the perfection of his body was his doom, and
Shakespeare said so too
 
*

Right there before my eyes was the one who said
where are you now? Where
are you Anne? I was the one
 
*

Who saw how Aeneas lay there in the darkness watching the
light, the little motions of light moving around the ceiling
and telling him something
 
*

I was the one whose mother’s voice called out of the urn
beseeching
 
*

I was the one who said how the day light knocks at the lid in
vain
 
*

I said be keep to your self be close be wall all dark
 
*

I said good people are punished, like all the rest
 
*

I said the boats on the river are taking it easy
 
*

I said the brain in your head whispers
 
*

I said death lives in our words
 
*

I said how beautiful is the past, how few the implements,
and how carefully made
 
*

I was the one who said
her body witness is, so also is her voice
 
*

I said better not know too much too soon all about it
 
*

where rhymes with beware, I said
 
*

I said it is the body breathing,
the crib of knowing
 
*

I wish I could recall now the lines written across my dream is what
I said
 
*

I said the horse’s hooves know all about it, the sky’s statement of
oncoming darkness
 
*

The fumes on the roof are visible and drifting away like
martyred souls, I said
 
*

I said the knees of the committee touch each other under the
table, furtive in pleasure
 
*

I said
Eurydice, My Father
 
*

I said we huddle over the ice,
the two of us
 
*

To squeeze from a stone its juice is her art’s happiness is
what I said
 
*

I am the one who said,
I hum to myself myself in a humming dream
 
*

And how we’re caught, I said,
In language: in being, in feeling, in acting. I said, it’s
exacting
 
*

I said the sea upheld us, would not let us go nor drown us,
and we looked down say a million years, and there were the
fish
 
*

See, the dead bloom in the dark, I said
 
*

The nightjar feeds while flying softly, smiling, smiling, I said
 
*

I said revenant whitefaced Death is walking not knowing
whether
 
*

I said the formula on the blackboard said who are you
 
*

I said Utnapishtim said to Gilgamesh blink of an eye
 
*

I said where are you now    Where are you Anne
 
*

Stanza my stone my father poet said
 
*

vwx    stones and sticks
 
*

The day doesn’t know what day it is, I said
 
*

What’s in the way the sun shines down, I said
 
*

I cried in my mute heart,
What is my name and nature
 
                

^^EOP^^

When the next great
                                        dies
will their emails
be packaged
                        and published
revealing
                        their motivation
                                                        for everything
they ever wrote
enlightening researchers
satisfying curious readers? 
There’s more written down
now
        than ever
                        and none of it
is written down.
                             Ten
                                  thousand
elephants
               sway
                            in the breeze.
Blades
            of grass
                               conspire
against
            a dandelion. 
An albatross flies five
hundred miles
                              without flapping
migrates
                  pole to pole.
The price
                      of a one hundred
trillion dollar bill. 
                                Have you ever
sat next to a
                          campfire
                                                until your shoes
began to melt?
                                And what
of the toes
                                in that case?


^^EOP^^

People continue
to predict
                the end
of the world.
                       Are they
upset
       when they’re wrong?
The difference
between being
                ostracized
                                and a view
of you
                from space.
What does your
                      shirt
                                say?
She lost an eye
                     and regrew it
became
                chartreuse.
May the
                overpass
be blessed.
Your bed
                is a hole
the size of
                Jupiter.
Caught on the sticky
side of the tape
                                again.
Cannot
       see
                what does not
exist.
                (paraphrasing)
Who?
I want to start a college
made of anesthesia.


^^EOP^^




Rabbi Nathan ben Abraham I  /Cairo Geniza
(For Harriet Bart)



Who are you? Where are you hiding? 
Were you thrown, 
             tumbling through space, 
             aleatory, 
                          radiant, only 
                                              to land, wrapped in dust, coming 
                                              over and down?  
Or did you cross the black waves in the bottom of a ship,
             and arrive, shivering,
nameless, on the dock,
             then, and always, alone?  
And when you entered the forest, the dark
             series that had no edge,
             did you look to the bark and
             the leaves
             for a name,
                          or did you wait by the path,
             asking passersby,
                                              practicing each syllable
             on your tongue and your teeth,
             memorizing the word until
             it meant something fixed,
                                              something beyond
                          its saying? 
The world is full of strangers.
             You never come into their thoughts
                                       or dreams, yet there they are, 
in yours each night,
             or only once, 
                                       those human faces
                          ephemeral,
                                       stubborn,
                                                    singular ...   
Do they join the fawn and does
             there in the mist
at dawn, wandering
             through the ghostly tendrils
             of bindweed,
                          the carpets of wild lupine?   
The root is the measure of the canopy.
Wool fills the weak heart of the willow.
Was the rabbi, then, the root or the canopy?   
Catalog margins, and incompletes,
             jewelweed bursting in the sore eye’s
sightline,
             marjoram, sage,  
sweet pine,
             mint, leafhopper,
                          mint again, and mint
             again, perennial surprise.  
The rabbi made a list:
             chickpeas,
             saltwort, and
             slowest boxwood— 
(these are, each one,
alkali, and ash)
             purslane, basil,
             vetch, and
             pigweed.  
Medicinal: a linen square
held against the thigh.  
Sweet basil, cinnamon, ginger,
             clove—and henna,
             and poppy seeds. 
What you bring inside, you bring inside.   
Where are you? What are you hiding?
             Your right hand extended to the west,
                          your left to the east,
             though you turn and
                          turn in your bed.  
Do you know the perils—the sycamore’s map,
             the gall on
the grapevine, the
             moth in the kale?    Aleph, pe, and resh,
             the silver yad tracing down the column
             when the column’s no longer there.  
Tattered weeds, seed packets, rags. 
What magic hovered nearby to shield you?  Never touch the book with your hand.   
Slow-motion walk before a moving car,
             fallen from the hayloft,
                          fallen on the marl, the fatal
                          final ticket of admission— 
             who remembers
                                       to study the family tree?   
All my notes thrown
             in the trash—the means
to save them,
             at last.   
The single word changes, infinitely changing,  ruach, 
within the wind                          a breath 
             within the breath 
             infinite                          wind   
Difficult word like a stone on the tongue  
                                                                              The difficult persisting in its means of
                                                                 speech. 
The difficult persisting in its silence 
             and in the dreams of the waiting strangers.


^^EOP^^

They buried their son last winter.
Strange weather for winter—rain, thunder.
They buried him quietly—everybody’s busy.
Who did he fight for? I asked. We don’t know, they say.
He fought for someone, they say, but who—who knows?
Will it change anything, they say, what’s the point now?
I would have asked him myself, but now—there’s no need.
And he wouldn’t reply—he was buried without his head. 
It’s the third year of war; they’re repairing the bridges.
I know so many things about you, but who’d listen?
I know, for example, the song you used to sing.
I know your sister. I always had a thing for her.
I know what you were afraid of, and why, even.
Who you met that winter, what you told him.
The sky gleams, full of ashes, every night now.
You always played for a neighboring school.
But who did you fight for? 
To come here every year, to weed dry grass.
To dig the earth every year—heavy, lifeless.
To see the calm after tragedy every year.
To insist you didn’t shoot at us, at your people.
The birds disappear behind waves of rain.
To ask forgiveness for your sins.
But what do I know about your sins?
To beg the rain to finally stop.
It’s easier for birds, who know nothing of salvation, the soul.
Translated from the Ukrainian


^^EOP^^

how do I show you love when it is not attached to a video of me putting a nail to a balloon on loop? when a heart beats fast this is what I imagine. something too fast to see happen / too loud to forget & from here, the ground, we are beginning to look like lightning or the frameworks of buildings too far away or the line where the lake meets the sky. you are every 1996 space exploration gone right & I am waiting for you to come home with a backpack filled with moon rock & stardust to keep around our apartment. we find small jars to hide behind our pillows & fill every corner with something only we have touched / the rest in our cat’s fur. you remind me of something like a firefly underneath my tongue with so much spark I am finally able to live out my dream of becoming some sort of lighthouse even though sometimes I fall back into a dark galaxy of faults. it isn’t always possible to jam sharp stars into the round holes of us. I want to tell you that SpaceX named a platform for rockets to land on  Just Read the Instructions & another Of Course I Still Love You & wouldn’t it be nice to be still in the water for once



 
                

^^EOP^^

The “wolves in the waves” driving or being driven
inside the rain, which is one sort of day to be alone
in, then again the beach mile either way disappearing
into the thinness of the air, dead detail of the gone world
from the night before—probably an eaten-out barrel
or two, traps and lines of netting, lumber and almost
carcasses and scored horseshoe shells—brought home
from who knows where, then someone with a dog
making a single shadow out of an idea of sun: each
day rising and thinking I died for some kind of beauty,
standing in the morning on the height of my deck,
trying to wake up, nothing but my eyes to go by—
how dark down does the water go before the tide—
I the god of starfish fallen, the flounder’s whiter bones.


^^EOP^^

Neighbor, your mower
cast dust over the edge
where the field meets
the field, toy-sized ring-
necked snakes halved
and flattened by blades
among blades, and now
our things are mingled.
What do you covet
that is mine? Chigger-
riddled passion
blooms, a glint
of beetles loitering
under their anther eaves,
a car idling in a sealed
garage, arranging
the inevitable fog
into a fog that will arrive
without pain? Neighbor,
if your wishes require
me to act, I will act
according to your wishes.
I am ready, every day
as I pass, to cast over
a glance and make sure
all is still still, to drag you
out—or leave you there—
in your designated air.


^^EOP^^

                                                       I.
                                                Revelation
  We tell in strength. “The telling,” when to tell, leads to a discovery between the teller and the listener. Acquiring knowledge; the teller  holds his/her information as a tool for health, movement towards truth. 
 
                                                       II.
                                                 Salvation
  To converse as an attempt to recuperate, a holding on not to die. 
 
                                                       III.
                                                   Speech
  To acquire “language” for talking about a plague in the self. 
 
                                                       IV.
                                           Sharing Secrets Who to tell? Is there someone? The search for what to tell. 
 
                                                       V.
                                        Mature Masculinity Welcome the responsibility to do the work of building verbs, adjectives and nouns for mortality and its subsequent eternal breaking of concrete.  
                I.      Revelation                                         Revel at ion,                     rebel at I one a course                     to regret erections,                     to whip the cream in my scrotum                     till it hardens into unsweetened,                     unsafe revved elations                     of milk turned sour                     by the human body,                     of propagation of destruction.                     The epiphany: I am unsafe,                     you who want me                     know that I who want you,                     harbor the bitter balm of defeat.
                      II.    Salvation                     If I were to show you                     how to continue holding on,                     I would not kiss you,                     I would not mix my fluids with yours,                     for your salvation                     cannot bear the live weight                     of your sharing liquids with me.
                      III.   Language                     To tell,                     to talk,                     to tongue into sounds                     how I would cleanse you with urine,                     how my tasting tongue would wash your body,                     how my saliva and sperm would bloat you,                     to touch you in our lovemaking                     and not tell you                     would amount to murder,                     to talk about how to language this                     so that you would still languish                     in my unsafe arms and die,                     seems beyond me,                     I would almost rather lie                     but my tongue muscle moves involuntarily                     to tell of the danger in me.
                      IV.    Of Health                     To use my full and willing                     body to reveal and speak                     the strength that I impart                     without fear,                     without killing,                     without taking away what I would give,                     to use my man's tongue                     to share,                     to give,                     to lend,                     to exact nothing,                     to receive all things,                     to expand my macho                     and let the whole world                     into the safety of my mature masculinity.
                      V.    Quarantine                     Sometimes I fear touching your plump ear lobes:                     I might contaminate you.                     Sometimes I refuse odors that would                     drive my hands to open your thick thighs.                     Sometimes closing my ears to your voice                     wrenches my stomach and I vomit to calm wanting.                     Can it be that I am the bearer of plagues?                     Am I poison to desire?                     Do I have to deny yearning for firm full flesh                     so that I’ll not kill what I love?                     No juices can flow 'tween you and me.                     Quicksand will suck me in.
 
 
 


^^EOP^^

Stress is very important to me. 
With stress, I do the best possible job. 
From a personal perspective, I manage stress 
by visiting the gym every evening. 
It’s a great stress reducer. 
I find that when I’m under the pressure 
of a deadline, I can do some of my most 
creative work. I’m not a person 
who has a difficult time with stress. 
When I’m under pressure, I focus, 
and get the job done. I find it exhilarating 
to be in a dynamic environment 
where the pressure is on. 
I find a fast pace to be invigorating, 
and thrive when the pressure is on. 
I am an excellent employee 
and I didn’t want my unhappiness 
to have any impact on the job 
I was doing for my employer. 
I’m looking for a bigger challenge 
and to grow my career 
and I couldn’t job hunt part time 
while working. It didn’t seem ethical 
to use my former employer’s time. 
I’m looking for a company where I can grow 
in a team-oriented environment. 
One of my greatest passions 
is helping others. When I was younger, 
I’ve enjoyed helping mom 
with household repairs. As I grew older, 
that habit grew and I desired 
to help others as well. 
I’m passionate about painting. 
I take an evening art class 
once a week and try to find time 
each weekend to paint. Painting 
is a good way for me to relax 
and even though I don’t have much talent, 
I do enjoy it. When I’m involved with a project 
at work I want to do my best to achieve success. 
I feel the same way about what I do 
in my personal life. I’m an avid skier 
and I like to spend weekends 
and vacations on the ski slopes.


^^EOP^^

I can see you through the bonfire, with us.
A fifth of Old Crow circling the dark.
 
Where did that whole life go? In Texas
the chemo inches toward your heart,
 
things always dwindling to just the two of us,
a crumpled cigarette, a distant car:
 
our voices, at dawn, so clearly posthumous.
Woodsmoke rising to the ashy stars.


^^EOP^^

I had driven into one side of a city,
and through it, and was on the way out
on a four-lane, caught up in the traffic,
when I happened to glance to my right
where a man stood alone smoking,
fixed in the shade of a windowless
warehouse, leaning back into a wall
with one shoe cocked against it,
the other one flat on the pavement.
He was beside me for only an instant,
wearing a short-sleeved yellow shirt
and gray work pants, as the hand
that held the cigarette swept out
and away, and he turned to watch it
as with the tip of a finger he tapped
once at the ash, which began to drift
into that moment already behind us,
as I, with the others, sped on.


^^EOP^^

  What I remember is the ebb and flow of sound
That summer morning as the mower came and went
And came again, crescendo and diminuendo,
And always when the sound was loudest how it ceased
A moment while he backed the horses for the turn,
The rapid clatter giving place to the slow click
And the mower's voice. That was the sound I listened for,
The voice did what the horses did. It shared the action
As sympathetic magic does or incantation.
The voice hauled and the horses hauled. The strength of one
Was in the other and in the strength was impatience.
Over and over as the mower made his rounds
I heard his voice and only once or twice he backed
And turned and went ahead and spoke no word at all.  


^^EOP^^




a Markov Sonnet



The waraq, empty of chlorophyll, hung chewed & dangling
Because there was no witness amidst the yellowing foliage.
The toothing beast’s rapture, heavy in the air like a song.
 
                                    ***
 
Because there was no witness amidst the yellowing foliage,
The toothing beast’s rapture, heavy in the air like a song
Unfamiliar to soil-worn hands, harvesting small implosions.
 
                                    ***
 
The toothing beast’s rapture, heavy in the air like a song
Unfamiliar to soil-worn hands. Harvesting small implosions,
A marble heaven built over hill & tomb, reaches everywhere.
 
                                    ***
 
Unfamiliar to soil-worn hands harvesting small implosions,
A marble heaven built over hill & tomb reaches everywhere
The unyellowed, muting wind can neither stain nor uproot.
 
                                    ***
 
A marble heaven built over hill & tomb reaches everywhere.
The unyellowed, muting wind can neither stain nor uproot
A land ungodded – the dead’s hollow, hallowed roaring.
 
                                    ***
 
The unyellowed, muting wind can neither stain nor uproot
A land ungodded. The dead’s hollow, hallowed roaring
Silence, interrupted by riot of metal teeth & ricochet
 
                                    *** 
A land ungodded the dead’s hollow, hallowed roaring
Silence. Interrupted by riot of metal teeth & ricochet,
A country can only be accountable for the screams.
 
                                    *** 
Silence interrupted by riot of metal teeth & ricochet.
A country can only be accountable for the screams
We cannot unhear or unwrite from our memory.
 
                                    *** 
A country can only be accountable for the screams
We cannot unhear or unwrite. From our memory,
A history unfragmented, free of limbs disfigured.
 
                                    *** 
We cannot unhear or unwrite, from our memory,
A history unfragmented. Free of limbs disfigured,
Would you believe me if I said I bled for this?
 
                                    *** 
A history unfragmented free of limbs disfigured.
Would you believe me if I said I bled for this?
Leaves caught in my throat like a contradiction
 
                                   *** 
Would you believe me if I said I bled for this –
Leaves caught in my throat like a contradiction: Name name name unname name –                                                          name name name unname name –
 
 


^^EOP^^

  
 


^^EOP^^

in theory, she big bang.
her brown round lump of a body
stardusting half dozen babies into being
and giving God all the glory. 
first Junior, who sprang to 6’4” like his daddy
ate up everything including the cardboard
pickled his tongue in sips of thunderbird
till shriveled liver polka-dotted his hands and lips pink. 
Sista came next, wearing Ethel like storm cloud
and hex, shamed her into Angelina, meaning:
messenger of God but she big
and unpretty as a heathen. 
Doris Yvonne got all the pretty and the skinny
and the crazy, so folks couldn’t covet.
at 6, she saw colors fuzzed round people
thought everybody had this rainbow vision. 
then in 1952, my mama brown-nosed herself
here. granny named her Amber, a quiet, too-dark
punk of a girl, ass-whippings all the way home
from school. married her fool-self off at 14. 
Wayne came out in handcuffs. did not
pass go. went straight to jail. met
Muhammad and became Ramel
became crackhead became ghost. 
Pamela named me. cute as she wanna be
spoiled with religion, granny’s baby
spent half her life in the church testifying
to chicken wings, getting her holyghost on. 
granny big bang. sequined hat
gangster. kicked Otis senior out
for mucking up her doilies with
engine grease. grandbabies everywhere. 
fat as pork rinds and hungry as slaves.
she banged pots til they bled gravy,
banged her big body to the floor
in stroke. invented: serious as a heart attack. 
she buried all the men with Jesus
on her breath. and when her big-boned
self big-banged to dust, we didn’t call
it death. we called it magic.


^^EOP^^

    i’ve left Earth in search of darker planets, a solar system revolving too near a black hole. i’ve left in search of a new God. i do not trust the God you have given us. my grandmother’s hallelujah is only outdone by the fear she nurses every time the blood-fat summer swallows another child who used to sing in the choir. take your God back. though his songs are beautiful, his miracles are inconsistent. i want the fate of Lazarus for Renisha, want Chucky, Bo, Meech, Trayvon, Sean & Jonylah risen three days after their entombing, their ghost re-gifted flesh & blood, their flesh & blood re-gifted their children. i’ve left Earth, i am equal parts sick of your go back to Africa & i just don’t see race. neither did the poplar tree. we did not build your boats (though we did leave a trail of kin to guide us home). we did not build your prisons (though we did & we fill them too). we did not ask to be part of your America (though are we not America? her joints brittle & dragging a ripped gown through Oakland?). i can’t stand your ground. i’m sick of calling your recklessness the law. each night, i count my brothers. & in the morning, when some do not survive to be counted, i count the holes they leave. i reach for black folks & touch only air. your master magic trick, America. now he’s breathing, now he don’t. abra-cadaver. white bread voodoo. sorcery you claim not to practice, hand my cousin a pistol to do your work. i tried, white people. i tried to love you, but you spent my brother’s funeral making plans for brunch, talking too loud next to his bones. you took one look at the river, plump with the body of boy after girl after sweet boi & ask why does it always have to be about race? because you made it that way! because you put an asterisk on my sister’s gorgeous face! call her pretty (for a black girl)! because black girls go missing without so much as a whisper of where?! because there are no amber alerts for amber-skinned girls! because Jordan boomed. because Emmett whistled. because Huey P. spoke. because Martin preached. because black boys can always be too loud to live. because it’s taken my papa’s & my grandma’s time, my father’s time, my mother’s time, my aunt’s time, my uncle’s time, my brother’s & my sister’s time . . . how much time do you want for your progress? i’ve left Earth to find a place where my kin can be safe, where black people ain’t but people the same color as the good, wet earth, until that means something, until then i bid you well, i bid you war, i bid you our lives to gamble with no more. i’ve left Earth & i am touching everything you beg your telescopes to show you. i’m giving the stars their right names. & this life, this new story & history you cannot steal or sell or cast overboard or hang or beat or drown or own or redline or shackle or silence or cheat or choke or cover up or jail or shoot or jail or shoot or jail or shoot or ruin 
                                                                                                   this, if only this one, is ours.
 


^^EOP^^

I am tired of work; I am tired of building up somebody else’s civilization. 
Let us take a rest, M’Lissy Jane. 
I will go down to the Last Chance Saloon, drink a gallon or two of gin, shoot a game or two of dice and sleep the rest of the night on one of Mike’s barrels. 
You will let the old shanty go to rot, the white people’s clothes turn to dust, and the Calvary Baptist Church sink to the bottomless pit. 
You will spend your days forgetting you married me and your nights hunting the warm gin Mike serves the ladies in the rear of the Last Chance Saloon. 
Throw the children into the river; civilization has given us too many. It is better to die than it is to grow up and find out that you are colored. 
Pluck the stars out of the heavens. The stars mark our destiny. The stars marked my destiny. 
I am tired of civilization.
 


^^EOP^^

in it we clip it comics
                                   
                                    Appa, our sheets are sails                when those people came
                                    they trapped the wind that leaves your body behind
so we find a piece of it land                         
in it we clip it the postage stamps
                                   
                                    Papa, our letters are shirts              when those people came
                                    they stripped the night that leaves your body behind
so we loosen the it soil
in it we clip it the obituaries
                                   
                                    Bapa, our names are masks             when those people came
                                    they carve out the eyes that leave your body behind
so we dig the it damp
in it we clip it the headlines
                                   
                                    Naana, our rice is sand                     when those people came
                                    they filled the bowls that leave your body behind
so we peel back the it sod
in it we clip it the coupons
                                   
                                    Baba, our blood is water                   when those people came
                                    they drained the well that leaves your body behind
so we fill it with it sky
in it we clip it the tongue
                                   
                                    Abbaa, our cries are coups               when those people come
                                    they will steal the sons who leave your body behind        
 


^^EOP^^

We are on our knees. We are saying that the tulips have had it hard this week. We are saying something about the brightness & the dryness & we are saying we hope it will change. I press a finger into the loam, flick the dust on my jeans. We are listening to the snip of shears. I pick up a smooth, small disc of pink Sioux quartz, hold it like an avian heart in the palm. A disc slipped & beating from a time when all of North America was under sea. My finger walks the buttery vein that parses the stone in two & then in four. Its edges are under siege; its end at the foot of suburban perennials. Do you have stones, someone is asking me. Where you are from, do you have stones, like these. We have purple sunbirds, I am saying, & their hearts have four rooms, one for every answer to questions like these.


^^EOP^^

I can imagine someone who found
these fields unbearable, who climbed
the hillside in the heat, cursing the dust,
cracking the brittle weeds underfoot,
wishing a few more trees for shade.
 
An Easterner especially, who would scorn
the meagerness of summer, the dry
twisted shapes of black elm,
scrub oak, and chaparral, a landscape
August has already drained of green.
 
One who would hurry over the clinging
thistle, foxtail, golden poppy,
knowing everything was just a weed,
unable to conceive that these trees
and sparse brown bushes were alive.
 
And hate the bright stillness of the noon
without wind, without motion,
the only other living thing
a hawk, hungry for prey, suspended
in the blinding, sunlit blue.
 
And yet how gentle it seems to someone
raised in a landscape short of rain—
the skyline of a hill broken by no more
trees than one can count, the grass,
the empty sky, the wish for water.


^^EOP^^

The road wasn't a proper road; it was
two ruts across a pasture and down
into a dry creek bed and up
 
the other side, a cow path really,
soft sand up to the hub caps. You didn't gun it at the right time,
 
he said. I knew that before he
said it, but I didn't know how to get
the old Chevrolet out of the crevice
 
I had wedged it into. You'll figure it out,
he said, and then he took a walk,
left me to my own devices, which until
 
that moment had included tears.
My face remained nearly dry,
as was the gas tank when he finally
 
returned, took a shovel out of the trunk,
and moved enough sand from around
the rear tires so he could rock
 
back and forth and get a little traction.
That country had very little traction;
it had mourning doves, which lay their eggs
 
on the ground, a few twigs for a nest,
no fluff. Mourning dove. Even the name
sounds soft. Even the notes they coo,
 
perched on a fence wire. But they are
hatched on the dirt. When they leave the shell,
the wind is already blowing their feathers dry.


^^EOP^^

no more dandruff
on his blue suit
open casket


^^EOP^^

That silence again
             a wall
of feathers, and near
 
enough
            to block the
circuit of our time—
 
Adobe wall,
           roads of dust—
thirty two years
 
until the bones
            discoursed—
That's how long
 
I've dug into
            myself—
And the baby?
 
She is a promise—
            ungraspable,
mist—
 
Fuss or no fuss,
           yearn, yearn,
yearn. Heart
 
pounds, ears
            throb—
Will it ask
 
the question
            tattooed
on our skin?
 
Until dirt
            fills
my grave, you say.
 
Call it wait
            or rest—the stare,
the lunge back
 
into what we can’t
            swim—
Another shore now—
 
how our arms flail
            the joints’
acidic burn—
 
A hunger     
            unbeknownst
to us, a flame cupped
 
in skin—earth
           turning us
toward a thin stream
 
of self—Oh anticipant,
            Oh dear
loving Lord—to hold
 
a burden like a need
            and let
a new life begin.
 


^^EOP^^

In the bedroom,
I notice you’ve stacked
my things into piles,
clusters of everyday items:
 
my grandmother’s costume beads,
spare reading glasses,
prescription bottles
 
that have long expired.
 
It is getting dark.
Through the window,
the moon shades in its marble.
 
And another woman
appears in my mirror,
this one too heavy,
the other, too old, to be me.
 
Now, I run my fingers
over a layer of dust on the tabletop
where, in my absence,
 
you’ve gathered my poems,
early drafts without
beginnings or endings,
 
while in the backyard,
the cherry blossoms bloom,
and black-capped chickadees
sate at the feeder,
 
the garden still waiting
for whatever might come.


^^EOP^^

in the dreary February underbelly
atlantic ocean outside my window
draped in silk pajamas and flaxen
sweater i lied belly-up on my bed
my laptop resting on a pillow
as the angels conducted brain surgery
scraped my head clean while the angelic
frequency healer directed them by name
asked them questions about my internal
weathers the electric zings of my condition
i was told to rest and hydrate as my brain
and body had been through a lot but I had
to go into the snow take my tired vessels
out into the road and accept the clean clear
air of midwinter the aquarian burst of a zodiacal
electrocution
 
they cured my frequency got it aligned
with godliness or the choirs of them
I would hear exactly one year later upon
Vera’s 3am death death of red throbs
and hydration death of electric conditions
and snow death of vessel and midwinter
 
upon waking I skyped with a Los Angeles
healer in a wooden paneled room and asked
why and when asked him to ask the entities
to see what arrival pulsed the now and dreary
underbelly my laptop on my pillow slanted
insidious glare but so silver
 


^^EOP^^

Is it true that Troy lived life without a
written form before the Greeks invaded
with their horse, or did I learn that from a poem?
Either way, is that not how affection
ends, married or devoted to motion?
 
The upper hand forgetting how it felt
to feed the token, the brass first held in
the fingers then dropped into the subway vestibule.
This daily verb and its prescription cost,
on the rise from root to roof, would have you
 
be an estimate of man, could convince
you to never love another or another as he goes.
& if my looks one day be gone, my mood
will excuse my bad behavior. O trophies
of action, between which occasions suffocate,
 
& which boil into vapor, I should have seen X coming.
Not that anything would change the case, or more
Closely approximate the correct answer, but with the lawn
exposed I would not have to wonder when
it is you enter and when it is you leave.
 


^^EOP^^

It was August 1977 when Elvis Presley fell
face down on his Graceland bathroom floor;
by the time paramedics arrived, he was
 
cold and blue. I knew this because I was with
my grandmother, Belle, who called her sister,
Geraldine, who came over at once so we
 
could watch the news. My grandmother knew
Elvis liked peanut butter on white bread
with American cheese, eaten in his jungle room
 
which had Tiki chairs, fur lampshades,
a waterfall. Other neighbors arrived:
women in short skirts, women who
 
brought with them more of the food Elvis
loved: coconut cakes, fried chicken, bacon.
Elvis was dead, and summer had been so
 
hot the things we touched burned our hands:
handles of garden hoses, car doors,
the metal swing set my grandfather
 
built for me on the back lawn. I listened
to the sound of southern women's voices
expressing disbelief; they said I swan
 
and I pictured something rippling
and solitary; they said Well, shut my mouth and
I saw blue Elvis, falling.


^^EOP^^

In a flock on Market,
just below Union Square,
the last to land
and standing a little canted,
it teetered—I want to say now
though it's hardly true—
like Ahab toward the starboard
and regarded me
with blood-red eyes.
We all lose something,
though that day
I hadn't lost a thing.
I saw in that imperfect bird
no antipathy, no envy, no vengeance.
It needed no pity,
but just a crumb,
something to hop toward.


^^EOP^^

At the railway station I ask
if there’s a train to where you are. 
I’m told there is one but it’s left already,
so has tomorrow’s and the day after’s. 
Somewhere in the trees, painted in
degrees of green, the morning 
paint still wet, a magpie robin sets up its
musical kit. You hear it in your garden, 
I in mine. At night, like a colicky child,
our old bones tired, desire keeps us awake. 
Put it to sleep if you can, I’ll do
the same, and for now let’s forget 
the railway station. Parking’s not easy there,
the trains keep to no time.


^^EOP^^




After Kwame Dawes



i 
When the coming of another grave
jabs at me like harvest, stolen. And the flame
inside consumes. The uneasy hand of the sun
approaching. What was, given back by night.
When a body ascends away from reason,
a name is a form of oblation. Like ash, like loss
to the goddess of lost things, I fear
the belonging that ranks. I’m sorry,
I have held the few smooth lines I come from
in the way of a rooster, talon tied to blade. 
Yes, belonging is a lie I tell
like any official crowd, something to hem
restlessness. A sock’s taut elastic waiting
for the day it goes to sag: trouble
in my own bones for a short flat time.
The digging I need in storm. This glory of tears,
I bind my pain, my labor to something else.  ii 
For those days you pocket-dial your cousin,
kapwatid long since drowned. For those moments
when feathers of your hope
are a bother stuck at lips. For those
whose desolation has the texture of silt, of velour
against the nerves. For days you cannot thank
your sweat: down to a toenail,
your presence is worth the awe I reserve
for newfound constellations, opening
the narrow sky above a single wall. 
Coffee, toothbite, styrofoam. Styrofoam and cargo.
Outside the train stop, a hawk: how it glances upside
then side to side between each pulling
redsplash bite of fallen pigeon. Do you also stare
into the crankled dark absorbed by windows—
praying a deity of lost things might visit—
bloom your fingers at their ghosts? 
Then you might feel dizzy. Here, a spell:
whether giant lavender or dwarf wisteria,
whether cedar or banyan tree, fruit-
bearing or root, concrete, quarried rock,
or arkipelago, say body, say love. May you feel easy
in your skin. May the language of ancestors
tattoo the ground you walk on,
back from all the places where their failings
gather as a congregation of mercies.  iii 
I, too, have been losing my gentleness
since the first young wound. What is thick:
the cold, the doses of exclusion, the generous
human contribution to earthly hurt, the song
that pulls me from the knot of my mouth
back toward searching the low round hills
in my only soul. My monster is a bargain,
despair dropped easy like antelope meat
into the boiling pot. It simmers
like migration, multiplies
my shadows. Reduce me to desire
in my brown-boy sidewalk stance,
down from contempt in an idling car
my tightening body remembers best. 
The beat was four-four time enough
to nod at first, dipped how dreams dip
into the earth. Counting the insults
alive in your ear, the collapses,
the collapses, counting them now
grow small. Enough to hear
your body—into the groove—
expand. The stars, the city lights
who swallow them: they do not leave you,
but gleam. Like oil spill and candle
glut—like a forest burning. 
I am desperate for a language to hold me
as does a water crossroads: between gravel
shimmering in the transparent above the gravel.
What is sharp and thin in me, I carry.
Like you carry: the strength
you save: the mischief you will wear again
when you return: to this place
where all that has seen famine
returns. If each day is orphan
and river to a goddess of  lost things,
as my lament also dies down to whisper
curved, horned like a dawn that knows
death, light flow into the ladle you offer—
as a seed’s journey to harvest, reaching—I drink.


^^EOP^^

Dear mother and father and old and young people of my home. Dear pets and weeds and flowers and footfalls. I write to you in a script speckled with time. I write to the language of a poet and many who chanted after her. I quote those verses which are laments, songs, praises, and warnings. The laments are about not being of your skin, your tongue, your high heaven. The songs are about television screens, newsprint din, and the men with the megaphone going around shutting people’s windows down. The praises are to those that wear spotless clothes, hidden weapons, buck-skin shoes, and plastic faces. The warnings are about daring to speak, daring to say I’m two languages not one, I’m three faces not one, and I’m a quarter bile not full. Dear people of my city, town, lane, and invisible spaces, tell me, how do I return to you? It is the night of the patient moon. But the doorkeepers are asking for proof that I lived here, the watchful voices are mocking my  wandering toes, and the vigilantes are simply admiring their righteous claws.
 
I, Anima, stand bewildered in the midst of midnight’s jowl. What is it, why is it that for many there’s no home? Although it is chaand raat, the night of the moon? And a child’s tearful whisper: Take me to Eid tomorrow, Ma, take me to Eid. I, Anima, ask you to wait for me to find out the answer when I carry the grasshopper home.



 
                

^^EOP^^

If you want definitions, here is one: a lover is one who waits.

The next part, the part where definitions are unwoven and the threads laid bare, can be left to Barthes, Roland, who said everything about it that needs to be said. And for what cannot be (and there are still some of those things) there are films, which—no matter what the structuralists say—are not to be read.

There was a girl who sat every evening at a particular table, hoping it was close enough to where the boys sat to make it appear a natural veering off when (if) he came to sit at it, opposite her; but not close enough to make her seem desperate.

Not always was her waiting played out as gestures of solitude. Other people gave her company. There was nothing in her face that could be read as signs of biding. This did not mean that she knew her time was up. This did not mean that she ceased to wonder and hope and despair and curse.

This is where Barthes got the story of the mandarin wrong, the one who pined for the courtesan who had said that after the 100th night of waiting, she would be his. What Barthes did was to report the mandarin’s departure on the penultimate night. He didn’t say how, on the night the mandarin left, the courtesan had made up her mind to tell him he’d waited enough, he could come in and

instead

she waited.








 
rb: A Lover’s Discourse





barthes
 


^^EOP^^

Beauty is brief and violent
like the white thunderbolt
of Nilgiri slow and sudden
braided like her hair
one morning was a cluster
of grapes hung beside each
ear maybe it comes from where
hunger the voices of children
come breaking their way
to my heart the stones
my feet which are light
and heavy from walking
that path full and swift
the river flows eroding
the banks with its sinuous
desire gentle and unkind
the days the years boulders
tossed by a giant down the hill
we must climb to the sudden
sinuous blue


^^EOP^^

i poetry 
Pull down the crows from the sky Piya, summer’s blood is barely dry
What is a poem if it cannot try
To call you a ****ing ***** or die
Whispering in your arms, this lie
When Kabira met Keats, he said:
Our poems make canopies overhead  Always 
Or, beloved, if I told you
We are words
And the spaces between us
Make poetry
Would you not say Piya, why the fuss?
We knew it was thus  Always  sun’s amber squirt or piss’s intricate stains on indian walls voice’s uncertain trickle down page’s length small syllables entombed in marble vastness kisses kismet some call this poetry 
Others declare it’s a fact! Check it out on Google or Wiki or just about anywhere.
India is the only country in the whole wide world with an ocean named after it
Where cunning gods tricked flatfoot demons into parting with sublunary nectar
Placed in mythic textual jars no human hands could ever touch and lightning
Struck dead in the water lovelorn whales keening in decibels no biped ear might
Fathom and red coral crumbled to depths in which no ship anchored and grainy
Infinities of sand queried: what’s any poem but this endless curving water body?  Always 
Okay, all right, I think I get it
But, Piya, this universal shit Kaavya, dhvani, and infinite woe
This my clownish, doggerel show
It is not poetry, nor Indian
And I cannot call it English
Except the crows insist it is, it is  Always, the cawing 
Poetry does not sell!
Which may be just as well
No bourgeois form, this
Shaped like a kiss
At the world’s dawn
Was a tulip poem born
Maybe it was the dawn  Always 
When that first turtle
Space-time loaded
On its crenellated back
Limped gamely ashore
A love poem took shape
Out of thin air and lack
And that, Piya, was that  Always  ii prose 
Pull down the crows from the sky, Piya! 
Long before those roads diverged
They cawed above the yellow woods:
Syntax is wing and body! Surge
Of air pushing a weight of words
Had we no prose, Piya, we could not ask why!  Why, Piya, why?  iii epic 
Of the epic, we demand feats great gods
Cannot perform but men easily accomplish.
When the Ramayana went to Bali, the gods
Mounted stilts, casting huge shadows on dim
Walls, and the crows crashed from the sky  That was history, Piya  iv tragedy 
Everything happens offstage
Clytemnestra’s scream, Draupadi’s rage
Catharsis rehearsing softly in the wings
Then the crow-garbed chorus troops in and sings  Fate, Piya, is a funny thing  v comedy 
Beloved, if I told you how the rangeela women
Of  Barsana curse and beat their cowering men
At Lathmar Holi, would you ever stop laughing then?  Even the crows, Piya, cheer!  vi novel 
1864: the first Indian novel in English, Rajmohan’s Wife
Black and white make gray: the long, postcolonial twilight  Crows are early birds, Piya  vii tweet
 
Twitter 2006: in this electrifying handholding, our new, pterodactyl longings  & language in its 6-inch grave unmaking president & slave  Characters reveal character, my sweet


^^EOP^^

Aji held onto the brown and black
patched calf’s tail
A pundit sang her mantra for
43 minutes
Years
Aji understood the calf would
lead her through oceans
into her next journey
My Aji and I
are alike
We have silver hairs
I am holding on to a dream tail
hoping it will carry me
through oceans
into my next journey


^^EOP^^

Can you let go the concern
for how it began      what happened 
Here the word house remains
A reddening (      ) near house 
To describe the sounds
coming in      A human voice
barks through the window 
the same voice      like horsehair
stretched along the bow drawn
across the strings 
Where the action is missing
we place (      ) A girl pours out 
water from a pail flung up
so that the water      arches
into a sickle in an instant
of daylight 
The word swallows      as a complaint
of swallows raiding the air
suddenly thick with gnats 
When you notice the ash
you will mutter ash
& it will appear again: ash
on everything, behind the ears ash 
Maybe this shadow belongs
to the house at 4:30
Shadow is a length of gauze
loosened over the garden 
It began with blizzards
for nine hours 
A cleft on the ceiling
or a cleft in the chest
No matter, a cleft let
the weather in 
Here is a description
of a face in anger
a weather of arrows  
Instead of counting sheep
the injured man folds clothes
in his head into heaps 
Separate what is missing
from what’s disappeared 
(here has been eaten by silverfish)
We are left to think of (      ) 
as the space between falling
asleep & waking up Swallow can be a passage 
the gullet, throat,
a grave in the ground
We’re surrounded by swallows 
that open (      ) so fluent with bodies
nobodies 
Here there was a story
& we were part of the after-
waves in a disaster 
braiding wreaths of roadside flowers 
The violet ones we’ll call purple daughters
The white ones: asylum lights


^^EOP^^

A people’s first language is the motion of their basketweave.  Yes, death, our motion: yours. But, for making me forget  where around my husband’s bend a cobra lurked,  your repentance: not enough.  
He and I we remain close as severed roots of banyan tree.  Yes, your melody taught me to lace  the rhythm of my work, a melody that fits through a basket’s  thousand eyes—a rattle without a chant  
until I heard my husband’s  killing song. I was a child no one believed, beaten  as an aging weaver’s hand. Vision, too, is never enough  like baskets never empty: my son will live  
inside the pause between two whispers. He will embrace that pause like a man  fucking, pull himself from it just as quick. I draw him away from your path  by my own strand inside the bark. I am no longer the child  you taught, nameless  
inside the junctions, bound to the weaving.


^^EOP^^

Leaning out over
a lantana bush
abloom with polybags,
yellow and pink,
and a woman
gathering firewood
beside a sluggish gutter
while her twitchy goats
go looking for
a patch to graze on,
is the big cluster fig,
its giant’s foot, its
buttress roots, caught
in the rusted door
of the garden shed.
How it came to be there
no one knows.
Growing faster
than a beanstalk,
it’s become a high-rise
for birds. Pariah kites
and crows are heard
in its windows,
singing, screeching,
cawing, as if newly
in love, survivors of
the human disaster.


^^EOP^^

As a rule, we are only because men have looked down upon us with such kindness straight into our eyes.
Warriors stare each other down. 
Reach its climax at the Shikhara, or the Vortex
is the subject of the verse. Has been, since way before
Pound’s age, peaks like the city all over a pleasure
we are not given credit for. Like how to make time
move by not moving. How to make a new time
in the palm of your hand, a son made of dirt
is our most popular deity, with an elephant’s
borrowed tusk and a half
the trunk, which leads to good luck
depending on what side it points to
sitting idle an idol at your desk.

^^EOP^^

He stood at the back of  his old Church, wanting to join in with the congregation.
Everyone followed the priest,
I confess to almighty God, and to you my brothers and sisters, that
I have sinned through my own fault in my thoughts and in my words ...
He looked for her. The back of many black-haired heads made
his stomach upset. Heads all bent.

He glimpsed her thick plait curled on her shoulder by
the end of the Penitential Act. Moving, he saw her.
Always in a sari. Always with her mother.

Their son sat up on the altar, his shoes shinier
than all the other boys. His mother would have shone
them with Kiwi shoe polish and an old brush. The sound
would wake him. She must be watching him to keep
his face still. Her son on the altar at Morning Mass.

Their daughter was hand-in-hand with mother and
grandmother. Her two plaits shone with oil. After
the shoes, her mother would have woken and washed
her for Mass. She would tell the small girl Stop crying!
while tightly plaiting her thick-oiled hair.

He left before Communion started, walking down the road to the bus stop.


^^EOP^^




After A.A. (1967–2015)



It’s 2005
and we are almost glamorous,
the five of us— 
the chairs are cane,
my shirt batik,
the sunshine Goa and Heineken. 
We’re past the clumsy brutality
of eighteen— 
we’ve deleted
makeshift faces,
borrowed persuasions,
stances without journeys. 
We’ve forgiven the treacheries
of student seminars,
wrong addresses
at different ends of the city,
digressions of faith. 
No edge
to our voices anymore
when we say Zen or Gramsci. 
We’re wearing
the dumb happy
of holiday
and wearing it well—  and there’s always so much sun. 
Against limewashed churches
and cashew plantations of melted green
we’re laughing hard,
beer-glazed, sand-drizzled, stoned
on Sgt. Pepper and Kishore Kumar. 
And there’s the other picture, look,
where arms entwined,
we are bathed in fierce siesta light
and seem to know this moment is teetering
on the verge
of never again. 
It isn’t difficult, of course,
to skip the nostalgia, 
to fast-forward
the embarrassment
of memory, 
to speak,
as others do,
of calcium
rather than satori. 
So, the morning I heard
it wasn’t difficult to turn efficient, 
to delete
pictures of hummingbirds
and cardamom tea 
and the air ticket you emailed me
never knowing it would be
the one to your funeral. 
It gets easier, friend,
with age,
to delete, plan breakfast,
turn the page. 
It would have been easier still
if you hadn’t deleted the sun.


^^EOP^^

Up and down the campus he goes, chatting
With clouds and trees or a bee worrying
The hive of his beard. His brow has billows
For he thinks like the sea. He has his lows,
Yet knows there always is another high,
And just in time the sea comes rolling by
To prove him right. He has rid himself of
All hubris and gabs in the tongue of love
Which is the tongue of rain on stone, of stone
On leaf, of leaf on wind, of wind on bone.
He has given up on our wants and wars,
And passes cleanly through a virtual port,
Yet the ocean rouses him when it roars
And settles him roaring back into thought.


^^EOP^^

the sleep that restores
weakens to strengthen
to rattle first
cocos nucifera ...  yes, cocos nucifera, consort of a lesser wind cocos nucifera’s trunk bends and sings coquettish, it curtsies and flirts 
... yet in a cat 5 assault
its branches are ripped out like feathers ...
one by one, half the treetop
decapitated, gone  (the tree rat lives in the coconut tree at night it scurries inside thuds upon the kitchen counter and awakens you  in a hurricane it is but a downy feather before an electric fan on a hot and humid afternoon)


^^EOP^^

As if what I wanted to say most
would be lost in the saying
all the lines running slightly aslant
clouds and white horses grazing
wherever you look the gaze lifted
by the wind a rippling in the barley
and in the hot curtain of the atmosphere
the last hunger before it settles
on two sparrows on an earthen pot
or pine cones on a bed of pine needles
fallen as if someone had put them there
for your viewing but that is just how
pine cones fall I want to write but
the school is inside a thick fog
and the children must shout across the valley
that may have grown between them
and it is hard to read because already
the title of the grade 5 English textbook
is burning in a sooty fire lit
in the offset printing and I don’t
have a pencil and I don’t know
the spelling so I go on erasing until
the page begins to tear like a cloud
through pale pastel blue sky and the fog
inside the classroom keeps growing
and a child speaks the alphabet through tears


^^EOP^^

It would try to lisp a dumbness sometimes—
the language of welts rising slowly on the panes,
a cracked blur of riot-torn air,
confused which year it was. 
The last time it made a sound was when
it crinkled on its way into a bin,
a great plot of justice. I wasn’t born, then;
my father was. 
It must have been whole once,
for you could still conceive it like a dream,
a gloriously illegitimate thing, though;
until a country was torn out of its heart one day
and you saw its impaled ghost in the moon. 
My grandfather told me we had slept so long
with a flag over us, we couldn’t run when
machetes poked us awake amidst still-dreaming heads
rolling in the streets like marbles struck in game. 
There was nowhere to go and we went nowhere,
with its face slumped on our backs
and history books that said what had happened is the past, 
until sixty years later, a community’s threats betraying
her voice, a poor nun requested me
to leave my month-old job in a convent
where I’d studied since childhood. 
I keep trying to find its shape in photographs, old letters,
the wind of stories trapped in some cancerous throat, dying ... 
a tattered roof in the stars, a tent flying off
with meanings barely gathered into a heap.


^^EOP^^




Whatever its causes, however much we speculate about its connections with other psychological issues, crossdreaming in itself  is a form of sexual stimulation.
—anonymous web user



v. praxis 
you do not know me if you graze
my saber & my light
but not the wound I guard.        1 accuses another
of everything but love.        1 demands 
cameras, safety whistles, glue
to hold herself together
against the brutal gaze.      we only need
these awkward straps, heat-slick dildos, 
Kutchi mirrors, concentric abstract
aurae of this crescent moon
sweeping our bodies w/ cool white
reflected & deflected light 
because of what we’ve lost or left
because the language is disaster
because our species has forgotten
acute angles, 
triple dream projected
—inner, outer, secret—
on empty, aching
temple walls.        afterward 
the residue.      what isn’t conscious
throngs toward the surface:
10,000 joy-and-sorrow fishes
crashing into air.


^^EOP^^

In Trinidad, three men appeared
  in court on August 15, 2017,
   charged with having bird
  parts in their possession.
They were caught
  near the Caroni Bird Sanctuary
   by a team of game wardens.
  The wardens happened to be
“conducting surveillance” in
  the area when they spotted the
   men with the dead birds. 
  The men attempted to escape
in a boat. 
  They were caught.
   They were granted bail. The case
  was adjourned. 
Drones have been
  brought in to protect
   the birds. The Ministry of
  Agriculture has conducted
test flights in Trinidad. Here
  is the DNA of the scarlet ibis
   rendered as a barcode:
 
  
The desire to eat the scarlet ibis
  has long haunted man. Fat ibises
   are preferred over lean egrets.
  Even the indigenous peoples
of America prized the
  bird flesh. They made
   special expeditions for
  their eggs. In fact, in their
quest to eat ibis meat, the
  first peoples accidentally
   discovered the islands of
  the Caribbean. The birds made
new land. The natives carried
  baskets with eggs and emaciated
   fledglings. They cooked the
  eggs even if addled or in an
advanced state of decay,
  according to one writer. So
   that birds of all stages of
  life floated in a sky of yelks.
Soup, richly spiced with
  death and Spanish pepper.
   Yet the scarlet ibis, if
  allowed a return to its former
glory, can bring about the
  annihilation of all mammals.
   Among its plumage, the bird
  harbors pathogenic bacteria,
no match for human medicine.
  Man, for good reason, is
   their prime predator.


^^EOP^^

You won’t
kill me
because I
will not
oblige you
by dying. 
I hold all
my hands
under
the cherry
trees. 
Clusters of
shyest
pinks
joining
hands. 
Laced
like this, 
diadem
like this, 
we live the
past/
present/
future/
all at once 
and even now. 
Wouldn’t we tear
seas,
cities,
money
to get to
each other? 
The public
garden— 
the books
of its leaves, 
the leaves
of its books— 
denotes privilege,
entitlement
gorgeous belief 
that we’ll meet
again and
again
holding 
this
feelingtone
of
flowers


^^EOP^^

                    
                    
                    3 AM walks on Fridays across the Marais—from that insomniac
bar on Rue de Lappe, via a Place des Vosges gurgling secrets
in her sleep, zagging down to Rue du Roi de Sicile before
zigging back to the tip of Rue des Francs-Bourgeois
((sound asleep)), with pit stops to salute gothic
gargoyles, brush Art Deco façades, and peer
at miniature parks penned in for the night—
then up Boulevard de Sébastopol, up north,
all the way north to your shared digs
in Château Rouge, holding a wasted,
bedraggled moon aloft, turn by
slow turn—first you, then I—
till he would faint & fall
from an unsafe,
matinal
sky.    
 Fortnightly
sessions—when down
to the last clean fitted sheet—
at the prematurely aged laundrette
rasping out wrong or no change on the top
floor (was it? Or does memory begin to fray?) of
Résidence André Allix, high above the funicular station
at Saint-Juste, Vieux Lyon; some years later, the same ritual
with the swankier, snootier machines in Château-Landon, Paris
claiming more coins; the tortuous rides you would take to reach—
each time—before I’d begin to fold the cobalt nakshi kantha
quilt (you had brought back from a fair trade crafts village
near the northern suburbs of Dhaka) that you knew
I should trip over—each time—if left alone (that
quilt still alive, still untorn: strangers tend
to help, most, keen to touch, to stroke
the wealth of colors, to ask, Where
is it/are you from? One came
home the other day). 
Vernal
morning-walk
battles simmering
from the night before,
wildfiring, pyring by the axis
of Parc Josaphat in Schaerbeek;
our voices scorching the sleep-filled
wings of the neighboring swans, and
words—both barbed and burning—whirl-
pooling the ponds beneath their feet, then all
of it—the earth, the air, the green, that high blaze
of words and decibels, yes, everything—unspooling
in a snarl of arms and thighs, hips and groins, extra-large
elbows, tongues and—it once even felt—uncaged ribs with
double, smelted hearts, purple-hot beneath and hammering their
own daft, arrhythmic anthem, overheard only by an inquiring fox
 



 

Then, the smaller, more regular ones: week-end washing, the family of filthy plates and pans and casseroles somersaulting well past burnished wooden spigots to be the first to greet me when arriving at your ancient garret in Angers by the last TGV, just grazing past midnight and the lone, last tram—with that recurrent, half-annoyed, half-amused, thought: would you first run out of copper and steel and stone, space in your cavernous sink or the resolve never to soap and scrub and rinse (drying’s all right)?
 

 
Happier, low-maintenance rites as well: molten, dark hot chocolate brunches to celebrate impending surgery, yes, “celebrate” the verb we’d adopted as shaggy, wet-nosed mongrel, just right for consolation. The nights in hospital, where I knew—each time—you woke to place quiet fingers and parse the storm warnings within my breath. Then, the weeks of binge-relishing Wong Kar-wai films—from Ashes of Time to 2046 (we as “We” would not live to see My Blueberry Nights and Norah Jones)—for sustenance through rebirth and recovery, till I rose, irrevocably in love with Patrice Chéreau after Son  frère,  and,  it  is  true,  seldom  returned.
 

 
All these and a few, more diffident, others went
missing in that one, endless, afternoon of our
remaindering, slipped away—unnoticed—
amidst the naming, the labeling, the
allotting, the packing. They could
have fled through the fissures
in the kitchen wall, or rolled
down cracks in the floor-
boards—and some, I
reckon, even threw
themselves out
of windows
we’d left
open.


^^EOP^^

Hello flowers and cigarettes
every afternoon spoke to a bird
a small set of hands
they gone out in the pond and slept
who seem to be doing something nicely
which made them drowsy
only to grace and share the beautiful moments
across Latin streets
Hello flowers and cigarettes
cordially invited
into an employment contract
and at last there were too many


^^EOP^^

Lemon balm is for forgiveness.
Pull up from the root, steep
in boiling water. Add locusts’ wings,
salt, the dried bones of hummingbirds.
Drink when you feel ready.
Drink even if you do not. 
Pepper seeds are for courage.
Sprinkle them on your tongue.
Sprinkle in the doorway and along
the windowsill. Mix pepper and water
to a thick paste. Spackle the cracks
in the concrete, anoint the part
in your hair. You need as much
courage as you can get. 
Water is for healing.
Leave a jar open beneath the full moon.
Let it rest. Water your plants.
Wash your face. Drink. 
The sharpened blade is for memory.
Metal lives long, never grows weary
of our comings and goings. Wrap this blade
in newspaper. Keep beneath your bed.
Be patient, daughter.
Be patient.


^^EOP^^

If suddenly she rears
pulls, pitches
into the lightning 
if the split sky strikes
splinters the glassy ground
(her stride is a circle growing smaller) 
when she sees the stars
—all skies have storms
and she has seen them 
if she shies and starts
when she skids
when she lowers her eyes
if she stops to listen: 
nervous rider, beware.


^^EOP^^

darkriver moonrise
girlrise locksdrip
firmfoot mudbank
starwheel skinflush 
red
mouthswell tongueloll
breastswell hipswell
archback cockride
nailrake treebark
sunripe wombswell
cuntswell rockback
haunchsquat pullsquirt
babesquall blooddrip
sweatdrip slimedrip 
devour
headfirst skullcrack
laugh 
leaffall headback
laugh 
you were seen mother
but there was nothing
to see


^^EOP^^

What’s Godhead—
now standing upright,
fecundity no less
I tell you more about. 
Phases of the moon, you see:
an auspicious moment I’ve
come to believe in with
Shiva or some other deity. 
What Greece from antiquity
bestowed upon us with an
outsider named Sikander—
Alexander the Great going 
to the Indus Valley but not
ancient Rome, I presume to
know less about; then it’s
Parvati, consort of Shiva, 
being on the diurnal stage
as I dwell on enlightenment—
fires burning and smoke
rising from the ground. 
Sandalwood, the ghee of life
with avatars coming closer,
and I will recite mantras
when Shiva looks back at me 
from the corner of his eye
as I pretend I am in some
other place like Rishikesh,
close to the Ganges, but 
here by the Rideau River—
this North with celestial fires,
making promises to myself
from long ago.


^^EOP^^

If you must hear      the story
of my turbulent gaze      after waking, 
the march of my hours      to hermit
into a higher body,      it is that 
whatever you put            into the Universe
eventually       returns. 
In our oneness      of gift,
                     we are eyes together, 
nerves together,         affected together.
If I’ve never      told you 
how madly we share      in the stars, 
how it was all      founded      for you,
then let the longing      for Arcturus 
                     be the gilding      of our sleep. 
I know      when your time      was in its
making,      I was left      to sing alone, 
unfed      to trample through      a hundred
layers      of night      without a heart 
                                   to hold my guard. 
If I had known      all those     days
to listen deep   into myself      so that you 
would begin      to hear      me,      I’d sooner
soak      the decibels      of      your cells 
into  the exhale  of my      embrace.
            A scorning within       is within 
                coming back      to scorn.
A rose quartz promise      lifted into 
the world   is the world      coming back
                          to surrender      its love. 
Even after      I took my health
into a vineyard      of hawks, 
I could not break myself from caring
but only     to seek you,      find you, 
            whisper into your palm:
you are not lost,      you won’t be lost.


^^EOP^^

i passed my lit exams with
colors flying to a precipice
the rundown colors of the other 
of tribulation and witch hunting
i knew nothing but of the crude and
rude wife of bath i was well versed 
medieval texts renaissance men
used abused erased to
historicize temporalities
of others 
while lovers on a balcony bargain
a pound of flesh to a specter of
the rotten state betrayed
by cassius 
of the ancient mariner these rimes echo
water water everywhere nor any drop to
drink discovery as glorious as thirst 
many o and odes followed lyrical ballads
to psyche melancholy and immortality
which i turned to audes 
i read and read and read pages
and pages and pages on fanny and
emma and jane and
elizabeth 
i had the bourgeois gentilhomme
the puritan andromaque the
fantasy of le grand
meaulnes 
the reality of la mare au diable the
dirt of les fleurs du mal carmen’s
dilemma saved the day 
it still resonates l’amour est enfant
de bohème il n’a jamais jamais
connu de loi except the romani law 
revived by dramouss la peste
et l’étranger vive la francopholie
noire et masculine blemished of its politics 
the middle ages bled through the
middle passage passed down to the
middle class ripping through my
middle in a carnage 
sixteenth-century white
brutality to twentieth-century
slow violence 
i absorb the flow in oblivion
and erase myself to imitation
only to live in dejection 
until i listen to my creole tongue
search my historical voice
hear my name and
ask what is in a name? 
that which we call a rose
would not be the same rose
if we call it enn fler roz
or gulaab ke phulwa 
i grab tagore’s Gitanjali
i breathe and finally reach
the Lorde.


^^EOP^^

Make broadness broadness
from narrowness
Lead lead us
We see nothing
behind nothing ahead
These worlds are broad above
beyond our knowing
The great river plains open and descend
slowly from west to east
beyond our knowing
Us
Doctor, suture me from
narrowness to broadness
All the suns all the dawns all the waters
rise and pass
in broadness
Our bodies move over over this land
rising and falling
Broadness
stretch out our skies and dawns
so we can walk walk
out of our selves
Doctor, move me from dark
spaces of invented light
I do not know just
what it is
that I am like
Broadness open for
us us
Unharness our days


^^EOP^^

a churile swims the length of
the demerara river in my dreams.
she tows her dead
child behind her, catches me
in a net of  black hair. 
do you want to know how to
buss a gyaff, she asks. 
ditch the ipa chart. mimic
your grandmother’s
canal no. 1 lips. howl
the choo-ryle’s grief into a
cornelia ida cane field sitting
at the bottom
of your uncle’s coors light can. 
the churile’s grief is the undertow of
every overseas gyaff. in her hands
the saltwater-pickled tongue of my
great-great-great grandmother sings. 
a tongue without a mouth
sings the loudest, she says. 
do you want to know how to
buss a gyaff? 
listen for the
wagwans the sita-rams
the how yuh dos
the langtime me nah see yous
listen for
what the story says and 
wield your grandfather’s cutlass.
reply with
di’ ’tory ’tweet.
(even if it’s not.) chop up
the queen’s english, prune
the consonants, make room
for the vowels to stretch their backs. 
somewhere at the bottom of the demerara river
a colonial officer is hoarding the Ss that somersault off my tongue,
smooth like the tamarind seeds my mother
swallows when she is five. somewhere
at the bottom of the demerara river
is the tamarind tree i wish
climbed up my esophagus
and out of my yankee mouth
that time i swallowed
a handful of tamarind seeds. i was desperate
to cough up
a shipwreck a ship manifest
a house on stilts
a bottomless bottomhouse
a saltwater-pickled tongue—
anything to soak up the currents of
a seasickness over a hundred years young
that drenches
my feet


^^EOP^^

These are all ancient names of what you will once call home.  
The shape of the fire altar is independent of time.   Each temple is an offering made to the gods by giving them a home.   An inward realization can only be achieved by draining out your wealth and strength. So he went on
Another building rampage.
 “A world conquer campaign,” as my brother used to say. Drew a straight line across a map And let the priest and the architect connect the fact that often it was a Queen
on whose insistence these stone gardens were built.


^^EOP^^

Did you ever feel this. Astonished
by the blood drawn from
your arms when you took a step forward
and the air scraped you. 
Maybe you think peace. Think it
as a floral carpet, a persistent scent
that is supposed to be
a memory you treasure. Only
it was put there by someone else. 
When the sun hits
it feels like something.
Someone cooks soup.
You love a person you envy.
And the emotions wash
into a teacup
and you drink them
and your teeth are storm-stained. 
If there were a wave,
blue-black, flooding lives out,
spinning each person
and the next
and their needs
together as if they were fabrics
in a laundry machine,
could I ever trust it? If I touch
and you forget
you have borders against nature.
We’re floating somewhere
in a primordial pool.
And I’ve got you, and I’ve got you.


^^EOP^^

We must be
the inviolate
petals, always
queering to-
ward the sun,
must be water
on the lips of
flaming cities,
quenching
the husbands,
insatiable. These
days the abdomen
blossoms, but
we must be
boneless, edible
fish. We must
beg for bouquets
for absent sons.
This is how we
know devotion:
listening to lovers
sleep, breathing
like monster trucks,
wanting to soothe
them when the dream
is done. We march
the sinking avenues,
finger the curls
at the baby’s neck,
hanging from
the brink at
office hour,
gulping Xanax
in their white
oblong shells.
Cities can sleep
but we can never.
Vigilant animals
on our hands and
knees, asking for
it again and again.


^^EOP^^

When death fell asleep between my legs
One arm slung over my knee
I pulled her up to my leaking breasts
And heard her grind her teeth 
— 
Does not inhabit herself
Stun guns of solar hair and eye flash hide her age
Born in a mirror in water precariously unheld
Will never die 
— 
Sometimes runeface spreads
Wind wrinkling a lake
Dolphins flipping at eyes and mouth 
Sometimes a crucifix
Nose the bent of spine
Splayed veins from eyebolts 
— 
A bit inconvenient
To die just to drop 
This sticky lover
That loveless parent 
If only one could just get plastic surgery
Change lives behind the shrubbery 
— 
Not fair 
I get older so
Do you I
Never catch 
Up you train me
For your death 
To my patterns you do
Patterns I want something 
To shock you
My namesake tree 
To drop all its leaves
In the center of spring 
Remind me what
I gain by being here 
Love me in a hurry 
— 
Our granaries flowed with deposits of sweetest kernels
Like squirrels we were the saviors of a future
In winter’s clamp we siphoned liqueurs using deep-stemmed waterlilies
Returning to redeem we found brittle rock-sugar
Clouded air traps
Ice spikes
Fossil prints 
— 
Whenever I open my mouth: crater 
Blisters I take for moonwalking shoes 
Sentries out the front
Slips at the backdoor 
The bloat floats 
Fatwrapped
Fleafeeling 
— 
Two people have a third person between them
One of them is always responsible for her disappearance 
Parched beehives in their stomachs they look everywhere 
Lightning and smoke form duration in the I Ching clouds
She won’t say shoo


^^EOP^^

After
the small bomb of his orgasm
I stole his mother’s crucifix,
darted through the back doors. 
I never saw the dogs.
Quick like Krishna’s gopis they swarmed me.
Pink tongues of threat and purebred musk.
Rosaries of saliva.
Jaws open like warm ovens for bread and fish. 
I tried their father’s language on them 
stay calm hold still
hold still stay there
don’t run stay calm
don’t panic I said
stay still calm
I said stay 
When the ridgeback bitch rushed me,
I sank the gold christ in her eye,
felt her piss soak my sandals.
She buckled into the death,
I whimpered
easy easy now
no one has to get hurt.


^^EOP^^

Small words craft a spell
for honey-scented light;
a white sail flung to earth
makes a river of cold and diamonds,
makes blood shiver. 
This is an old string
undone, useful as a lie
to the dreaming,
sleeping like water in the veins,
used to the hunger
of the unfed. 
Taste is the shape of lovers’ hands,
the arched sky, a bowl of knives,
that tame bird in blue—
your name is
the squall and surrender
of things to come. 
Night is for never,
bloodshot hours and the must of books,
breath of moth-winged longing. 
Pack your things:
strike out before light.
 


^^EOP^^

I put in a butterfly, first.
Shake its purple noondust air
into the furthest corner where
it will be safe. 
Then, I put in the snake
that he bit a mouthful out of,
silenced with a stone. 
What else was there room for,
after that?
 


^^EOP^^

Ask him at four the con man with the fancy herb
whether the shirt will still fit
the grain still stream millward
the girl still hold her balance
on the fraying rope 
How to hold and frame no, see see see
as if for the first time
the raw unpolished yellow skin
of the door the warm brick skin
of the terrace the downy cream floor 
You must be alert to coffee stain and mosquito bite
red cloud of panic on the inner arm
the river’s pulse beating in the brain
its gilded fish bursting the weir of sleep
source forgotten mouth unknown 
upstream and downstream braided one current from which the wounded dolphin leaps
slipping from this skin of water to the next
finding balance on a wave it’s you and me both
asking who’s really native in passage


^^EOP^^




For Rick and Stephanie



Because today our hands unravel a perfect orange
we each left our homes
drank ripening light before boarding
put our hands together into red soil 
we each left home
to place new juice in our mouths
put our hands together into red soil
kept our eyes open for tiny seeds 
unfamiliar juice in our mouths
each season we unlatched door
eyes open for tiny seeds signaling first growth
kept away wilder foraging creatures 
each season unlatching door                                   and because windows kept their promise to open
ripening light before boarding                    sun did indeed round out
foraging creature feeding grass                                            sky no longer called out      private song
our mouths welcome            smooth rind singing sweet
                                                                                          juice in our mouths


^^EOP^^

There is a place not far from here where
two rivers meet the sea, a shore dark
and pitted as a caiman’s back.
My thoughts drift here when I pray to you,
to swollen water and lonely spit,
tide-risen belly of a mangrove god. 
Every white room I enter is untruth.
The doctor is not my maker. He can barely keep
my bones together. He cannot sew me
into wholeness, even with your holy medallion
round my neck. Oh saint, there is so much
I cannot tell you. 
Perhaps I will confide in Xochiquetzal,
goddess of childbirth, mother of ocelots and flowers.
Perhaps I will write letters
to my own mother with invisible pigment
made of colostrum and brine. 
But these words are all seeds, hard-shelled
and deep-veined like nutmeg, falling to earth
in careless handfuls. I know this forest of silence
is of my own making. 
Now what can you say to me
that the wild Atlantic has not?
I’ve already heard the one about
everything happening for a reason. 
Dear saint, I know you will not
take me in your pristine arms
and make me weightless, even if I beg.
Behind my eyes at night there is only water,
my unborn child inside me a turn of turtles
flailing in the deep, crossing the unknown. 
 


^^EOP^^

My suited and booted grandpa
reminds me of a weighty door
hewed from fired vesi or oak.
If, upon turning the brass knob
in his breast, you push against him,
he’s swift to push against you,
and for an instant you’re a doorman
and he the mule of a man-door
until the moment of letting go
when he pulls you along after him
into an open room where history
reclines vacantly on an armchair.
 


^^EOP^^

St. Andrews. Forbach. Gothenburg. Sète. Douai. Roubaix. The towns we knew as shapes at night, or a stranger in the next berth half-hidden beneath a duvet. A whirling midnight of boat-hopping in Nantes. Half of Lyon from 2001: all the mornings julienned into sunshine and periwinkle skies at Croix-Rousse; Sunday ends at La Cigale (or was it La Fourmi, or both?), redolent of the ashes and smoke and crimson drapes of Wong Kar-wai; the salad bowl tossing an ever-delayed sunrise over your cracked skylight; those 73 lines (563 words) you managed to fit alongside eternity on an un-postmarked card. Some constellations—Aquarius, Aries, Hydra, Pegasus. The blue-and-canary-yellow polka-dotted python who still gobbles me up on the 99th square. A weekend in Rouen where I drank the sun with a red plastic straw. Dimples on your stubbled left cheek that surface from a dream at 5 am alone, my wonder at their constancy. Your hands wrapped around my fugitive breath even through those dreams. The sight of a baby in the metro who looked like she could be ours (and my relief she was not). The July afternoon the sun left the map of Spain on a thigh. The year I turned cartographer at beachside siestas, mapping the stir of sand across your back, the blue rivulets under your skin navigating their way toward a heartbeat. The giant, prismatic, poster of Mira Nair’s Monsoon Wedding covering fissures on a kitchen wall; two wickerwork laundry baskets from Dinjan; wooden ladles, now splintered; that livid indigo hand-braided quilt: the first among joint possessions. Twelve-hour road trips across France under unwashed stars to help resettle schoolmates. Piles of moldy Satyajit Ray VHS tapes. A map of free Bangladesh. The Māori mask gifted by a fellow passenger on the train from Georgetown. Noughts-and-crosses played on the rafters of a hotel ceiling. Every yesterday but the second, quieter than the first yet more fragrant. Keep them, and stay: yes, they are yours from today.  














What will I take instead, you ask? Solenoid, ouroboros and African paayal: words we learnt from each other. Sputters of   laughter over the misspelling of récipiendaire in my hundred-and-twenty-paged dissertation you went on to supervise. A first date with Patrice Chéreau’s Intimacy that left us bereft of voice but not touch. The spring lost in Paris, and retrieved in Rome: neonate but blithe and loud. Den Bosch and its soundless mornings, where even birds meditate. Dublin, yes, despite the disasters with missing kathak ankle bells and katana. Those shy cities that blush at dusk when the sun’s gaze fills with sudden desire. Others undressed by moonlight. The unsubsidized, incomplete report “Science and the Art of Rolling Balls and Other Machines.” All the lines of poetry you thought, and refused to write. The crackle and splutter of toast burning before breakfast. A tuneless humming muffled by shower curtains. Matinal half-hour radio-switch battles between RFI and BBC World. Sighting the smile on a natal cleft as you reach up for the tin of dark chocolate. Haroun and the Sea of Stories and Invisible Cities, more mine than yours: yes, I can play dirty on this. Canal Saint-Martin—but only the curve between the café Le Valmy and Pont de la Grange-aux-Belles. Koodiyattam as a birthday surprise when the gods left their paddy fields and invaded Paris, complete with cobalt and emerald cheeks, human woes and joys. The first encounter with Pina Bausch’s Café Müller. Every single one with her Rite of Spring. My fear of dying alone in a strange city at night. Copper and caramel: the two shades your gaze seems to traverse between dusk and daybreak. Other constellations: Pisces and Lynx and Phoenix. The ancient fleece jacket each would wear when the other was not around. All of Terry Pratchett’s Discworld books we owned together. The word together, as well. The fact you shared aloud in surprise at tea: a giraffe’s heart weighs an incredible 24 pounds. Today. Tomorrow. A spring tide of tomorrows  


^^EOP^^

As we approached the front door, I noticed
grills on the windows, bullet pockmarks 
in the wall; inside, a maid served us salad,
potato and cilantro soup—and I saw, 
in the amphitheater above Medellín,
the stage where twenty-eight poets read; 
clouds gathered; in the ensuing downpour,
I expected the five thousand people to rush out; 
instead, a sea of umbrellas appeared,
and people swayed under them; when the readings 
resumed, a poet stood, chanted in Vietnamese,
and when I stepped up to the podium, 
two rivers flowed down the steps to the far right
and left; as I read our emotions resemble leaves 
and alive to their shapes we are nourished, 

^^EOP^^

Forgive me.
I say to the wall.
My life is paper.
My jaws rust. 
Wanderer: singing.
The sky is my home.
I throw roses into it
to color it red. 
Stop: these roads
grow from me.
My journey must end
because my destinations
have ended. 
Kneeling like a priest,
seeing the spherical eyes
of flies, my wish:
emptiness and sudden light. 
Resurrection: I am dead
from it—the attempt to live
again. 
It sings as me when I sleep:
the world dressed in yellow.
Never have songs
meant for me what they do
when you sing. 
I leave you: haloes and clothes.
I leave you violently.
Like the wail of an exile. 
Forget me: my truth.
My masterpiece is
my nonexistence. 
Sunrise: unbreakable dawn.
I open your book.
It has no pages.


^^EOP^^

he walks like a monologue
pauses like the word saudade 
he rarely makes a turn
yet becomes an acute angle 
landscapes and shadows
return 
to a partially foaming home
corners start talking 
a girl waves back
prodigally 
becomes available to touch
now, even if a knee 
doesn’t blur, doesn’t bend
the world will still turn bokeh 
otters will remain otters
doors will remain doors 
the keys won’t fit


^^EOP^^

A snake eats a mynah
head first, yellow legs extend
from the snake’s filled mouth
The cattle bellow
tethered to ancient trees
Dung fills the tall grass
Thunder strikes at the humid air
There is no I
in the breath
Roots wind through fallen leaves
The terror of an owl smashes
into a tree trunk
loses a wing
drops below into dried weeds
There is no I
in the breath
The seasons are muscular and original
What should I
speak
Thunder strikes again and again
What is real must be harvested
each day and threshed and ground
put through fire
then eaten
What should I
imagine
in this place where we become
Our sight is made from our seasons
Bring us
the rain


^^EOP^^

for you who heard useless
           through honey trees in time of wasp and stalk 
for you who raised surface                             we all mixed from hunger
           generated off-color milk                            borne from chemical cousins 
                     for train of mouths                          you who haven’t sat down
                                          breathing a first bowl                         days waiting
                                                                              for fog and spiced sky  
                                                                               I watch you weave
                                                       them bare grassy cane              would not wash out no matter
           tired body in shift and glitter                      how we found red 
                                                                                              into whatever wore
                                                                      me stolen a sheen
                                                                                                          of milk memory saw
                                                                                 alone on the porch  
                                                                       to sleep and take up
                                                                                  a branch of that country
                                            to allow maps of fire
                                                        our own fields of rain


^^EOP^^

May all beings, seen and unseen, be well, happy, and peaceful, including ourselves.
May there be peace in the world, peace in our hearts, peace in our minds.
May we use this wonderful opportunity of  human life to awaken.
May we be grateful for wisdom and compassion,
this infinite boundlessness that surrounds us,
waiting to be used by us, to open our hearts and minds
so that we may see things as they truly are,
how brief our lives, how dependent upon others we are,
and so with each act may we bring wholesomeness, humility,
and the courage to do no harm, not least of all to ourselves.
As we journey through this life may we move deeper into insight,
and see things as they truly are,
this wonderful opportunity to awaken.
May we be grateful for the teachers in all their guises who appear before us.
May we love those who are hardest to love, including ourselves.
May leaders who will work for the peace of the planet step forward,
and may we support them.
May those who have gone before us rest in peace, rest in comfort, rest in joy,
and may we remember to remember them.
May the next life be a happy one.
May we cultivate in our hearts, in our minds, here and now, here on earth,
generosity, a land of plenty for all.
May our wish for peace spread like a mother’s soothing hand
and reach the distressed, fevered places of the world
and protect each child the right to be fed, to be sheltered, to be schooled.
The right to go to sleep without fear.
May we journey safely, work contentedly, and return home to loved ones well and happy.
May the path of forgiveness and acceptance
be the path of peace,
and may we find it.
May we use this wonderful opportunity to awaken
and together find true happiness, open spaciousness without borders.


^^EOP^^

He was first a snake and was in love with her—a she-snake. And then he molted and after he molted he was a turtle and he met another she-turtle and fell in love with her. When he deshelled after years, he became a four-legged animal, black spots sprouting over his fur, and he fell for a leopard. He moved this way through the jungles, the savannas, the deserts, the skies, through the oceans, the air, the land and beneath it, changing and changing and meeting and falling in love with new she-species.
 
The lovers he left behind did not change. They were who they were. The same.
 

They were individualistic so to speak, but now they were also heartbroken and full of hate for him—the one who had left in the middle of, sometimes, passionate lovemaking.
 
They had no idea how it was to live so many lives in one life like him.

To take no breaks with rebirths from being mosquito to man.

Sometimes evolution and progress is so fast, blessings and curses are all mixed up, and One.


^^EOP^^

1 
Christ meets Peter after the Resurrection
Peter is old
Christ is reborn, rejuvenated, young
He clasps his oldest disciple to his breast:
When you were young
You wore clothes you liked and went wherever you wished
But now in old age
You will put out your hands like a child
To be dressed in clothes others wish you to wear
To be led where they want you to go ... 
Peter clasped Jesus for long
And wept Like a child 
2 
Mother Mary found Christ dead
It was left to her to clean up the mess
After that he gave that spectacular show: The Resurrection
To dazzle the world and Time
It wasn’t the first time she was left alone:
At the foot of the Mount of Olives he told her
“Woman, what art thou to me”
At the resurrection he told the other Mary: Noli me tangere
(Women had become touch-me-nots)
But at 15 Mary felt the womb stir
She took on world-blame to birth god’s son Then she must’ve felt so alone So alone and so frightened


^^EOP^^

I pledge to sit upright in my coffin
as soon as the morgue-ice melts, and turn
a cheek grayer than this dusk. Kiss it
even if it doesn’t remind you of yesterday,
but let your tact disregard the breath
of a corpse mingled with the musk
you emptied on my breast. The belched outrage
from a belly domed in gas is simply
my way of saying, “Honey, I’m home.”
The carrion fly counting the fibers
in my nose is no heavenly harbinger.
Discount it as you’d discount a bird
on a cliché and fear nothing for there’s nothing
left to fear. Darling, I’m in no hurry.
Take your time in bringing me a rose
of that pinot we once praised to the sky
and let my tongue gad about in a warm
crimson bay. I swear to lie back forever
when the stylus roundly vexes a scratch
in our nuptial song, and it all begins again.


^^EOP^^

Why do we look
for sutures and siblings 
in all the wrong places,
when Google gives us 
22,950,000,000 results
for the word home?


^^EOP^^

what lights up the lightbulb filaments
of your recall Old Man
this streak of fire
through the thin wire of memory and mind what line from which poet? 
the ibex looking down quizzically
at our car from cliff
the croc sunning corrugated hide
on the banks of the Rapti
as I cross the river rolling on elephant back wary elephant treating riverbed like a mine
trundling diagonal across the current 
and red-robed monk slowing down life not through asanas, but with mumbled prayer
that slow-rolls the cylindrical prayer drum 
and stars at their night shift
  in Ladakh 
2 
I don’t remember the dripping deciduous word-leaf holistic halfway-through its never-ending fall
from the tree of knowledge 
3 
and your eyes I remember them bright as a window of a just-lit room seen from the cinder-dark outside
the black-moment cinder-dark
that was I at that moment 
4 
sad isn’t it (not a bit)
the spyglass getting hazed in the cold
as it peeps into the mist and melancholy
of the gone-by guzishta
Urdu word for the past
memory sabotaging memory
past subverting past


^^EOP^^

An evening of expected rain. Out the window clouds lifted
their skirts and the wind poured in. We were the mothers
lingering over the dessert tray, placing the sweets in our
mouths, one by one. We were the soothers and givers,
keepers of children and men. Those days, our skin bunched
up at the bra line, eyelids gathering like crinoline as it folds.
Yet standing there at the table, there was nothing in the world
we were in want of, not even the loves that had escaped us.
Whatever we suffered, we let go of willingly. To know we
were not the same women as before did not pain us. When
the others spoke their voices swept over us like bees hovering
over lilacs. Outside, lights strobed over the Hudson; we watched
a white boat riding the crest of a wave, headed to sea. We
felt an ache we realized was happiness, almost unbearable.


^^EOP^^

Between the woodpile and the window
a line of small black ants is moving,
some to the north, some to the south.
 
Their constant industry is admirable,
as are their manners when they pause
in meeting to exchange a touch.
 
I must have brought their home inside
for fuel, heating my small house.
And if it burned I too would move
 
along all points of the compass rose,
touching my neighbors on the path.


^^EOP^^




for South Africa



What is the difference between here and there?
Between what is seen and the elusive face?
Fascism or imperialism,
South Africa, New York,
South Bronx, Soweto, Harlem, East Harlem, Namibia,
Lower East Side, Sharpville, Williamsburg, Watts, Johannesburg.
 
What is the difference?
Between sunburnt hands knocking vainly on the blind doors of apartheid?
That haven of disunity that forgets how it was molded from the dirt,    
descended from the rich clay wombed mother,
that bore a continent through slavery,
here or there denied its inheritance,
here or there in iron ore chains,                                 
stripped from the same sacred vessels, plucked from the same mountain breast
that nourished the birth of all creation,
that brought forth Yoruba incantations for life,
the science and precision of Mayan astrology,
the wisdom and passion of the Cherokee,
that filled the sky of the children of the Hopi,
offering hommage to a sungod where Arawak rivers of fire mountain blood
dance out a heartbeat for the darkness and the ocean of a million coquí.
 
Here? There? What is the difference?
When hunger thrives from unemployed nightmares created on a neon trip
down madison avenue by mercenaries of the inner soul,
paying first class rates just above the poverty line?
 
What is the difference in the name of the bank
that funds the weapons of racism?
That suppresses nations of builders into limbo/drug/ depression/regression,
oppression on a master scale?
 
South Africa. New York. What is the difference in the face of greed?
How does it construct its smile from the burning bones of Vietnamese families,
or the screams of a million martyred students in a stadium filled horror
that witnessed the slashing of the poet's tongue, the murder of Víctor Jara,
the hanging of Benjamin Meloise?
 
South Africa. New York.
Chile. Guatemala. Puerto Rico. Nicaragua.
Ireland. Ethiopia. El Salvador. Panama.
Kent State. Attica. Beirut.
What is the difference in the perfect equation?
That brings food to every table in a banquet of sharing and dignity applied?
That writes this book of truth. That diffuses the bomb of oblivion.
That ignites the fires of compassion. That lights the torches of liberation.
To set South Africa free.
That will set South Africa free.
 
—That MUST set South Africa free.
 


^^EOP^^

When grief comes to you as a purple gorilla
you must count yourself lucky.
You must offer her what’s left
of your dinner, the book you were trying to finish
you must put aside
and make her a place to sit at the foot of your bed,
her eyes moving from the clock
to the television and back again.
I am not afraid. She has been here before
and now I can recognize her gait
as she approaches the house.
Some nights, when I know she’s coming,
I unlock the door, lie down on my back,
and count her steps
from the street to the porch.
Tonight she brings a pencil and a ream of paper,
tells me to write down
everyone I have ever known,
and we separate them between the living and the dead
so she can pick each name at random.
I play her favorite Willie Nelson album
because she misses Texas
but I don’t ask why.
She hums a little,
the way my brother does when he gardens.
We sit for an hour
while she tells me how unreasonable I’ve been,
crying in the check-out line,
refusing to eat, refusing to shower,
all the smoking and all the drinking.
Eventually she puts one of her heavy
purple arms around me, leans
her head against mine,
and all of a sudden things are feeling romantic.
So I tell her,
things are feeling romantic.
She pulls another name, this time
from the dead,
and turns to me in that way that parents do
so you feel embarrassed or ashamed of something.
Romantic? She says,
reading the name out loud, slowly
so I am aware of each syllable, each vowel
wrapping around the bones like new muscle,
the sound of that person’s body
and how reckless it is,
how careless that his name is in one pile and not the other.
 


^^EOP^^

Richie playing the maracas
is the universe becoming fluid
and the Nuyorican Café
floor becoming platform
for the shape of art
to mimic so that the artifact
becomes direct message
         no symbols of
         but the very thing itself
the knife in the belly
and the blues singing soft
shoes of pain as my gut
kicks my nerves insisting
on its pain vomiting more pain
about gifts that on a Christmas
day reached a dead child
too late to be played with
but it wasn't the deliverer's fault
it was his uncle who kept forgetting
that Christmas falls with love
not on a calendar but on the tenderest
feelings where the self of all others wants
love and sharp edges that awake
the internal mind into a self-created speech
that reaches over into your listener's system
and reschedules his entire psychic set,
I once had a friend who in one afternoon
traced all of my spinal short-circuits
and rearranged my electrical flow
into more fluid work than the switch-on,
switch-off, I'm overloaded crisis
that results in nausea, asphyxiation and the
swallowing of my tongue
          hay algo
          hay un epileptic fit
trying to reduce me into a trembling
mass of jellied nerves, formless,
shuddering, there, on the subway floor
while hundreds of passengers masochistically
look on both enjoying my crisis and feeling sorry
for me, the poor wretch, lying on the dirty
concrete subway floor imploring my muscles
and nerves to keep cool and cut the short-
circuit tongue down my throat menace
out and institute a no-nonsense
coherent I'm a mechanical and predictable
human being behavior modification program
to counter my muscular violence against myself
which keeps calling attention to itself while the
transit cop is almost breaking both my legs
by throwing his full weight on me as he
tries to hold my legs still and my mouth open
grabbing at my tongue, yanking it out,
shaking my shoulders, slapping my face,
working to neutralize the short-circuit
in my spine till Dr. Psychiatrist starts
to define my mind and its connections
into a State Asylum where I can get more
medication than I do out on the streets
or have the medication forced on me by a
well-meaning nurse who relates herself to me
through an every four hour give him his
dosage routine
          hay algo
          it’s 11:59 p.m. 1975
and I got one more minute of talk
before 1976 finds me shooting up and down
behind the Nuyorican Café bar trying to
decide if nuclear war will ravage
New York before I find out just how
to divide the line so that it repairs
short-circuits that block the world
from coming together! it is 12 a.m.
the new year’s been bombed and over the T.V.
the hottest news release tells us that at La Guardia
Airport an explosion was so strong that tiny,
invisible slivers of glass have penetrated the skin
of many but the slivers are so fine that
it cannot be detected where they’ve entered
the body
and here it is 1976 enters in like a
glass sliver undetected yet causing pain.
 


^^EOP^^




                                        What I assume you shall assume. 
                                                                 Walt Whitman (1)



This Self—Hispanic, Latin, blond, black,
olive-skinned, native and immigrant—
dispersed far and wide
was here with everyone, yesterday and again today;
today and tomorrow; does not stop,
virginal atom of nakedness and dust,
of Manhattan’s universal son
the uncaged cosmos
and the echoes’ whirlwind. 
Child with the wisdom of questions,
offspring of poor and rich, of lettered and unlettered,
of rails, planting times, classes and cares,
which will sprout, embodied, with nothing forgotten,
seed in its newly bloodstained earth,
which gathers hands, pupils, voices,
the savor of oceans,
the smell of sweet jungles,
God's pollen, days and nights
at center of the Self that dances with many,
men, women, young people and old
in the light of the infinite’s furrows,
with open hands, without walls,
free roots of mine and everyone's
at the foot of the song
that now celebrates
without creeds or schools.
 
With all the colors that stir up their race,
Roman, Celtic, Hebrew, Moor,
Hispanic, Aborigine, with kingdoms of multitudes
fresh in the tree of life. 
Grass, girl or boy child, suppliant germ
of love and timepieces in the atmosphere,
God of the promise and the future,
modern and ancient in the new people,
come and gone from among the old people,
humanity's heart in the moon, hands' mirror,
the breath of syllables.
Because it is voice, hum of green and dry leaves
that loves equally,
in the color of its time, the park that is, am,
are, today, here, yesterday and forever,
the mystery's imprecise territory. 
This Self is Puerto Rican, Chicano,
from Cuba free dancer of merengues,
from Santo Domingo and all the Caribbean,
from El Salvador and Nicaragua.
It comes from Mexico, Central America,
from Costa Rica, Tikal, Guatemala,
from their rainforests, lakes of salt and honey,
from Panama, Colombia, Peru and Venezuela,
the corn crops of the Argentine pampas,
Chile's veins of grapes, Bolivia's reed flute,
from the Mayas, Quechuas, Aztecs, Incas,
from the Guaranís, from the Amazon, Ecuador,
from the Uruguay of the Charrúas and its shores,
gauchos, criollos, Europeans, mestizos,
mulattos, the fair-skinned, Turks, Asians, Syrian or Lebanese,
waifs, streetwalkers, huddled masses of Latin America
with their many names. 
It is harassed and startled by propellers and shrapnel,
by ashes and the hammer’s hard-won pennies.
Boss and day laborer; still the job’s slave,
painter of trenches, resourceful creator of roofs, pavement
on the agony of yesterday’s blood and the even-now
of the Monday of beginnings and the Sunday of holy days.
 
It is expressed and is not expressed by welcomes,
the yowls of rejection and the sunless silence
of indifference, every day, gray hands.
 
It belongs to family and sometimes they invite it, other times exclude it
from family suppers and their menu of dawns;
when the assemblage is gathered, they have become used
to its only cooking, serving, or cleaning up after the meal.
 
It suffers now, and in the next gust of wind, the discriminating smoke
of random breath, for good or bad of those
who intoxicated breathe ignorance or haughtiness
without clusters of stars, mountains, heavenly clouds,
wellsprings of gifts and of meadows.
 
The dream of your creation, fatherland of many fatherlands,
at the same time defined and disturbed
in the ferment of capricious laws
that attacked freedom and happiness in their path
and the paths of all who signed your articles.
 
It likes and does not like the words, the eve
of silences, words dyed in the antagonism
of empires and conquests, welcomes, coffins and slights,
gold pieces received and robbed.
 
They will not destroy this Self, although it be teacher or student,
follower or leader. They tried without luck
because history and its soul, to which we belong
and it belongs in this cloth of substances and times,
do not allow it.
  I am large, I contain multitudes.
They will not manage to deny me or ignore me or declare me undocumented:
I am written in you, in all,
as all are in me,
in clay and in the breeze's gentle sky,
in the delightful meaning of your body.
 
With the people’s wise voice, it complains and does not complain.
Like everyone, it triumphs in its defeats and loses, sometimes,
in the victories of bridges,
because the shank’s good fortune carries it inside
and outside of agony's navel.
It sings with the voice of ravaged fields,
the sweat of stria and its gifts,
the robust and oppressive body of cities.
It aims to be the river’s voice and not only of the forbidden,
but also strictly unknown voices.
 
If would not wish for entrance to a forest
whose roots it must avoid. 
In everyone’s Self,
the poem’s universal soul,
in each innumerable Walt Whitman,
cosmos without rubrics,
wave among waves, shared worlds
inside vibrating yellow,
I dance, I smile, I cry: I celebrate myself, and sing myself.  
 
 


^^EOP^^

                    
                    
                    my first try I made a hit it dropped from morning gray the smallest shadow both wings slipped
inward mid-flight the man barked Now I shot again and again a third time with each arrow
through the target I thought was it luck or was it skill luck or skill as the last one fell
 
 
its awkward shape made me run there pulsing on the ground I was astounded by its size a
gangly white goose throbbed heaved its head my eyes dropped blood flowers opened in the
snow of its neck behind my shoulder stepping down from a yellow bus
 
 
child made their way across the field I shot once more to end it quickly close range its death
did I do this to spare the bird from suffering or to spare the children the sight my motives in
humid cold yes my knuckles in the cold steamed bright red
 
 
because on my stomach in grass in rubber boots pockets and vests I slid along with that hunter I
did as he directed from quiver my draw my black lashes in steely eyed release it felt good there
it felt strong my breath in autumn was an animal there I thought did I really do this        did I 
really yet what difference is muscle is an arrow powered upward or any flight to center when I
did not hear it though I clearly mouthed poor thing poor thing poor thing
 
                

^^EOP^^




                        I think I could turn and live with animals, 
                                 they are so placid and self-contained. 
[ . . . ] They do not sweat and whine about their condition.
                                                        Walt Whitman (32)



Who does not marvel at the spider’s creative saliva,
the ant’s perfection,
the butterfly’s unsettled elegance,
that the running blackberry would adorn the parlors of heaven?
 
I used to fly into high dudgeon
with the insult “beast”;
now in my soul I honor it
in spite of extravagant haughtiness.
 
As when I pet Babe, my placid sheepdog,
my animal-companion,
who rejoices in my arrivals,
licks me in the time of solitude,
plays, begs, offers me therapy,
understands me, guides;
to the point, as he barks, of seeming to call out in a wondrous language,
paying heedless attention to incongruent commands,
and at each goodbye howling his sentiments
with an authentic whimper.
 
Also my girlfriend’s cat and T. S. Eliot’s practical ones
pull it off with their spoiled ways,
the rogue Mistoffelees, mysterious
Macavity dissembling his smooth crime.
 
Our follies do not begin to match their stratagems;
they are all indisputable circus performers.
Recently in the zoo's theater
the audience enjoyed a sea lion's applause,
its ball-handling skills, and other acrobatics.
I witnessed, wonderstruck,
in the oceanic snow of the Patagonian Steppe,
a rage of penguins
and their solemn march.
We are touched by the mama's promenades with her ducklings
and the melody of puppy love still moves us.
Little rabbits with their ears' alert softness
share our patios.
The splendor of spirited stallions fresh and responsive to my caresses,                              
with their bodies that tremble with pleasure as we race around and return.
 
The Olympic kiss of Leda by the swan
revives every so often in a sigh.
 
The sublimity of eagle’s flight.
It has been said that the poem is a bird,
the whole universe a winged purpose.
 
I wish, sometimes, to possess some of their gifts and talents. They bring me tokens of myself, they evince them plainly in their possession.
 
And you, eloquent Whitman, insist to us
that a mouse is miracle enough to stagger sextillions of infidels,
 
that the cow crunching with depress’d head surpasses any statue,
that what the oxen express in their eyes
says more than all the print I have read in my life.
 
There they stand, with the donkey, in the manger.
 
They accept what they are and what they have
with neither resentment nor complaints.
They don't need mirrors to fashion their beauty.
They live naked, unshod, in the hours’ Eden.
They sing the breaking of day with a trilling not learned in school.
Elk and other species snort when surprised
or watch you without fuss, contemplating your presence.
They move away, peaceful, toward forest and the wisdom of its trees.
They comprehend their place in the vastness of the universe.
They sleep in peace. They don’t trouble themselves over blame or sin;
nor worries about money
or the corruption of more distant ambitions.
 
They seem contented in their proper niches
of plants, earth, air, fields, and rocks.
 
Who would not trade their qualities
for some human ones that afflict us?
 
What library did tigers’ eyes or lions’ noontide golden
color suggest to Borges?
 


^^EOP^^




                                            The friendly and flowing savage, who is he? 
                                                                              Walt Whitman (39)



 There is something in the root of
the word jungle that conjures,
savage; it challenges
the fictitious trappings of the civilized.
 
Someone revealed that my grandmother
used to be an anarchist.
I yearn for the discredited independence
of barbarity,
of the sort destroyed by conquest,
its rock solid wisdom,
its culture’s temples,
its communion with infinite nature,
its clear-sighted breath in the air
where water touches it.
 
I escape to the primitive frontier
with a liberated body
of the soul's hierarchy
and all its decrees.
I am native to the territory
of animals and forests,
mountains, lakes, universe of progeny,
audacious pioneer of my own center.
 
What civilized pomposity
does war embody?
That of sepulchers, injustices
and a heap of anonymous cruelties?
 
I, we, all of us want to be the friendly and flowing savage
who subdues civilization
with arbitrary behaviors
like those of snow-flakes, words simple as grass, uncomb'd head, laughter, and naiveté.
 
Hostile only against those who exhaust
the generosity of grains,
those who sacrifice the land,
sweet sprinklings of rain,
butterflies, flowers, their brothers and sisters,
those who uproot the tender pages
of nimble books of calendars,
those who sell freedom
with blood on their hands.
 
We long for the birth of new forms from the tips of his fingers
and that, lawless, they might love us.
 


^^EOP^^

My uncle always insisted,
“strike the first punch,
put your enemy on the run.”
I always threw the first punch,
I remember,
“attack, attack, attack,
put the hurting
on his limbs,"
I remember,
I remember
the night my uncle
got angry because I said
his wife thought his nuts
were christmas walnuts
and that she cracked them
every day of the year,
his left arm twitched,
I leapt at him
and struck first.
 


^^EOP^^




for Lela



Half blue, feet first
she battled into the world.
Hardly surviving the blood cord twice wrapped,
tense around her neck. Hanging.
Womb pressing, pushing,
pulling life from mother’s child.
Fragile flesh emerging perfect in blueness,
like the lifeline that sustained her,
yet limp, almost a corpse.
 
Her mother claims the virgin interceded.
Invoked through divine promise, in prayer,
that caused her dark eyes to open,
her tongue to taste air like fire,
as the blueness faded,
tracing death on the tail of eclipse.
 
And as in birth from her darkness,
the free-giving sun inched slow to visibility,
revealing all color and form,
a great teacher, generous and awesome,
silent and reverent, loud and blasphemous,
constant,
sculpting edges of definition
in the shadow and light of multiple universes.
 
Half blue, feet first
she battled her way.
The world did not want another brown,
another slant-eyed-olive-indian-black-child.
Did not want another rainbow empowered song
added to repertoire in blue,
or azure, or indigo,
or caribbean crystal.
 Did not want another mouth to feed,
especially another rock-the-boat poet,
another voice opened wide,
fixed on a global spectrum of defiance.
 
The meaning of war defined her. Gasping and innocent,
before she knew her mother,
before she discovered herself, barely alive,
gathering weapons into her being with each breath that filled her,
growing stronger,
determined
to beat all the odds.
 
 


^^EOP^^

"People go out to vote
but the guerrillas obstruct them."
That's what's said on Channel 4 in Manhattan.
On the 28th of March we're made to understand
that Democracy is being obstructed
by the left, "the guerrillas
fire against the Salvadoran people,"
but that chaos was invented in the White House
and it doesn't afflict the public in Chatatenango,
there aren't any guarantees
for the public to take hold of!
although some go out and vote pretending
that the machinery is not fraudulent,
that Duarte doesn't repress,
not withstanding that it's written in every man's bible,
that in El Salvador Christ has not yet
freed his folk.
 


^^EOP^^




for Aya



We never met, but I knew her.
By that ray of life that passed into her son,
brilliant as sky through cane fields,
casting pastel shadows on a jíbaro’s balcón,
abundant fruit and flower scented
from an ancient caribbean, full of spirit
y la vida india.
 
I never heard her cry, but I was there,
at the birth, when the hurricane growled,
fierce and terrible, screaming,
as she listened to its thunder within herself,
her womb stretching,
pushing out the manchild she offered the world,
not in regret, but full
of remembrances, of land-plowing farmers,
plátano covered rainforests,
asphalt paths carved in slavery
through migrant jungles and concrete mountains.
 
I never saw the high curve of her taíno face
with its delicate brown cheek,
or felt the caress of her motherly hands. But I knew her,
recognized in emanating points of vision
from a craftmaker’s fingertips,
in precision woven tapestries, like gifts from ancestors,
marking borderlines where families become whole.
 
We never spoke, or shared a conversation,
but I can still hear the music
composed in the black latino brew of her kitchen.
Smells and leftover renditions of creole beans and salsa,
of mamá-cooking ladles tapping three/two clave
from sinks to pots to laundry machines
in survival ritual symphonies.
 
We never exchanged a word,
yet she whispered to my soul,
the way mother teachers son to love his child,
the way father shares with daughter the meaning of abuela,
the way bonds are secured,
like a sunday afternoon banquet at the table of Orisha
where all food is nourished,
love-seasoned.
 
I never knew her, yet she reached out,
as sister, woman, teacher,
as mother, a gentle wind,
touching me. Becoming mine.
 
 


^^EOP^^

Not tonight but tomorrow
when the light turns the peach
tree green and the Earth sprouts
its young leaves looking to repeat
the magical mystery tour of
photosynthetic conversion of light
and moisture into life—
Not tonight but tomorrow
when my body will have shed
its fear of turning old and soft
will I turn my speeding mind
into the tunnels of your psyche
to melt the calcium that constipates
your synapses into a lubricating powder—
Not tonight but tomorrow
when the Universe moves on
beyond the field of action
that is the Earth to me and you
will I discover the interplanetary clues
that signal the roots of my moment to you—
Not tonight but tomorrow
will I throw my feelings into
New York streets to stew
in the violence and despair
of our planet—
Not tonight but tomorrow
will the Earth turn green again.
 


^^EOP^^

To Whom It Does Concern:
 
        Could we please have just one space flight,            one nine-million dollar adventure into the great breath,            so that we could divide the loaves and fishes            and put 900 more people to work for a year.
             Or could we please have one nuclear missile,            so we can difuse it, sell the used parts            for one-point-ten billion worth of more than just            rice krispies breakfast-lunch-dinners.
             What if we could exchange an M-1 rifle for a solar reflector            so that our building could have heat all the time,            not wait for avaricious gun-toting landlords            to remember to call the oil company tomorrow            for the child next door with pneumonia today.
             We would even accept a leftover bomber,            or one two-million dollar high tech space suit,            however patronizing it may seem,            or a decommissioned aircraft carrier to relieve tight housing
                problems.
             Its not much, is it?            When you add it up, pull together the sum total            of the four billion dollars-a-day catastrophy fantasy,            the whole is worse than its parts.
             So to continue our list,            could you please refund on our next tax return            the difference between the limousines you drive,            and the tokens we do not have            to build our nation strong.
 
                                        Signed,
                                        The People of the Rest of the World
 


^^EOP^^

There were still shards of an ancient pastoral
in those shires of the island where the cattle drank
their pools of shadow from an older sky,
surviving from when the landscape copied such subjects as
“Herefords at Sunset in the Valley of the Wye.”
The mountain water that fell white from the mill wheel
sprinkling like petals from the star-apple trees,
and all of the windmills and sugar mills moved by mules
on the treadmill of Monday to Monday, would repeat
in tongues of water and wind and fire, in tongues
of Mission School pickaninnies, like rivers remembering
their source, Parish Trelawny, Parish St. David, Parish
St. Andrew, the names afflicting the pastures,
the lime groves and fences of marl stone and the cattle
with a docile longing, an epochal content.
And there were, like old wedding lace in an attic,
among the boas and parasols and the tea-coloured
daguerreotypes, hints of an epochal happiness
as ordered and infinite to the child
as the great house road to the Great House
down a perspective of casuarinas plunging green manes
in time to the horses, an orderly life
reduced by lorgnettes day and night, one disc the sun,
the other the moon, reduced into a pier glass:
nannies diminished to dolls, mahogany stairways
no larger than those of an album in which
the flash of cutlery yellows, as gamboge as
the piled cakes of teatime on that latticed
bougainvillea verandah that looked down toward
a prospect of Cuyp-like Herefords under a sky
lurid as a porcelain souvenir with these words:
“Herefords at Sunset in the Valley of the Wye.”
 
Strange, that the rancour of hatred hid in that dream
of slow dreams and lily-like parasols, in snaps
of fine old colonial families, curled at the edge
not from age or from fire or the chemicals, no, not at all,
but because, off at its edges, innocently excluded
stood the groom, the cattle boy, the housemaid, the gardeners,
the tenants, the good Negroes down in the village,
their mouths in the locked jaw of a silent scream.
A scream which would open the doors to swing wildly
all night, that was bringing in heavier clouds,
more black smoke than cloud, frightening the cattle
in whose bulging eyes the Great House diminished;
a scorching wind of a scream
that began to extinguish the fireflies,
that dried the water mill creaking to a stop
as it was about to pronounce Parish Trelawny
all over, in the ancient pastoral voice,
a wind that blew all without bending anything,
neither the leaves of all the album nor the lime groves;
blew Nanny floating back in white from a feather
to a chimerical, chemical pin speck that shrank
the drinking Herefords to brown porcelain cows
on a mantel piece, Trelawny trembling with dusk,
the scorched pastures of the old benign Custos; blew
for the decent servants and the lifelong cook,
and shriveled to a shard that ancient pastoral
of dusk in a gilt-edged frame now catching the evening sun
in Jamaica, making both epochs one.
 
He looked out from the Great House windows on
clouds that still held the fragrances of fire,
he saw the Botanical Gardens officially drown
in a formal dusk, where governors had strolled
and black gardeners had smiled over glinting shears
at the lilies of parasols on the floating lawns,
the flame trees obeyed his will and lowered their wicks,
the flowers tightened their fists in the name of thrift,
the porcelain lamps of ripe cocoa, the magnolia’s jet
dimmed on the one circuit with the ginger lilies
and left a lonely bulb on the verandah,
and, had his mandate extended to that ceiling
of star-apple candelabra, he would have ordered
the sky to sleep, saying, I’m tired,
save the starlight for victories, we can’t afford it,
leave the moon on for one more hour, and that’s it.
But though his power, the given mandate, extended
from tangerine daybreaks to star-apple dusks,
his hand could not dam that ceaseless torrent of dust
that carried the shacks of the poor, to their root-rock music,
down the gullies of Yallahs and August Town,
to lodge them on thorns of maca, with their rags
crucified by cactus, tins, old tires, cartons;
from the black Warieka Hills the sky glowered fierce as
the dials of a million radios,
a throbbing sunset that glowed like a grid
where the dread beat rose from the jukebox of Kingston.
He saw the fountains dried of quadrilles, the water-music
of the country dancers, the fiddlers like fifes
put aside. He had to heal
this malarial island in its bath of bay leaves,
its forests tossing with fever, the dry cattle
groaning like winches, the grass that kept shaking
its head to remember its name. No vowels left
in the mill wheel, the river. Rock stone. Rock stone.
 
The mountains rolled like whales through phosphorous stars
as he swayed like a stone down fathoms into sleep,
drawn by that magnet which pulls down half the world
between a star and a star, by that black power
that has the assassin dreaming of snow,
that poleaxes the tyrant to a sleeping child.
The house is rocking at anchor, but as he falls
his mind is a mill wheel in moonlight,
and he hears, in the sleep of his moonlight, the drowned
bell of Port Royal's cathedral, sees the copper pennies
of bubbles rising from the empty eye-pockets
of green buccaneers, the parrot fish floating
from the frayed shoulders of pirates, sea-horses
drawing gowned ladies in their liquid promenade      
across the moss-green meadows of the sea;
he heard the drowned choirs under Palisadoes,
a hymn ascending to earth from a heaven inverted
by water, a crab climbing the steeple,
and he climbed from that submarine kingdom
as the evening lights came on in the institute, 
the scholars lamplit in their own aquarium,
he saw them mouthing like parrot fish, as he passed
upward from that baptism, their history lessons,  
the bubbles like ideas which he could not break:
Jamaica was captured by Penn and Venables,
Port Royal perished in a cataclysmic earthquake.
 
Before the coruscating façades of cathedrals
from Santiago to Caracas, where the penitential archbishops
washed the feet of paupers (a parenthetical moment
that made the Caribbean a baptismal font,
turned butterflies to stone, and whitened like doves
the buzzards circling municipal garbage),
the Caribbean was borne like an elliptical basin
in the hands of acolytes, and a people were absolved
of a history which they did not commit;
the slave pardoned his whip, and the dispossessed
said the rosary of islands for three hundred years,
a hymn that resounded like the hum of the sea
inside a sea-cave, as their knees turned to stone,
while the bodies of patriots were melting down walls
still crusted with mute outcries of La Revolución!
“San Salvador, pray for us, St. Thomas, San Domingo, ora pro nobis, intercede for us, Sancta Lucia
of no eyes,” and when the circular chaplet
reached the last black bead of Sancta Trinidad
they began again, their knees drilled into stone,
where Colón had begun, with San Salvador’s bead,
beads of black colonies round the necks of Indians.
And while they prayed for an economic miracle,
ulcers formed on the municipal portraits,
the hotels went up, and the casinos and brothels,
and the empires of tobacco, sugar, and bananas,
until a black woman, shawled like a buzzard,
climbed up the stairs and knocked at the door
of his dream, whispering in the ear of the keyhole:
"Let me in, I'm finished with praying, I'm the Revolution.
I am the darker, the older America."
She was as beautiful as a stone in the sunrise,
her voice had the gutturals of machine guns
across khaki deserts where the cactus flower
detonates like grenades, her sex was the slit throat    
of an Indian, her hair had the blue-black sheen of the crow.
She was a black umbrella blown inside out                 
by the wind of revolution, La Madre Dolorosa,
a black rose of sorrow, a black mine of silence,
raped wife, empty mother, Aztec virgin
transfixed by arrows from a thousand guitars,
a stone full of silence, which, if it gave tongue
to the tortures done in the name of the Father,
would curdle the blood of the marauding wolf,
the fountain of generals, poets, and cripples
who danced without moving over their graves
with each revolution; her Caesarean was stitched
by the teeth of machine guns, and every sunset
she carried the Caribbean's elliptical basin
as she had once carried the penitential napkins
to be the footbath of dictators, Trujillo, Machado, 
and those whose faces had yellowed like posters,
on municipal walls. Now she stroked his hair
until it turned white, but she would not understand
that he wanted no other power but peace
that he wanted a revolution without any bloodshed,
he wanted a history without any memory,
streets without statues,
and a geography without myth. He wanted no armies
but those regiments of bananas, thick lances of cane,
and he sobbed, "I am powerless, except for love.”
She faded from him, because he could not kill;
she shrank to a bat that hung day and night
in the back of his brain. He rose in his dream.
 
The soul, which was his body made as thin
as its reflection and invulnerable
without its clock, was losing track of time;
it walked the mountain tracks of the Maroons,
it swung with Gordon from the creaking gibbet,
it bought a pack of peppermints and cashews
from one of the bandanna’d mammies outside the ward,
it heard breath pitched to the decibels
of the peanut vendors' carts, it entered a municipal wall
Stirring the slogans that shrieked his name: saviour! 
and others: lackey! he melted like a spoon
through the alphabet soup of CIA, PNP, OPEC,
that resettled once he passed through with this thought:
I should have foreseen those seraphs with barbed-wire hair,
beards like burst mattresses, and wild eyes of garnet,
who nestled the Coptic Bible to their ribs, would
call me Joshua, expecting him to bring down Babylon
by Wednesday, after the fall of Jericho; yes, yes,
I should have seen the cunning bitterness of the rich
who left me no money but these mandates:
 
His aerial mandate, which
contained the crows whose circuit
was this wedding band that married him to his island.
His marine mandate, which
was the fishing limits
which the shark scissored like silk with its teeth
between Key West and Havana;
his terrestrial:
the bled hills rusted with bauxite;
paradisal:
the chimneys like angels sheathed in aluminium.
 
In shape like a cloud
he saw the face of his father,
the hair like white cirrus blown back
in a photographic wind,
the mouth of mahogany winced shut,
the eyes lidded, resigned
to the first compromise,
the last ultimatum,
the first and last referendum.
One morning the Caribbean was cut up                       
by seven prime ministers who bought the sea in bolts—   
one thousand miles of aquamarine with lace trimmings;
one million yards of lime-coloured silk,                      
one mile of violet, leagues of cerulean satin—         
who sold it at a markup to the conglomerates,
the same conglomerates who had rented the water spouts
for ninety-nine years in exchange for fifty ships,
who retailed it in turn to the ministers                  
with only one bank account, who then resold it   
in ads for the Caribbean Economic Community,
till everyone owned a little piece of the sea,
from which some made saris, some made bandannas;
the rest was offered on trays to white cruise ships
taller than the post office; then the dogfights   
began in the cabinets as to who had first sold
the archipelago for this chain store of islands.
 
Now a tree of grenades was his star-apple kingdom,
over fallow pastures his crows patrolled,
he felt his fist involuntarily tighten
into a talon that was strangling five doves,
the mountains loomed leaden under martial law,
the suburban gardens flowered with white paranoia
next to the bougainvilleas of astonishing April;
the rumours were a rain that would not fall:
that enemy intelligence had alerted the roaches'
quivering antennae, that bats flew like couriers,
transmitting secrets between the embassies;
over dials in the war rooms, the agents waited
for a rifle crack from Havana; down shuttered avenues
roared a phalanx of Yamahas. They left
a hole in the sky that closed on silence.
 
He didn’t hear the roar of the motorcycles
diminish in circles like those of the water mill
in a far childhood; he was drowned in sleep;
he slept, without dreaming, the sleep after love
in the mineral oblivion of night
whose flesh smells of cocoa, whose teeth are white
as coconut meat, whose breath smells of ginger,
whose braids are scented like sweet-potato vines
in furrows still pungent with the sun.
He slept the sleep that wipes out history,
he slept like the islands on the breast of the sea,
like a child again in her star-apple kingdom.
 
Tomorrow the sea would gleam like nails    
under a zinc sky where the barren frangipani          
was hammered, a horizon without liners;
tomorrow the heavy caravels of clouds would wreck
and dissolve in their own foam on the reefs
of the mountains, tomorrow a donkey's yawn         
would saw the sky in half, and at dawn        
would come the noise of a government groaning uphill.    
But now she held him, as she holds us all,    
her history-orphaned islands, she to whom 
we came late as our muse, our mother,
who suckled the islands, who, when she grows old
with her breasts wrinkled like eggplants,
is the head-tie mother, the bleached-sheets-on-the-river-rocks
        mother,   
the gospel mother, the t'ank-you-parson mother    
who turns into mahogany, the lignum-vitae mother,
her sons like thorns,  
her daughters dry gullies that give birth to stones,
who was, in our childhood, the housemaid and the cook,
the young grand' who polished the plaster figure    
of Clio, Muse of history, in her seashell grotto         
in the Great House parlour, Anadyomene washed  
in the deep Atlantic heave of her housemaid's hymn.  
 
In the indigo dawn the palms unclenched their fists,
his eyes opened the flowers, and he lay as still
as the waterless mill wheel. The sun's fuse caught;
it hissed on the edge of the skyline, and day exploded
its remorseless avalanche of dray carts and curses,
the roaring oven of Kingston, its sky as fierce
as the tin box of a patties cart. Down the docks     
between the Levantine smells of the warehouses
nosed the sea-wind with its odour of a dog's damp fur.
He lathered in anger and refreshed his love.
He was lathered like a horse, but the instant
the shower crowned him and he closed his eyes,
he was a bride under lace, remarrying his country,
a child drawn by the roars of the mill wheel’s electorate,
those vows reaffirmed; he dressed, went down to breakfast,
and sitting again at the mahogany surface
of the breakfast table, its dark hide as polished
as the sheen of mares, saw his father's face
and his own face blent there, and looked out
to the drying garden and its seeping pond.
 
What was the Caribbean? A green pond mantling
behind the Great House columns of Whitehall,
behind the Greek façades of Washington,
with bloated frogs squatting on lily pads
like islands, islands that coupled as sadly as turtles
engendering islets, as the turtle of Cuba
mounting Jamaica engendered the Caymans, as, behind
the hammerhead turtle of Haiti-San Domingo
trailed the little turtles from Tortuga to Tobago;
he followed the bobbing trek of the turtles
leaving America for the open Atlantic,
felt his own flesh loaded like the pregnant beaches
with their moon-guarded eggs—they yearned for Africa,
they were lemmings drawn by magnetic memory
to an older death, to broader beaches
where the coughing of lions was dumbed by breakers.
Yes, he could understand their natural direction
but they would drown, sea-eagles circling them,
and the languor of frigates that do not beat wings,
and he closed his eyes, and felt his jaw drop
again with the weight of that silent scream.             
He cried out at the turtles as one screams at children
with the anger of love, it was the same scream
which, in his childhood, had reversed an epoch         
that had bent back the leaves of his star-apple kingdom,
made streams race uphill, pulled the water wheel backward
like the wheels in a film, and at that outcry,
from the raw ropes and tendons of his throat,    
the sea-buzzards receded and receded into specks,
and the osprey vanished.                                         
                                             On the knee-hollowed steps
of the crusted cathedral, there was a woman in black,
the black of moonless nights, within whose eyes   
shone seas in starlight like the glint of knives
(the one who had whispered to the keyhole of his ear),
washing the steps, and she heard it first.        
She was one of a flowing black river of women
who bore elliptical basins to the feet of pauper
on the Day of Thorns, who bore milk pails to cows
in a pastoral sunrise, who bore baskets on their heads
down the haemophilic red hills of Haiti,
now with the squeezed rag dripping from her hard hands
the way that vinegar once dropped from a sponge,
but she heard as a dog hears, as all the underdogs
of the world hear, the pitched shriek of silence.
Star-apples rained to the ground in that silence,
the silence was the green of cities undersea,
and the silence lasted for half an hour
in that single second, a seashell silence, resounding
with silence, and the men with barbed-wire beards saw
in that creak of light that was made between
the noises of the world that was equally divided
between rich and poor, between North and South,
between white and black, between two Americas,
he fields of silent Zion in Parish Trelawny,
in Parish St. David, in Parish St. Andrew,
leaves dancing like children without any sound,
in the valley of Tryall, and the white, silent roar
of the old water wheel in the star-apple kingdom;
and the woman’s face, had a smile been decipherable
in that map of parchment so rivered with wrinkles,
would have worn the same smile with which he now
cracked the day open and began his egg.
 


^^EOP^^

                    
                    
                    The exhausted wing of a sounded out page reversed the void in the grass into a bee, a tiny kite the rain keeps learning. This is the story of recording the wars in a storm for a whole human hymn.
 
                

^^EOP^^

I.
 
Nothing happened here.
Meaning it was done.
  Over counts itself among
the studied synonyms
 
but beyond
those round mouths
 
opening for answers done is the opposite of over.
 
 
II.
 
What is the sum
when you add
 
cut flowers in cellophane
to teddy bears and prayers
 
and the difference  
when you take away
 
and take away
and take away?
 
Show your work. Attend to precision.
 
 
III.
 
The students are gone.
It is not summer.
 
The classroom snake
that fled its shattered tank
 
the long shadows
draping themselves over
 
the overturned desks
and the red pen fallen
 
to the floor will count
as symbols on a different
 
subject test. Let them be
innocent in this world.
 


^^EOP^^

                    
                    
                    I get tired of being the one to make all the decisions so when they ask me where I want to eat, I say that I don’t care, I’d eat anything  at this point. Next thing I know, I am face to face with a bowl of Girl Soup and I just can’t bring myself. Some of us at the table are in a hurry to eat the soup, they are specifically trying to eat the  girls quickly because they seem to know that if you wait too long they turn into cyborgs or robots, and those are harder to chew. I can see that some of the girls are still alive and perhaps would like to be extracted from the soup, but when I squint I see that there are girls all over the floor with varying amounts of soup clinging to their clothes (you didn’t think they were naked, did you?) and so there goes that idea. Just at the moment I think I am running out of options, something comes over me and I take a deep breath and I do it, I jump right in there, that bowl of Girl Soup, no one is checking IDs or questioning my size or gender or race or voter affiliation, and I quick round up all the girls in the bowl into a large huddle. We have now obliterated two major problems: huddled together we are too large to eat, and also we’ve taken care of the problem of the eater.
 
                

^^EOP^^

It starts
with a blank sheet,
an undanced floor,
 
air where no sound
erases the silence.
As soon as
 
you play the first note,
write down a word,
step onto the empty stage,
 
you've moved closer
to the creature inside.
Remember—
 
a square
can end up as frog, cardinal,
mantis, or fish.
 
You can make
what you want,
do what you wish.


^^EOP^^

I take her in my hands
I open her gently
I part her pages
I stare at her words
I want her letters in my mouth
I run my hand down her spine
I love reading her
I love making love to her
I let her fall asleep in my lap


^^EOP^^

I am so small walking on the beach
at night under the widening sky.
The wet sand quickens beneath my feet
and the waves thunder against the shore. 
I am moving away from the boardwalk
with its colorful streamers of people
and the hotels with their blinking lights.
The wind sighs for hundreds of miles. 
I am disappearing so far into the dark
I have vanished from sight.
I am a tiny seashell
that has secretly drifted ashore 
and carries the sound of the ocean
surging through its body.
I am so small now no one can see me.
How can I be filled with such a vast love?


^^EOP^^

My father worked with a horse-plough,
His shoulders globed like a full sail strung
Between the shafts and the furrow.
The horses strained at his clicking tongue. 
An expert. He would set the wing
And fit the bright steel-pointed sock.
The sod rolled over without breaking.
At the headrig, with a single pluck 
Of reins, the sweating team turned round
And back into the land. His eye
Narrowed and angled at the ground,
Mapping the furrow exactly. 
I stumbled in his hobnailed wake,
Fell sometimes on the polished sod;
Sometimes he rode me on his back
Dipping and rising to his plod. 
I wanted to grow up and plough,
To close one eye, stiffen my arm.
All I ever did was follow
In his broad shadow round the farm. 
I was a nuisance, tripping, falling,
Yapping always. But today
It is my father who keeps stumbling
Behind me, and will not go away


^^EOP^^




I Archipelagoes



At the end of this sentence, rain will begin.
At the rain's edge, a sail. 
Slowly the sail will lose sight of islands;
into a mist will go the belief in harbours
of an entire race. 
The ten-years war is finished.
Helen's hair, a grey cloud.
Troy, a white ashpit
by the drizzling sea. 
The drizzle tightens like the strings of a harp.
A man with clouded eyes picks up the rain
and plucks the first line of the Odyssey.
 


^^EOP^^

Tonight at dusk we linger by the fence
around the garden, watching the wound husks
of moonflowers unclench themselves slowly,
almost too slow for us to see their moving—
you notice only when you look away
and back, until the bloom decides,
or seems to decide, the tease is over,
and throws its petals backward like a sail
in wind, a suddenness about this as though
it screams, almost the way a newborn screams
at pain and want and cold, and I still hear
that cry in the shout across the garden
to say another flower is about to break.
I go to where my daughter stands, flowers
strung along the vine like Christmas lights,
one not yet lit. We praise the world by making
others see what we see. So now she points and feels
what must be pride when the bloom unlocks itself
from itself. And then she turns to look at me.


^^EOP^^

I ran across the street, I didn’t know any better.
Ran out in the street, I didn’t know no better.
I just knew a woman was there, though I’d never met her. 
She sat me in her parlor, distracted me with trinkets,
milky glass birds and fish, distracting trinkets.
She said my mother would be fine, but did she think it? 
The world was a blur of crystal wings and fins.
My tears were casked in crystal, wings and fins.
She was the first of many lady-friends. 
The tree shadows shortened, she brought me a drink of water.
Morning matured, she brought me a glass of water.
I drank it so fast, she went and brought another. 
I kept looking out the window, she didn’t ask me what for.
I watched out that window, she didn’t ask what for.
The seconds broke off and lay there on the floor. 
I imagined my mother’s route, as far as I could.
Her long morning walk, followed as far as I could.
Nothing I could do would do any good. 
Suffer the little children, and forbid them not.
Christ said suffer the little children, and forbid them not.
Said love thy neighbor, sometimes she’s all you got.


^^EOP^^

That’s a good one, the idea of the moon having a stem and somehow
stealing you, whoever you are, kind of like Persephone or Orpheus,
portrayed or alluded to in countless forms of art and popular culture
including poetry, film, opera, music, and painting. And it kind of fits
my mood this morning, something vaguely cartoonish and devoid
of real gravitas, but still, a kind of realism, even so. And the area
around is the void, outer space, nothing, because explaining things
is never as interesting as wanting them, the desire to know, set against
a backdrop of black velvet and rhinestones. Let’s say that you wake up
one day and realize you don’t remember anything that happened
yesterday. Maybe for five minutes or so. And for those five minutes
you’re thinking, as I was thinking this morning, that this is it. Car keys.
The word for when you really want something and work for it.
Your dog’s name. There are not enough blank pages for all this
forgetting, like debris falling back to earth, you and yours hiding in
the underbrush with hopes of your own, of rescue or escape.
When you don’t remember why you’re hiding in the underbrush,
you’ve been hiding in the underbrush forever. This whole other
existence leaps forward in possibility. And then the five minutes
are up, and it’s oh yeah, eggs, Saturday. Some day that was.
A chemist once told me luminol was her favorite color. It glows
a beautiful greenish-blue when it comes into contact with blood
by reacting to the iron in hemoglobin, looking a bit like the sky
this morning. It’s a kind of truth of blue, that uncovers, that
remembers. It’s used by investigators to detect blood at crime scenes
where no blood is visible. There are so many things to forget,
to lose, and in so many different ways. But even so, one can be wrong
about the past, and deduce from error, but still be right about
the future or the present. And when you don’t remember what day
it is, happy birthday. Despite all our best efforts, there’s a wolf
on the horizon making a movie of your approach, and it’s
a shipwreck playing across me as I’m pouring sugar into my cup.


^^EOP^^

Dark corridors, crammed bedrooms, stairs that smell
of cigarette smoke and impermanence.
Long days of waiting. Ringing of the bell 
that calls us to our dinner. Shillings and pence
that fill the hand. The wallpaper. The pulse
of other people’s half-heard arguments. 
The landlord’s dog. Interminable phone calls
in the lobby. Someone is falling apart,
another’s longing to be somewhere else. 
You hold on to the street map of your heart
and make yourself at home. You’re here at last,
whatever “here” now means. Now you can start 
your childhood again, the world a mythic past
you’ll wander into by mistake, the joys
of lost performance with a vanished cast 
of now-imagined names that other boys
might whisper just to put you in a spin.
It is another language that deploys 
the tottering edifice that you live in.
Strangers will come and go, are gone for good.
The bedrooms empty. Here is a new skin 
for you to wear in the enchanted wood.


^^EOP^^

She wanted to taste the fire inside the corn,
cried over photographs of other people’s cakes. 
Once she punched a cake. Those memories
surface often, like a flood of bus stop pigeons. 
She hoped to meet an owl before she died,
did nothing at all to further this agenda item 
other than looking up. Curious about clocks,
she asked a lot of questions regarding their guts. 
Was there an ocean inside them, for example?
How did the first craftsman know where to lodge 
the quiet snore of gears? She asked for holy
water to be distilled down into an adhesive seal 
that might ride the forehead all week long
the same way she tumbled her bike into hollows 
and ravines regardless of weather. Little reek
of the river which was mostly things left behind. 
Once she bit a tree. It was softer than expected.
The blossoms remained unchanged or fell like hail.


^^EOP^^

My grandmother was born in a city called [宜兰] 
Despite its name, no orchids grow there 
Five of my six aunts have names ending in [兰] 
My mother’s full name is [little wind] 
Orchid seeds are distributed by land, water & wind 
One of my aunts drowned in a river I invented from rain 
One of my aunts thinks skydiving is a synonym for when it rains 
the other way 
One of my aunts faked her visa & went to the vet once 
thinking it was the doctor 
she asks me how come dogs here have doctors 
I say because dogs here are domesticated 
the opposite of domestic is alien the opposite of flower 
is fist the opposite of purple is pray 
orchid comes from the Greek word meaning [testicle] 
Greek women believed eating orchids made their unborn 
babies boys 
for a son, my mother creamed her toes suckled coals liquefied flies fucked on full moon 
days flossed with a dagger darkened her bathwater ashed her cheekbones torched her crotch 
candied the blood boiled it with sugar & still 
she wept when she saw my face 
filmed it with her fingers 
weeded out my eyes & witched them into rivers 
my grandfather farmed orchids in a city named thirst 
when the war came, he pissed on his field 
to keep the orchids alive, he spent all his body’s water 
his organs dehydrated into stones I skip across sea-mirrors 
flowers bruise in the wind & weaponless 
crimes are called births 
water perpetrates want 
the army unburied our bodies in a field of salty orchids 
everyone in my family resembles a river’s 
rag-dolled neck 
in photos our faces overlap like venn diagrams of grief 
there is a breed of orchid called the ghost orchid & another breed called the blood orchid 
one is fictional & the other is edible & the other 
night I vased my throat like a stem & did not think of extinct species 
decades later reappearing like the lungfish 
one of the original fish that left the sea for land 
all migrations begin as mothers as mimicry 
a fish saw a tree & decided to stand 
without feet my brother says orchids 
look like pussies smell like 
pussies too he says I should know 
I do know I know the color of thirst 
is not salt but cylinder but a city leased to fire 
to architect the ash into an alibi 
my wife’s spit is my river is my silver 
bullet thirst 
is the mouth’s unit of memory memory 
begins in me like a bone 
to breed its breaks


^^EOP^^

Everything we do and say in patriarchy can be traced
back to “Strangers in the Night.” Your faded jeans, my
faint daytime smile. (Dazzling’s so expensive.) Bad
Mailer novels; lose-money-quick schemes. A fortune in
friendship, nevertheless. Beef farmers favor self-flesh
awareness. (Or brittle in toffee queen regimes.) Thoughts
as feats of strength. The figure in the woodpile as a
white snake, two needle bites. The end of the week, of
us, strangers now or not? I’m dressed in white, I am the
right blonde in the wrong seaplane, I haven’t learnt the 
language yet. The meta-leopards will have taken over
the aquarium. They’ll stroll this way like kangaroos to
green glass. Papa, I’ve upset you. There’ll be a line of
songs like crystals lining up to kiss the bell that says Big
Town. We are on the roof now, playing to Central Park
everyone hot in their coats. Paid for not stolen. They
admit to being too late for miracles, for charity. The
poem’s parents are in the front row. The poem’s friend
interprets. Can we repeat it without going back to the
start, the lover’s demand like ants beneath the plaint? 
In Eden, in Athens, estrangement flowers. We turn and
return. Is it love itself, beckoning from the lurid grass-
lands? There’s a cuteness to plaster’s novelty hiding of
the body. People are cited in the mouth, stand on the
ground. They fly like Lucy. You can deny it all for fun
and parties, as if the mind was the feeling that input
gives. It’s a power no one likes to admit, as it so often
leads to failure in later life, like living in a swimming
pool, or losing your tongue in the mail. What of
romances with characters from books? Alice says hello 
I remind her of a cookie in a dream she had of heaven or
hell—but which was it? Everything that happens in the
world has someone to say it’s their fault, repress it as
they may. The cutout in the cocktail bar wants to go
home with someone for once. The snakeskin hangs on
the gate like it’s a street corner, that each uttered “baby”
renews. Knowing can be a means to forgetting, also
We stand there as if the floor or wall is our companion
our fortress in trouble: mates a bit longer, keeping sex at
bay. Not everyone looks where they’re going or cares 
where others are. They’re the rugged ones, though fleet
as moths when crossing a highway. Sometimes, despite
our own egos, we admire this, as if wise that the pattern
of the one ahead won’t ultimately save or brave us
Don’t rush. The star we wake to mightn’t always be
there, so we wander outside as if air were itself a prayer
or someone’s. Is that for me? addressing an ivy or a wet
plank, suddenly hungry. Tell me what happened to Peter
and Wendy and the loser with the hook for a hand. Was
it all alright in the end? They say time is nothing but it 
takes the saying to make it so. To be the one is to
vanquish Sinatra, but also life (not that life is patriarchy)
Repress the possibility for the sake of staying young, as
around the bend a boat may contain the set of problems
that will have always been around. Attitudes to dancing
housework, contraception, ever music’s themes. A wall-
flower may remind themselves of wallpaper, peeling to
reveal a peasant who goes to sleep at dusk behind their
tux, but does that haunt you more than the possibility
of possessing truth? Is that what your glances are about?


^^EOP^^

Watch for them. Faint as aspen, peeled as birch,
walking the edge of the field raw. Any minute now, 
you should start to see remote women flickering in the distance,
their smiles more flickering inside the flickering. 
It isn’t hard to find them, but once you do, don’t believe them. 
Confessing is just a big part of their drama. 
Don’t we all know someone pale and drawn out from coming back  so many times,
someone worn thin from having to turn into the thread that turns into the rope
that turns into the river that leads her out of the fire she may have started? 
It was supposed to be fragrant
and perennial like blossoming.
Their returning. 
It was supposed to be copious and make you reach
for a wide jug hoping to catch it all. 
Come back, that’s what these women do. 
They climb out of oval frames hung on walls.
They use any open page as a little ladder.


^^EOP^^




For Steve



                         Remember when we almost drowned in ’03, the woods
            so thick we only knew the rainstorm by sound of thunder
and violence of the creek, how every day I’d take you to the Stop-N-Go 
                         for your case of Natty Lights? Think back to summertime,
            when after lunch you’d pull your shirt off and wring it in your hands
and count off one beer, wring some more, two beers, how in July you’d sweat 
                         all the way through last night’s binge. Think back to when
            we chopped paths across hardwood bottoms for skidders to plow
makeshift roads for Justiss Oil pumpjacks to suck black snot the earth 
                         doesn’t blow. I wanted to call in sick every day, to feel
            the sunrise through my bedroom pane instead of the company truck’s
windshield. But this isn’t about that. What was I? Eighteen? Drinking 
                         creamy coffee the color of soupy dishwater, the callouses
            of my hands sanding the white Styrofoam cup, whiskey from a flask
stirred into yours. I grew to welcome the start of a day filing blades, the rhythm 
                         I’d find scraping down, down, up and over. I didn’t care
            like you did for squaring drill sites with double-knots of orange flagging
for the loggers, how we kneeled, panting in the dirt, how you would pan your head 
                          to take inventory of the beech and white oaks rooted inside
            the flagged-off square. I don’t know what it mattered, Steve,
which tree we marked for loggers to fell, which sapling we ourselves chopped 
                         with machetes. Did the thicket not return what we gave?
            Did the thorn limbs and briars not cut your flesh into estuaries
of brackish pink creeks of sweat and blood? Nothing changes much, 
                         does it, Steve? I’m filing a brush hook’s edge for the first time
            in years and still hear you yelling at me, Not like that, Smith. Just give
that damn thing to me.

^^EOP^^




That [science] which treats of those conditions of knowledge which lie in the nature, not of thought itself, but of that which we think about ... has been called ... Architectonic, in so far as it treats of the method of building up our observations into system.
—Sir William Hamilton
... one of which systems is a poem.



1. what the chicago window was for 
mainly light. 
      the supporting function
on the sides      opens to let in
      air.      the proportion
wall to door   dependent on heat. 
      repeated upward
into cold      wind
      around the columns
and garland
      sky high   reflections off the face of their 
investment   the blueprint raises money longer
      hours   profit piles up 
the american beauty    of  work   yourself
      to death to look out on.   2. otis 
railroad architecture ran elevators
off the ground to get weight it needed up
like people off land to get over      then
an elevator railroad floated architecture
up floors open as plains to the sky
through walls into rooms coupled like cars
to each other without a climb
hallway distances like vistas through
zigzag mountain valleys as work’s landscape
the first time since walking sheep in the cloud
meadows far away from the later smoke
the elevators laid more meadow out
than the mountain had basis for
its little square created acreage out of air.  
more than the fiery iron horse   the hidden
legged spider wove worlds more tightly into
her realm of feeding upon   more needed
immediately   she trained her fare
into catching her by waiting for her to swallow
the fat rides she needed to keep her moving.
and moving faster with no feeling
of movement   she has architecture anesthetized
to no other way   as long as there is up
it will feed her with it.
she has learned
how to go streetwise   through airports
she tells you when
the moving walkway is ending.   3. 
the rookery
was built out of birds
which were actually
individual flames 
not really
birds with fiery plumage
they stood out against
the masonry of black smoke 
all that survived the fire.   I have
that x-periential thing about fire that makes me crazy
at even the thought of it   I  x.
so the idea of the city 
having only this place for birds to land after
took me a long time to visit.  
the difference between locate    identify know something about   and visit re-experience   identify with         is
in if   the roosts that become return   call back a sky 
unclear how much what’s left
tells that much
about what has been lost   enough
to nest its shard against which tomorrow lies best 
living its death until death is shown the lie
it lives into life.   it stirs
nothing suddenly.   more the politicking of birds
found a place to buy 
and sell    the audacity
to have survived.   as the architectonic of a city.   4. any programmable hall 
crown hall is a lyric
miniature of bridge
el and street-stacking
engineering. 
railroad
building   to art song.
the base   work. the columns
of profit.   and a capital. 
the vast empty spaces
re-created
inside are potential.
what ended frankenstein   always waiting 
to be given life   it already has.
any programmable hall   a machine.  
but these are new life
designing already
itself      piece
by piece      cell 
to embody   back maybe even
the species that crashed
into the vast invisible window
walls   in their migrations. 
the artificial intelligence of walls
in the first place   that beheld us in
to our cathedral
now   to other worlds 
out of the darkness.   the light
the open.   in their way   the intelligence.   5. against all that square straight up 
the hancock leans away in all
      faced direction from you
to the side   up ahead
      the darkness so strictly structured
it erupts in a gusher of sky   pure
      american   brought in 
against all that square straight up
      drill   out on the plain of it    all x-ed out
into simple
      optimistic shift of dimension. 
all tapering has its vanishing point.
      infinity its asymptote.
any two lines converging downtown has
      its hancock   its lift off      michigan avenue. pyramid   6. the aqua 
only underneath
the water from the street
can you see up 
the moss hanging floors
of the waterfall cliff
orchids of light
off the ledge balconies 
the re-vegetation
of the canyon
the re-visualization of our spaces
from our animal 
need to be curious about what’s around
our corners not just
that they square.  
the walls of wave canyons
beneath the southwest   wash out up here
with clear views divest of the ground
to dust   of much that has lifted them to where 
they can see
is runoff.
a drainage of romanoff
richness in its dissolution   of geography. 
the appalachian humps—
bodies bedded the long house
state to horizon    the smokies roused
from the valleys by the updrafts’ bump 
you to look up into
a landscape from a bird up   turned view.   7. 860-880 lake shore drive 
we were discussing how devoid of everything—
it was
             she was listening to our conversation
she said   she had lived in one
of his residences   and it was calmly scary  
how the building almost wasn’t there
yet everything you needed was
within reach
                      the way she went
at things was the way it was
already it was like there
were no walls
                           which made it feel
really spacious   she was never in a place
that fit her so every
where she turned was where
she wanted
it directed her in
that it didn’t 
everything was there
everything else was out of her way
it was as if he refused
to build in the way   anything ever again.   it was almost insane.
                                                                                                             
 
                               ( lake point )
rippley mies
van der rohe licorice
melting      farthest out 
into the lake
walls waving around
like a curtain   a sail
of window 
melting into solid wind
lotte lenya singing brecht
the remembered ship 
against which the rational was not a defense.
which loaded his tools.
nothing but the existence of line
left   not even a rule.   the pencil   the point wavering   8. marina 
pie in the sky with petal
pinched crust   stacked high
above its park of delivering vehicles
on the river   a pie boat too 
can cut in   (there’s a marina) home
to pinecone peel down balcony
symmetry fun for tie up
and sing dock of the day   as it. 
this city doesn’t hold back
bay manners up   nor not
talk straight    it does look like
a corncob.   a celestial gate   from here 
a bean.   cakes
of ice   with faces on them. us.   a fountain.  
the base.   the column.
of river   wheels   roof
over your head with food
and amenities layered in 
between
your work all day and immediate
need to sit down   without traffic
stacked up in one convenient 
location   residents willing to pay
for required.   freedom
of imagination   insight   into freedom—
the capital.      let’s say 
to try anything once
but more deeply   freedom from fear   of response.   9. the drawbridge houses 
the boats go by
the drawer
bridge pants’ flies
go up 
the river
like the moaners’ bench
of fifteen-year-old boys when
the girls go by. 
think how heavy the weight
that balancing   lifts
to let the delicately lilting
sails like skirts through   and the traffic 
back across
if it were in your pants to toss  
up or down.   the massive
concrete counterweights like balls.
streets go up   at the helens
navigating the obstructions    some 
not come down   except at some castrating
war of recollection      a reconnection.
think of the engineering
of the open and close   as of arms. 
who houses in the palaces of these gates.
what counter power holds place
on the bank of this flood
this flowing and crossing of desires? 
the palaces   balance’s hub
a dowry to house the form   of the beloved.   11. di chirico chapel 
a Franz Kline ceiling painting on
the tunnel vault of a building
which incorporated its partial collapse
from a bombing   the black paint swaths
beside the open to the night sky
the stars
the outdated old style of stars
lit the chamber pale
a standing shadow fell across the floor
through a small open door slanted off the wall
the no one there stood outside any light to block
her hoop balanced
on its own shadow not rolling   still
a dress model of its architecture rose   off the air.   12. the mecca 
this isn’t there
anymore   something famous 
is built over
it    that has nothing 
to do with it    or for
now 
as public
housing went up and 
torn down
too to defeat 
.
. 
.
.   13. 
robie house mock  horizon sub  urb laying down   
its give up retreat from the city   back into
the low against the ground   against the high
of skyscrapers      re-carpeted the nation outside. 
but is back now to reclaim
the collapsed properties   it let go grow
weed to re-gentry
heedless of tearing up whose rooms   back into profit. 
the however   here
police drawn blood on their doors   have lived
dangerous and can paint it angel mad    sign again 
anytime   if flipping back and forth for gain
were to spread too far   the spread could find their
horizontal shrunk to their floated upper floor.   14. shedd aquarium  Arapaima gigas   third
most ancient species   my totem fish
made so from the fact it targeted me
to eat.      six feet of it attacked me 
when forgetting protocol
I slipped my legs into its tank without
warning
it    I was feeding not food   it mauled 
my toe it thinking it a goldfish which
was usually how I announced service. 
The Shedd’s A. specimen is the oldest living
in the country   so old its heavy tail
dragged down its spine into that hump of the frail.
This might be the last time we meet.  
Some sheds you walk into with experience
of a specific song to reclaim.
I couldn’t see the building for checking first
the clarity of the tanks’ water   the name 
plates above the windows   how well
the shit was cleaned off the bottom   and if it came
there was nothing in a tank at all   having
eaten itself—      this first fame 
is what was always held up to the staff
for us to surpass.     and here I was   degrees
and jobs later   still holding it up
for inspection.   it is 
a beautiful building we have built
together this life    arapaima      gigas. huge thanks.


^^EOP^^

I won’t explain. My aunts spell
                                                                                 around the vanity mirror
& centerpiece me, my lips plummed,
                                                        my neck belled mid-flight. 
                 After the food’s uncooked, the heirloom paring knife
stitched up the bell peppers & dark meat,
                                                                    after the fiddle leaves
                             left their fiddles, the porch undressed of wasps & us
our old names—
                                          right here. As if even the evening
           didn’t let on. No parking lot, no gas stations. A scythe
of emptied prisons shudder
                                                       alongside the highway; bougainvillea
& gun oil in the sheets. All my cousins slow-dancing
                              in their cowboy boots & antlers. 
                                          My mothers singing to the dogwood tree
             blooming black across my arm. 
Your hand finally on the small of my back, without any kind of fear. 
This time, I’ll be a girl & you can be anything
alive. Take the rope off your wrists.
                                                      Somewhere far away from here,
               a star’s unspooling its star-white curtain. 
                                          What happens if we begin already angels?
Press your ears to my wingspan. Hum a little. 
We are the most possible kind of daughterhood.
                                                                                    I promise. 
Step into the light.
            Let me see the mark our rapture left behind.


^^EOP^^




In ASL gloss and English



                    
                    1
 
Morning wind-wind-everywhere
Water mouth-dry-mouth-dry finish
G-a-z-e-l-l-e-s gazelles
Hooves s-e-e-d-s there stuck.

Gazelles trot-trot
Hooves s-e-e-d-s fall-away
Grass meld-pillow protect.

Feel eyes-eyes-look-search hunger
Sense ready
Fingersnaps gazelle p-r-o-n-k how:

Legs-stiffen leap-straight-up
Back-shoulders-drop
Tail-up drop head-up drop p-r-o-n-k that.

Gazelles-pronk-pronk
Look-like eye-shimmer, eye-shimmer
Body-shimmer kill can’t.
From the winds that scheme to dry
every drop of moisture at dawn, they gather
seeds, lodged between their hooves.


Everywhere they trot, they leave behind
seeds, hoping that their grass-blades
will knife the knolls into pillows

when they sense other eyes prowling
for a kill. Then they shoot straight up,
their legs stiff with hiding quivers,

their backs arch upward, bridging
their shoulders and tails hanging limp,
as they drop their heads straight down,

their bodies shimmering like mirages
punching everyone’s eyes out.
They are too vibrant for slaughter.
 
 

2
 
 

Night pop-up stories shh
Stories stay no-no
Stories winds-blow-away
Secrets cherish-cherish.

Gazelles smell-smell lie-lie finish
Men hunters mind-dumb do-do
P-i-s-s here there over there
Gazelles smell-smell avoid finish.

Experience-experience happen-happen
Stories body-inspire
Moon eyes shine think-hide rifle
Gazelles catch-catch finish.

Hunters jaw-drop gazelles group
Move-together cloud-move-together
D-u-s-t rise avoid death.

Tend happen what
Hunters watch nights
Gazelles stand-stand tail-twitch-twitch
Hope land somewhere safe.
 

At night stories tiptoe with them.
No one ever records them. Not even the winds.
They are small, but secrets nurture them.


Their noses have learned the scent of lies.
Hunters keep marking their hiding places
with their piss. The gazelles case their borders.


They see things that inspire legends.
The glint of moon in black eyes staring at them
from the bush, calculating whether to shoot.


The stunned cackle of teeth when gazelles sail
en masse over clouds of dust, cracks of heat,
our bodies snapping the neck of death.

But most of the time they simply watch.
Their limbs, dexterous and inured to danger,
twitch dreams of unmarked countries.
 

 
 

3
 
C-h-e-e-t-a-h gazelles watch know-inside-out
Gazelles mother show legs-zigzag
Time surprise laughter-catch.

Leaves delicious gazelles attract eat
Eyes-open-look-that-way flicker
Gazelle-tails-perk-up-all
Mind-telepathy c-a-t finish.

Fingersnaps gazelles-scatter-from-center
Leave-behind smell-smell poop
Flies-flies-buzz c-h-e-e-t-a-h finish.

Gazelles-gallop escape
Cheetah-eyes-stay-same run-run-after
Gazelles-zigzag-sideways.

Hair-bare-escape
Cheetah-teeth cheetah-claw
Gazelles-zigzag fast, slow
Cheetah-trip-trip
Gazelles-proud-pronk-pronk.
 

Gazelles know all about cheetahs.
They’ve learned from their mothers
the art of zigzagging, the power of surprise.

Leaves of succulence bid them closer. Distant
flicker of shadow, spots, ringed tail alerts them.
Their breaths murmur the scent of cat, now.


They scatter: a crater of half-chewed leaves,
dung, and flies flailing in his lightning wind
thundering from behind the scruffy bush.

They coagulate like veins galloping from his heart
of hunger, those cold eyes of cat sleeking speed,
until they twist abruptly, sideways, their necks

barely whisking the nick of his fangs and claw.
Changing tempo and direction, their hooves are staccato
music driving him to exhaustion. They pronk.
 


^^EOP^^

There’s nothing dandier than threadbare threads
worn by a discerning shabby dresser.
A collar’s fret or subtle fray is not lesser
because it’s worn away but models instead 
the bespoke tailoring of time itself.
Done poorly—the gentleman farmer’s
piecemeal pastoral, that NoHo charmer’s
duct-taped boots—it’s like an unread bookshelf 
of secondhand prose: a too-studied pose.
Done well, it draws you in to draw you near,
reveals the intricate pattern in the years’
inexorable ravel. Between decompose 
and deconstruct, what seemed a foppish quirk
grows wise. Design undone. We wear time’s work.


^^EOP^^

Paradise with a thousand stings, she replies.
Deep blue and blazing sky. Incessant cicadas,
scuttle of bug and roach. Fleas, mosquitos,
the threat of scorpions. Men leaning on doorposts,
crowding the bar. Smoking, drinking,
laughing descendants of slaves. Fire coral burns,
reef-edge barracudas. Truly lovely.
Matriarchal, she says, women with eight children
by many different men. The men would leave
as the spirit took them. I want
to know all the forces one can call spirit.
Tall, swaying fronds of the sugar cane fields.
Distant roar heralding a downpour. Snapping turtles.
Nearby shanty town, she says,
streets full of rubbish, rats in the gutter.
I admired the colonial-style homes, she says.
Colonial, I say.
Separate servant quarters and grounds
filled with samaan trees, the balconies overflowing
with hot-colored orchids and the locusts drawn close
by the palatial lights, colorful and clawing,
their hooks sunk deep into the bare skin of a sweating back.


^^EOP^^

his voice not so much hypnotic as reaching for the hypnotic 
but I leave it anyway sitting in the upright chair
of the windowless room 
for a place higher up that’s not quite
the windowless room— 
though I’m aware of my body’s particular kind
of breathing down there 
dressed in my favorite shirt and somehow
up here I’m dressed 
in that same shirt which is I feel suddenly
becoming very important 
its color pertaining to a quiet hue of knowing
I can’t quite explain 
and I do not think about the money I have
given him the man who is speaking 
but I’m looking instead down on a yellow
kitchen in Swindon 
upon a tiny remembered body I have found
crying or about to cry 
in little white shorts and there is carpet
streaked with blue 
and there is the noise of a terrible thing
that is happening 
and there is summer outside with its
other children 
“He doesn’t understand does he”
says the man 
“he is so young” and I understand the shirt
that he will have to grow through 
all of the terrible things to fit
I can feel my body now 
filling up the space inside its soft and
lavender-scented cotton


^^EOP^^

[byline]
northern triangle—First, I lived near mud, there, I carved some things. Then, I found a well, yo soy un bicho migrante. I had to climb trees, find mollusks, made a knife to eat them raw. Later, later-later, I worried about firewood, pots to cook. I asked ¿Where did my parents go? ¿Where? ¿There? I walked to another tree, another shore ... ¿Where are they now? I carved more: my face, my parents’, an alligator’s, yo soy un bicho migrante. ¡But no! I got tired of waiting, of playing, I wanted to see more. I found a river, found a road. Found more like me, a bunch of us waiting for more of us to flee. A tribe. A small village, yo soy un bicho migrante. I saw there were rules, clothes kept dry in plastic bags, phone numbers written inside pants. They also made fire, carved things into the mud. Asked ¿De donde sos vos? I pointed: de allá. Said I didn’t have plans. They answered, ¡Bienvenido! Tapped their feet on the dirt, yo soy un bicho migrante. We walked on the road, then along the road looking for food. Through the forest, through the mountains, we looked for mud, for frogs, for—¡There! ¡There they are! We played our favorite game, until I got bored again. Yo soy un bicho migrante. Nights are boring. Fireflies ... boring. Stars, the moon ... Well ... I began to let myself think ... babosadas came to mind: countries, passports. Then, I walked away from everyone, got to a mountain, then another one. Got to a river where I saw rats. ¿Have you seen the tribe? ¿A savage bunch that makes fires from trash? In a hurry they chased after me. I ran north. Found a few others. Or, maybe it was just me. To eat you have to believe, they said. Handed me something in the dark. Yo soy un bicho migrante. Saw pizza in the dark, hamburgers, clouds maybe. Maybe clouds. I saw fireflies. Few days had passed. I felt like an empty road. I invented machines. Planes. Fast cars. I barely had time to learn their names. I barely had time to say goodbye. Yo soy un bicho migrante. Years later, I filled forms. Wrote my name & woke up in a bed that had traveled 56 days, 56 nights. Then, came an election. War. Kids kept coming, but I had to find work. Wrote so many books my hands got tired. Made alternatives for plastic. Someone separated people into groups. Trees were cut extinct. But I destroyed fences, jailed kings, invented a replacement for countries. We searched for  purpose. Happiness. ¡Anyone could travel anywhere! We learned new languages. I had looked through the window I wasn’t supposed to. Yes, I looked. ¿What can I say? So I could be certain I looked & broke through. Yo soy un bicho migrante. But maybe, just maybe, I’ll return to that well & begin carving mud again. I’ll carve the whole world backwards. But no. Maybe not. Migrating has no beginning. No purpose. Yo solo soy uno de muchos bichos migrantes.
 


^^EOP^^

[byline]
ocotepeque, h.n.—I was born in a little town. This was not very long ago. I think I was four five years old. Parents let me do whatever: I looked up at the sun, I loved the sun, it burned a dot in my eyes. Mom was saying we must go catch the bus soon, instead I grabbed a piece of wood & etched it. Sucked it like my own thumb to learn something no one else had. Don’t judge my face. Girls like me. Boys like me with my long hair, I relish it. I love my father very much. More than anybody. He stayed. One morning I come home. He isn’t there. Down the road, this crowd. I drive the crowd away. This is my father, I say. Ask them this thing they allow: his body given to me. I dissect it. Anatomy, my father taught me.


^^EOP^^

[byline]
la herradura, s.v.—¿Do I have a mother? Have her pinkie in my hand crossing the street? Have her breath on my hair as she sings arru-rru mi niño to sleep. ¿Don’t you mean where? ¿What was your question? I’m older. Think more about memory. It makes me crazy. Obsessed. Her warm breasts on my belly as she knelt to tell me todo va estar bien. I’ll never see her again was the fear as if she’s gone, died, will never come back. I whispered it hidden in banana groves looking at the sky hoping one of those planes would take me to wherever she had left to. Whenever Mom hung the clothes to dry, not a cloud in the sky. I could see her sandals picking up dust. For a second. For a second I believe she’s back. It went like that every day. Every single night.  I’ll never see her again. But then, I did. Her face. Her hair. She was the same. So much had changed. I do not remember  what it was I truly felt.


^^EOP^^

what she told me. What I honor. They, as unambiguous as Lyrae is:
black, bard, badass; svelte with flourishing braids; a singularity and 
somehow all of them gathered as one like tributaries to the mouth of
the river of God—Gwendolyn and Lucille and June and—and I can’t 
count all the ways I was saved that day, emerging wet from the ritual
to find myself sitting in some stranger’s living room, a writer who’d 
been pushed out of their homeland by its persecutions, pulled into
America on the promise of asylum, the same America that commits 
my own kind to institutions with routine and rarely second thoughts
signaling the presence of conscience, and while we’re on the subject 
of right and wrong, know I’d read the news recently and retreated far
into my unfeeling before I received the blessing of her timely word, 
walking in bloody boots through hallways leading to the chambers
where tenderness is said to rest in all of us by symbology, but then 
I was called outside my bones again. And let me tell you, my friend:
you’ve never seen light before you’ve seen it. I swear, it’s as if with 
the snap of a finger I could recite the very definition of gold without
needing to run yolk from the promise of a child, a happy day’s glow 
spilling into the street like July’s laughter from a fire hydrant as we
left the house with folk who loved words and loved us—loved us— 
so expansively. And less than two nights later we’re all throwing our
asses in a circle, cuttin’ up, working up what was an effortless sweat, 
undeterred even as the music skipped on every hiccup of the fraying
wires, tethered just as strenuously to joy as ever, like always, trying 
to catch a good breath, but I paid it no mind, no mind, no mind—no,
I wasn’t absent upstairs exactly, I was hyper-present; what a ghost is 
to death I was to life, inside everything simultaneously—the sub and
the synth, the blown-off roof and hole-stomped floor, the rise of 
their chests and the fall—and only nigga returned me to this plane: my nigga, my nigga, a lyric left on my bottom lip like the sweet after- 
burn of Hennessy, but yo, it’s like I was being called for, called out
of need since I know that word only has such resonance in a world 
where we ain’t free. And, nah, we ain’t free, if you were wondering.
There are no shackles on me your eyes can see but none that I can’t 
feel as if they were appendages divided from me by the occurrence
of civil war, a set of chimeless chains that could be yanked on and 
bring me, even at my most upright, to my knees. And if it happens—
again—I suppose I could pray, there, at my literally lowest moment, 
immersed in the mess they’ve made that I’m tasked with cleaning
up for the commendation of pennies. I hope I don’t get shot while 
genuflect since that’s apparently a thing now in this country, but I
worry such a selfish ask won’t have sufficient fuel to reach heaven, 
that the bastardized sparrow will burn up in the atmosphere as easily
as tissue paper. And I recognize I’m rambling now, but I’m likewise 
increasing my odds of bumping into the point of all this since inside
the milk of me something was stirred by what she said, but it’s hard 
to translate a muscular language to a verbal one just as it’s hard to
relate to folk who don’t consider their own demise fifty ’leven times 
a day at least, and for that relapse not to be an injurious ideation but
an itch of practicality. What I wouldn’t pay for the chance to not pay 
attention to every little thing—how they talk near me and how they
talk when they believe I’m nowhere near, what they do or don’t do 
with each other that they do or don’t do with me, the questions they
feel quite content to ask me and the ones they never seem to though 
I leave the door open, the window, the bleeding heart. I know them
so well, people who wouldn’t know me from the next in the lineup; 
I know them so intimately you’d think I love them all, and the gag is
that I do, by some undesired miracle, and that is part of all this, too. 
To say they don’t deserve my time is an obvious statement, but they
take it anyway because it’s all they know, evident as I recount every 
transgression taking seconds off my time on this earth, summing up
to years, almost to the point I’m gone already, in response to which 
I either swallow spit or spit out ellipses. Ask the wounded wall what
I know of restraint, the manifesto I’d pen with what pours out from 
my punctured knuckles, though, perhaps, the poet was signaling that,
all along, I’ve been teaching the most important life lesson merely by 
domesticating rage, confining it inside the margins of the flesh that
my parents made for me, the page my life is written against each day 
in corrective red ink. And this seems like the appropriate moment
to divulge that her sermon came during a dialogue about poetic craft 
of all things, but if poetry can’t be applied to how one moves through
this world then I see very little worth in it, which is where it started 
for me. Poetry was a dead white thing in my life once, at the bottom
of the trash can with the doll of Jesus they’d tried pawning off on me 
back in Catholic school, but luckily I already knew one for us, by us,
and thus found the inner-strength to soldier through the barren winter 
of lyrical delight rocking a pair of big-ass Timberlands and other on-
trend threads a person of greater gravitas could’ve filled out better 
around the shoulders. But I digress—since what I really mean to be
speaking on is how the Cavalier poets weren’t really doing it for me 
during high school, not because their explicit sexuality or their taste
for material excess and ambitious proximity to the throne were such 
disagreeable subjects to me, at the time revisiting rap’s mafioso era,
but because when we painted those same pictures as we preferred to, 
our tongues spiraling like ballerinas and bullets, they sought the ban
on sale or talked down on it as being absent of any artistic merit, as if 
a nation’s worth of people surviving subjugation is more science than
art anyway, for if that were true, then we wouldn’t have a culture and 
America wouldn’t have great product to push to the rest of the planet
aside from all the bombs it seems much keener on dropping casually 
like Funkmaster Flex, and I’d already grown tired in my young age,
so tired, of trying to prove I’m not stupid even above trying to prove 
I’m smart. And those who doubt there’s a difference have digging
to do, deep into their pockets to get me what I’m owed for damages, 
for emotional distress and all things it’s been made feasible to sue for
with solid legal representation. Funny, I once longed to be a lawyer, 
little fool that I was, my back against a brick wall painted by spotlight,
rifles lined and aiming, in that night’s vision—legal fluency seemed 
the only option for release from this burden because it’s the language
my nemeses speak in. I do know bad English from black, but I know 
power even better because I’ve brushed up against it just as a person
in any number of neighborhoods around here may have brushed up 
against a police officer. Maybe it’s needless to say I didn’t go down
an attorney path; I actually don’t have a plan at all these days except 
evading the bullet and also the bullet points corporations thrive on,
as if any of this is simple, as if I, symptom of systemic dysfunctions 
enveloped by skeleton and skin, am something simple. I’d only ever
be two-dimensional if airbrushed on a blank T-shirt and even that 
would show depth to someone’s esteem for who I was with no one
else nearby, and all this means is that there is more to me or anyone 
alike than being menace or miscreant, minstrel or misanthrope, or
murdered as all four would be with equal fanfare. But what I really 
want is to know what they feel when their black friend dies in that
typical way for it’s maybe the only thing I don’t know about them, 
while we practice poker faces and draft FAQs. Forget seeing eye to
eye for a second. Set aside the particular grammars of forgiveness 
we use without pulling up the problem’s root: do they still feel full
people if they put the hammer down? And when they can’t answer, 
make note that I can because I have those tools and also others that
shall remain nameless in order to remain purposeful. That’s how I 
prefer it, besting all desertions of their decency, which I say since
you’ve caught me rare and raw tonight, sipping off the bottle top, 
slurring my songs, hitting my two-step on beat every. single. time.
Damn—how blessed they are to be able to watch me work around 
them—as illegibly as what the miraculous Phillis Wheatley wrote
all over her master’s walls, owned in the moment, I feel, solely by 
an ambition toward self-definition I also try applying prodigiously,
bringing them to speechlessness, a shaming kind of silence saying  listen, leave me be because there’s no explaining me, thus there’s
no exploiting me: what only a history under thumb and foot helps 
grasp before letting go, for one’s own good even more than mine.


^^EOP^^

Dear sip, dear shotgun, dear pound:
beneath the house, the kegs roll in;
the party flips its switches down. 
When drunk comes, it comes as sound,
a chord, a liftoff. I ride the rim,
dear sip, dear shotgun, dear pound. 
He could be anyone, and he abounds.
I slip inside a dance with him.
The party flips its switches down.  Let’s go, he says, upstairs now.
My cup spills. My shirt is skin.
Dear sip, dear shotgun, dear pound, 
I won’t. Get lucky. Get found.
But kegs run out, the hour brims,
the party flips its switches down, 
his hips to mine, his arms around,
a song ends, and dark begins—
dear sip, dear shotgun, dear pound,
the party flips its switches down.


^^EOP^^

but all I want to do is marry them on a beach 
that refuses to take itself too seriously. 
So much of our lives has been serious. 
Over time, I’ve learned that love is most astonishing 
when it persists after learning where we come from. 
When I bring my partner to my childhood home 
it is all bullets and needles and trash bags held 
at arm’s length. It is my estranged father’s damp 
bed of cardboard and cigar boxes filled 
with gauze and tarnished spoons. It is hard 
to clean a home, but it is harder to clean 
the memory of it. When I was young, my 
father would light lavender candles and shoot 
up. Now, my partner and I light a fire that will 
burn all traces of the family that lived here. 
Black plastic smoke curdles up, and loose bullets 
discharge in the flames. My partner holds 
my hand as gunfire rings through 
the birch trees. Though this is almost 
beautiful, it is not. And if I’m being honest, 
my partner and I spend most of our time 
on earth feeding one another citrus fruits 
and enough strength to go on. Every morning 
I pack them half a grapefruit and some sugar. 
And they tell me it’s just sweet enough.


^^EOP^^




In Calgary
I saw a man break a dog’s back.
—Joseph Stroud, “Calligraphy”



i 
In Calgary
I saw a man marry money Who giveth this money?
the commissioner asked
The man said Everyone who works for me
The commissioner asked Where are they? I don’t hear them declare it
The man said That’s not their job You do yours  Do you take this money
the commissioner asked to have and to hold
till death do you part?

^^EOP^^

Knowing my passion for celebrity nudes reached back to the last days of Netscape Navigator, Siri dutifully told me of the latest gossip site to promise their release.

Lawyers had sued to block the nudes’ coming to light and thereby confirmed they exist, she said. I resented the assured existence of any celebrity nudes I had yet to see, insisting all stars were both clothed and unclothed until the moment the webpage was loaded—at which point truth would be made clear.

Siri disapproved of my inaccurate interest in Schrödinger and his daguerreotype nudes, whose bits I’d heard were coffined up behind some Princeton research paywall full tuition granted access to. She explained I could save my money: how all nudes took form already, stored as light in fiber optic cables stashed in the oceans’ aphotic sands. HTML5 would dredge up everything.

Hypertext did not excite me, but I had to admit pleasure at the thought of seabed celebrity nudes leaked by wolffish. Would they float? Form islands? I saw archipelagos of nudes in a cold Atlantic full of them.

I asked Siri what she thought of my nudes, the lighting I’d used—their dark, private silhouettes. Bring your umbrella, she said. I looked at the thick cloud of my nakedness above, and agreed it was possible for rain.


^^EOP^^

I tell him to touch his toes. He reaches for them in a squat.
He stabs them with his little fingers. One toe. Two toes.
Then we say our letters, spell out all the sounds we will deliver because the death of a child is no small death.
I extend to him an open palm where he makes a fist
and slams it into my hand, a form, he wearily shouts,
is “a butterfly coming home!” We play “give me a five”
and continue swatting at the butterflies until the sun goes down.
I don’t recall ever playing with my mother like this.
Late one morning, my son caught me pinching
the sides of my head, my face wet from so much crying.
He punched my arm, which knocked one hand off
of my face. Ashamed that he saw me, I laughed very loudly
which brought him concern and happiness. He never
mentioned it again and I never forgave myself. My good son, running through the garden
in giggles. He is waiting for me to catch him. Once
I pretended to have fallen in a pit. I did not tell him
it was a grave. Very quickly he sprinted over and stood
beside my body. “Your hand!” he demanded.
Like a little father. I gave him my hand.
“Now, the other hand!” I give him the other.


^^EOP^^

A thing stolen say a spoon say gone before morning shook or worse unable to reorient a slip of the wrist and you’re married the spoon is small is decorative the length one walks back to oneself a shadow’s length or less a belief in one or other end reflects the particulars of one or other neurosis my caldera my Zika my bug-out in a camo pick-up still as damn now nothing happened say the spoon means jack the marriage too say a container is a ritual the spoon which is your bath your mirror is saving your life or more with earned misfortune still a house is not yours a body a personality the collection of traits the fear of heights of Zika the boy with his screen the game with its gun the bath with its salt the outer layer stripped and like an iris shrinking in the light of yet another the trick is not to mind the slanted rain the lack of sleep his screen the light of screens their shelter the shelter is not yours the marriage with its many utensils is silver in the same way love is sheer is tugging at your sleeve there was a plan a bunker the love-thing barely walking to a garden to a den of rifles with a knack for game a river say twice the width of home and gold and rising say it floods the rooms which are not yours the love-thing say the ritual of bathing does you good the thing beyond the body which is you is peeled back and massive barely anything at all the bucket you were dropped in the river the swallowing of itself in infinite configuration infinitely frayed the boy is you the man the screen with its various positions its many worshippers which are you say nothing really happened not the end the spoon the house with its ammo was a game the game of angels which are you


^^EOP^^

I write: the tall grass is a third wish 
then back away 
from the field. If I move
back 
far enough, everyone in the front row
will be still. 
Be still—
you’re witnessing my first time. 
A ballooning ballroom expanding 
until the beat drops,
a letdown 
letting you down gently 
before the DJ jumps up, afraid to play
something that could offend. 
I write: the tall grass is a third wish
wasted

^^EOP^^

The Inaccessible Island Rail lives in Atlantis,
with two black feet on the black plateau.
It might be slight, it might be shabby,
but it knows what it knows. 
Rain falls from the sky.
The sun shines, within limits.
Wind blows in from the furthest west.
There is nothing beyond the cliffs. 
Island Cape Myrtle is not true myrtle.
It is not the one in the myths.
Wind-stunted trees fill the fern-bush heath.
Sweet Roman Myrtle, True Roman Myrtle. Lies beyond the cliffs. 
What there is is sparse.
It is made of grass and ferns.
The birds fill what they can with themselves and fledglings
in boulders that lightning burned. 
They eat beetles, flies, moths.
They become what comes of trying.
The downy undersides of the leaves, they take it.
Until they can’t. They take to flying. 
Trying, the wind does what it can.
In time the strangest things occur.
The tunnel finds itself inside the grass, and eggs
of milk, of lavender.


^^EOP^^

Glitz girls in the spackle. Teen climbed
The boughed over stair. Stole lace to begin again
In darkness, a fingering salt. Print
Delighted the line to lined
Pink. Was doll-sized, weighted out. Was flat-reaped sigh
And dollar bin plaid. Fridays we stayed in
Till in coughed through with dry heat. Men
Grew approximate in their longing for something to mine.
Sippy cup of burn, acrylic camel, and melting kohl
Was a hiding past boyish. We shone with miraculous
Droll. Don’t try to kiss me, she was always saying. Older
Than a watch, the girl who pays starch to hush
Meat. Gargantuan between grown and still us,
I leave her orange street, my wanting ode


^^EOP^^

?) Let every sentence begin: I have been grossly mistaken. The stars are gone. Kirk: Kindly tell me what happened to the stars.
Kierkegaard shuttles past Reason to planet Absurd, a gas giant
without a detectable landing pad. He says, it’s the leap that matters. We’re being pulled toward the center of the zone of darkness.
Kenosis required, emptying the self of self. His sky lit, mine blazes
black, an experimental physics. Doubt the gravity that repels, attracts.
Dark energy : Dark matter : Attempt to probe : Universe [Static].
Neil deGrasse Tyson: we are a speck on a speck on a speck
on a speck.

^^EOP^^

before cameras could remember color, back when
the paint had not yet dried
on the world, and where was the fire? Everywhere
under their feet a patchy shining
and nothing tall standing plumb on either side
of the
street, canted saplings and slow ziggurats in brick, everything
splayed
away from     the kids   who wreck, who make                 these pictures. 
Their defenseless foreheads, the wet paving. Each cuts
their eyes at the adult who kneels, who stares
through a black birdhouse. 
Their hurry does blur some things
on their way into the box: blousing coats
and bobbed hair, hungry auras. And something
without fail also is tucked
in the arm’s right angle: a ball, an orange,
an infant’s skull. They could not
strive more furiously
if it were an infant’s skull.


^^EOP^^

From up here in the leaves’ no-kidding goldishness you’d guess everyone was already in lovely w/ each
others’ cheekbones. Infinity scarves & vanilla coffee, mint tea, warm whatever.
Cozy becoming the coming-at-the-seams, a couplet of verbs mid-bodily inexperience.
That man doing cartwheels is not wearing a shirt
& in any other life I’d want to be the double dare fanfaring a future so totally astonished by his nipples. This is what I mean 
when I say things like catastrophe. Okay, fine. Just one more winter.
Nothing can compare anymore to us anymore.
You big good oak limb. I’m in such cute like w/ you today.  In one diary of my have-beens, my mother
named me Elizabeth after one of her
mothers. You god particle. You matrilineage. I’ve never lived anywhere more
or less this haunted. She named my sister
Elizabeth. You boy genius. You midsummer pinky promise ring. 
There’s this person I know I’m not in love w/ but wears
a dress patterned like a postcard from the state my grandma died in. Imagine waking up
a whole frame away from your bedsheets. Imagine waking up & being anything as yellow
as a dress. You treeline. You root song. What’s an amount of time equal
to you? You kindling ring finger. You unchewable bark
but the headache’s gone. Pardon me, dandelions, have you seen my ghost, six foot nothing, 
has an interstate for a mother but also a mother? Adjust your spurs, honeybunch. This time I’m writing all of us
in pink ink. Let’s huckle-buckle off into the leafiest of all possible genderings. You know how the rain
starts right after you get home & the country song your friend slow-danced w/ her big love to, the one
your mom would play real quiet on her moonbeam highway streak back to Pensacola, is somehow 
already at the chorus & you forget there are words like joy? Or when someone whispers Imagine you never met them
back at the bum, grinning stars? You remember. It’s like that.
Or, is that. The difference between salt & salt. A someday of matching sweaters.
Told you it’s cute. O sweaters. O little knit bundles of vegetable-spit. It’s always sunsetting. 
You golden hour. You soap-soft seasonal. Once my mom found me
sitting in a circle of candles, touching each rosebud & sat w/ me until we were wax musuems of our secrets. Look—
the sky’s a toenail & the moon’s a chesthair. All the shirtless boys have tired themself out, spread-eagled
& slapping the sun off their shoulder blades. My body is a line heading for my body. You crushed-grass
sex smell. You dirt-inverted comma. Someone w/ bleached hair is biking home to restud their denim.
I rediscovered kissing foreheads & it is so yes again. 
Hurry up & sunspot, daylilies! The cops aren’t going to awe themselves to death & we have
a dictionary to laugh across.  The light’s seltzer, bubbles. I said My lord. I thought My god. O moonstruck. O gladracket. Barring gravity, our knees could be forevering each other. 
Barring leather, love is a world I’m praying all my mothers’ joy back toward. 
Elizabeth was my name. I’m writing this on all the trees like a wish. I’m kissing every hem in sight. 
We’re all hysterical & going nowhere together.  C’mon rapture. Let’s go bedazzling. 
Nothing gets futured without its own spitshine
& I’m already not not not not not not miraculous.


^^EOP^^

My husband doesn’t believe me—that the dogs barked nightly
at the spirit in the corner of the kitchen. That I knew of a family 
whose quilts were flung against the wall mid-sleep. Once, I told him
I met Satan in Scandinavia, and she had pigtails and a machete 
sticky with spiderwort. She couldn’t have been older than six
or seven. Her ancestors were Vikings. They boiled firestarters in urine 
and when she approached me, she laughed and called me ugly
three times: stygg stygg stygg. With the same gurgle of the growling 
dogs. With a film over her eyes, bobbled back into her head. Then
she giggled and ran away. Later in the hotel room, I anointed 
my forehead with oil—right thumb tracing the Sign of the Cross,
howling in the name of the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit 
amen.

^^EOP^^

Pollination against the seed to grow canopy
and mark place in shades of green—dry here to reflect
in glassine quartz chips in the off-red dirt where trees tree
as the forest is difference there green-inflected light you nurtured far
where volcanic would give name in poem or misty rain for each better-
suited frond of palm, its trunk, those particular roots. Here, so dry. 
Not to have visited outside the lines you published,
strands of rain where trade winds dry as here easterlies
sap the energy of watering. It’s where we read, as you knew,
where the single tree in a back garden opens out to all
trees momentarily safe, or at least alive, before the chop.
I knew a man who tried to make a suburban backyard into a palm house.  Arecaceae would seem like part of the joke as we measure
tank rungs and how many waterings left, aside from our drinking.
But you see them where farmhouses were built and lost or condemned
for varying reasons—twin date palms (“fate palms”) thick and robust
and the scrabble of rubble and chimney between. But no habitat of like, just addendum.
Living in a shack there was a single great chestnut, not a walnut, out of place. 
A chestnut introduced like a vision of walks, the tessellations
of light collected into prayer, which is where it began for you. And for others.
The mirror of any leaf, the flipside, the reverse, is the growing and falling
enigma—even here among the non-deciduous, dry leaves fall, stroke light.
Whole branches cut off from the supply when sap is difficult to supplement, create.
That vegetation cleared for plantation leaps shadows out of wasted soil, to scaffold.  Gardening. I have known so many gardeners who sought
to build hope out of the clearing, to remake an image of plenty,
of sharing fresh air and taking stale breath. Each quietly “oracular,” if in denial,
each afraid of drought though remembering greened light in their plans,
their reticulation, their watching the weather. To make a calm to spread— there if we bother to look, to listen to the birds moving in and out, some staying. 
You knew back gardens, and you knew the streets made bare, as they
are here—say, of Melbourne, green-gilled city, whose old planted trees become expendable?
Or where I am, huge chunks of bush grubbed out daily with excuses made
or not bothered with—hard to keep track of outside the shade of verandas, offices.
Or among the palms on another island, Réunion, the warning of offensive odor
though a beauty that might make an activist or remaker of demi-lost verse forms. 
What is there in common, across the list of names, of species—growing
conditions, from a part of the world far from where they’re coaxed into a differing
light? What is there in common if we’re not in the place of writing,
and yet we are grown into, welded rhizome by rhizome? You cannot take
the first bird I see today—a yellow-rumped thornbill tuning in, foraging
for the rest of the small flock—any more than I would choose to. It tends the image. 
Each cell an art to tempt and let be to rebuild the soil. But no profiling,
and no conflict. The straggly tenuous but tough contradictions of York gums’
outer reaches supple but brittle closer to a perception of where a heart might rest,
termites holding the strings of a pacemaker, split and opening out to tempt owlet nightjars—
I heard one calling from a broken limb at 10:49 the other night and you were still breathing,
sleeping your breath to the canopy of world? That near and far line of prayer. 
Once, on a very small island, a coral island big enough for a dozen palms
and a colony of land crabs and two humans, the heart of a young palm
was torn out and handed over to the one unfamiliar with its form or taste.
He ate, and the palm was gone. Coconuts were spouting, finding and making
on the atoll, at the outer. Lugging vats of water up and down the valley wall,
I think this, and your line, a late line: “nothing is missing”—a conclusion? 
I wrote of that palmheart for a heart surgeon years ago because all elegies
are entwined, even those of different endocrines. The circulatory system of memorials.
If welcomed under the green light of plantings, the off-spectrum aspiration
against grief, I would have told you of the jam tree—acacia acuminata—
because we are surrounded by them against the odds, and they come back,
thriving on disturbed ground, with trouble around them. Short-lived treeshrubs, 
their rough bark exchanges codes of camouflage with stick insects, as I look
now and can’t see beyond the idea of an insect being there, legs forward like antennae.
Rot here is powder rather than mulch, mostly. Saplings rise to spend time dying.
But some pull through and some will become part of the width of those great jarrahs
felled by ancestors, their essences pushing against climate to make good.
My “you” can’t be yours, but the moon and sun do their own syzygy for us all. 
Language is vegetation. I knew a couple who screened their cedar kit home
from a country pub with a line then another line and another line of native trees.
I have a family who planted tens of thousands of trees to reclaim saltland settlement
hauled out of its deep sleeping, its subroots. I knew a person who filled empty
paddocks with trees deleted for a new suburb, next to the new suburb where
bushland had hung on against the trend, gone late. To have known morning in those places! 
I know you’ll have known this—how thick vegetation, the uprights and bends
of trees on a still morning, can enhance our ability to pick out the between-notes
of birdwork. You wrote of clarity, and translated ornate forms, to be filled with a moment’s
singularity. Respiration. Our greatest breath might be so low or a rasp like a storm
coming in to rejuvenate, to depart with cataclysm. And so we pass with varying
degrees of light, the need for oxygen in the dismantling of carbohydrates. 
Night is eating of oxygen. But more, much more out in bare day. So in our sleep
we join the trees, wrapped in leaves and fronds, held out of consciousness by tendrils.
So we thank god for photosynthesis more than we thank god for the sun as itself?
Here, we have valley, we have curved rim of valley closing out, here we have a kite, too—
a black-shouldered kite that hovers above the infrequent powerlines and self-supply,
and here we have year building on year that is an aside to a past that builds in all directions. 
The inner green of room cracked in the thermal economics of presence
that underwrites reflection in crops and their residues, a shattering of light
in glassy stubble, the march against concrete and lead, against ordnance
and conquest, just roots holding soil so dry it is tempted to lift as a plume
across the district, hungering after the great dust devil that took off a roof
and opened a house down near Picnic Hill Road not long after you passed. 
Interior of wood of fallen branch of loosened fibers and machines striking out
from gravel shoulders to lay great flooded gums on creek beds a trickle of old seasons
green with algae, green with signatures of flow, the bridges where great roots held sway.
What remakes such wasted soil? We try local species and intertwine with olive trees.
And in our suppressed thoughts, palmistry is a lush future of shade and flycatchers
maintaining the relationship between mosquitoes and moisture. No toxins; no anti-growth. 
Our night-lights out here stick out sharp—sore thumb exposure, a failure of perspective
of what is lured to the hot light. Mouth dry. We go away too and bring places
back in descriptions but we won’t let them set root—they grow inside and reach
no light, this bright light that weakens accustoming eyes over time, straining
to pick out moss from lichen, which shields the granite boulders it breaks down.
Gradient cuts underfoot the echidna following termite galleries, interstices 
of plumbed surface-sounds. We go back to the records, the old books, which are young
and would replace those earlier cuckoo sounds, the kickings-out in nests, the breaking
through of secret chambers—all here, too, like birth, but with an unanswered history,
or partially echoed and not fully addressed. This stuff we do with our souls to adjust
the fragments of bush to whose maps? To miss the kangaroo trail though it’s before our eyes,
or the path of an elusive rain, or a lake whose existence you might request, hint at, question? 
Diverse as the air after war is gone but we still can’t breathe so something slips
or grafts. The stain. We rely on such conservancy, on gestures of repair and renewal
that regenerate, to sustain with hands-off learning to let be, to live alongside,
harvest no more than needs be. Such need manifests. Such sleep of passing
is the caveat, is the covenant is the testament of work that rains without a cloud in the sky.
Memorandum of walk of planting of tending: crowbar to break soil or soft cell, either way. 
Mostly, people search for pathways to exemptions
so they can cut down protected trees. Mostly, people
search for ways to get around those thin laws so they
can bring down an old system of life. But here, too, we
want to keep the trees going against the trend of felling,
to give breath to those who stifle the art of growth. 
Pollination with the grain to grow canopy
and mark place in shades of green—dry here to reflect
from fool’s gold but grow gnarled out of off-red dirt we coax with seedlings
if rain sets green-inflected light you nurtured far from here, far where necessities
work outside the poem for each better-suited frond of palm frond, a eucalypt trunk,
any particular roots. Dry wet dry. Making growth to suit a soil’s recovery.


^^EOP^^

A cloud spelled out a rune I couldn’t read
fast enough before it morphed into
another form that changed again, so I
recited something true enough from an ancient
book: “The wind blows to the south and turns
to the north; round and round it goes.” The screen
went blank and then the slip. No matter, I thought,
I’ll drive a truck. “The clouds are codes for reading
the blues,” I said beneath my breath as I
walked out into the rain with my umbrella
and attitude that kept me lean if un-
employed. A hermit thrush reported the dusk
somewhere in the woods on my way home and I
called back like a human bird who’d lost his wings:
“Light’s such a fickle thing but I sing for it.”


^^EOP^^

May your love be firm,
and may your dream of life together
be a river between two shores—
by day bathed in sunlight, and by night
illuminated from within. May the heron
carry news of you to the heavens, and the salmon bring
the sea’s blue grace. May your twin thoughts
spiral upward like leafy vines,
like fiddle strings in the wind,
and be as noble as the Douglas fir.
May you never find yourselves back to back
without love pulling you around
into each other's arms.
 


^^EOP^^

Ain’t of no kind word in what they’ve been telling you.
Heard they call you “Song Bird” these days. Part your beak
and collar the long part of neck with sapphires.
Girl, when are you going to see
you aren’t ever goin’ be one of them. Don’t mean a thing
they pour prosecco in porcelain dishes.
Let you lap leftovers from their palms. Do they pinch
your sides to regurgitate the slug of white cake, candied
roses, the baked breasts of hummingbirds?
Merchant the fetid smell of it into crystal?
I heard their trade ain’t much different
from what is done here at home. Only difference
is they prefer their Black rare and chilled over ice,
fine caviars knifed from the ovaries of the South.
Maybe at night you prowl the Turkish rugs.
Dressed in Schiffli lace, an ankle ribbon tagging
you rare specimen. Do they call you beautiful
for one of your kind? Pocket your songs
and measure your skin for couture.
And for who do you think it will make
statement when worn to the Grand Palais Garnier?


^^EOP^^

by going you have to be and
seek it
out
 
said the starlet in the shared volitional language of space and time
explanation thrashes round the thing but doesn’t touch it
the thing we know then as /style of thrashing/ or
ripples in the pond sufficient
in itself, she licks her tongue, it could be desired as a figure—
 
faithless as a class of examples
i found new objects swimming blankly in a common
sense, by going alone to listen
                                                to them
                         in the night
            light of their pool—
 
                                     to begin with life or stars
                                                              the spring as source or
                                                      season
                                         when to start—i love what you
                        said about the birds
                        as distance is required for attraction
                        & force keeps its distinctions
                        in a tall hull
                        called law—
                        clever in the style of depth in a painting
                        sumptuous for use, and briefly this
                        of fancy, pity, and devising,
                        wherefore as it is at the right door
                        make it language or rejoice
                        this is how you touch me in my other ghosts
                        & short of the occasion
                        just a frequent mist of atoms
                        all touching in the arms
                        like an error in the wish
 


^^EOP^^

The fog
shades
a smooth
stone bust
 
then slips
into rain
 
my mind is
well suited
onyx
shining edges
 
the reflection
itself
 
*
 
Traces of
mist
 
on an old
window
 
*
 
The best part
is grinding
the ink down
endlessly, filling
my brush
 
grey morning
 
I first feel
the mind
as reflex
 
* 
Bright and clear
 
The end of Evergreen road
is closed and crumbling away
 
Bill McNeil’s red poppy
resolves to be eaten alive
exposed to a shaft of air
 
between the flower and its flat glass-
masterful
 
*
 
The black bleeds out
from his beak
 
in long tears, ink onto
sopping head feathers
slicked back
 
black stiches on yellow
powdered eyes aglow
 
white speckles
          thrown onto autumn
                       breast feathers
 
a white field
                   below
 


^^EOP^^





Was she of spirit race, or was she one
Of earth's least earthly daughters, one to whom
A gift of loveliness and soul is given,
Only to make them wretched?

There is an antique gem, on which her brow
Retains its graven beauty even now.
Her hair is braided, but one curl behind
Floats as enamour'd of the summer wind;
The rest is simple. Is she not too fair
Even to think of maiden's sweetest care?
The mouth and brow are contrasts. One so fraught
With pride, the melancholy pride of thought
Conscious of power, and yet forced to know
How little way such power as that can go;
Regretting, while too proud of the fine mind,
Which raises but to part it from its kind:
But the sweet mouth had nothing of all this;
It was a mouth the rose had lean'd to kiss
For her young sister, telling, now though mute,
How soft an echo it was to the lute.
The one spoke genius, in its high revealing;
The other smiled a woman's gentle feeling.
It was a lovely face: the Greek outline
Flowing, yet delicate and feminine;
The glorious lightning of the kindled eye,
Raised, as it communed with its native sky.
A lovely face the spirit's fitting shrine;
The one almost, the other quite divine.




My hand is on the lyre which never more
With its sweet commerce, like a bosom friend,
Will share the deeper thoughts which I could trust
Only to music and to solitude.
It is the very grove, the olive grove,
Where first I laid my laurel crown aside,
And bathed my fever'd brow in the cold stream;
As if that I could wash away the fire
Which from that moment kindled in my heart.
I well remember how I flung myself,
Like a young goddess, on a purple cloud
Of light and odour — the rich violets
Were so ethereal in bloom and breath:
And I — I felt immortal, for my brain
Was drunk and mad with its first draught of fame.
'Tis strange there was one only cypress tree,
And then, as now, I lay beneath its shade.
The night had seen me pace my lonely room,
Clasping the lyre I had no heart to wake,
Impatient for the day: yet its first dawn
Came cold as death; for every pulse sank down,
Until the very presence of my hope
Became to me a fear.    The sun rose up;
I stood alone 'mid thousands: but I felt
Mine inspiration; and, as the last sweep
Of my song died away amid the hills,
My heart reverb'rated the shout which bore
To the blue mountains and the distant heaven Erinna's name, and on my bended knee,
Olympus, I received thy laurel crown.
 
   And twice new birth of violets have sprung,
Since they were first my pillow, since I sought
In the deep silence of the olive grove
The dreamy happiness which solitude
Brings to the soul o'erfill'd with its delight:
For I was like some young and sudden heir
Of a rich palace heap'd with gems and gold,
Whose pleasure doubles as he sums his wealth
And forms a thousand plans of festival;
Such were my myriad visions of delight.
The lute, which hitherto in Delphian shades
Had been my twilight's solitary joy,
Would henceforth be a sweet and breathing bond
Between me and my kind.    Orphan unloved,
I had been lonely from my childhood's hour,
Childhood whose very happiness is love:
But that was over now; my lyre would be
My own heart's true interpreter, and those
To whom my song was dear, would they not bless
The hand that waken'd it? I should be loved
For the so gentle sake of those soft chords
Which mingled others' feelings with mine own.
 
    Vow'd I that song to meek and gentle thoughts,
To tales that told of sorrow and of love,
To all our nature's finest touches, all
That wakens sympathy: and I should be
Alone no longer; every wind that bore,
And every lip that breathed one strain of mine,
Henceforth partake in all my joy and grief.
Oh! glorious is the gifted poet's lot,
And touching more than glorious: 'tis to be
Companion of the heart's least earthly hour;
The voice of love and sadness, calling forth
Tears from their silent fountain: 'tis to have
Share in all nature's loveliness; giving flowers
A life as sweet, more lasting than their own;
And catching from green wood and lofty pine
Language mysterious as musical;
Making the thoughts, which else had only been
Like colours on the morning's earliest hour,
Immortal, and worth immortality;
Yielding the hero that eternal name
For which he fought; making the patriot's deed
A stirring record for long after-time;
Cherishing tender thoughts, which else had pass'd
Away like tears; and saving the loved dead
From death's worst part — its deep forgetfulness.
 
From the first moment when a falling leaf,
Or opening bud, or streak of rose-touch'd sky,
Waken'd in me the flush and flow of song,
I gave my soul entire unto the gift
I deem'd mine own, direct from heaven; it was
The hope, the bliss, the energy of life;
I had no hope that dwelt not with my lyre,
No bliss whose being grew not from my lyre,
No energy undevoted to my lyre.
It was my other self that had a power;
Mine, but o'er which I had not a control.
At times it was not with me, and I felt
A wonder how it ever had been mine:
And then a word, a look of loveliness,
A tone of music, call'd it into life;
A song came gushing, like the natural tears,
To check whose current does not rest with us.
 
    Had I lived ever in the savage woods,
Or in some distant island, which the sea
With wind and wave guards in deep loneliness;
Had my eye never on the beauty dwelt
Of human face, and my ear never drank
The music of a human voice; I feel
My spirit would have pour'd itself in song,
Have learn'd a language from the rustling leaves,
The singing of the birds, and of the tide.
Perchance, then, happy had I never known
Another thought could be attach'd to song
Than of its own delight.    Oh! let me pause
Over this earlier period, when my heart
Mingled its being with its pleasures, fill'd
With rich enthusiasm, which once flung
Its purple colouring o'er all things of earth,
And without which our utmost power of thought
But sharpens arrows that will drink our blood.
Like woman's soothing influence o'er man
Enthusiasm is upon the mind;
Softening and beautifying that which is
Too harsh and sullen in itself.    How much
I loved the painter's glorious art, which forms
A world like, but more beautiful than, this;
Just catching nature in her happiest mood!
How drank I in fine poetry, which makes
The hearing passionate, fill'd with memories
Which steal from out the past like rays from clouds!
And then the sweet songs of my native vale,
Whose sweetness and whose softness call'd to mind
The perfume of the flowers, the purity
Of the blue sky; oh, how they stirr'd my soul! —
Amid the many golden gifts which heaven
Has left, like portions of its light, on earth
None hath such influence as music hath.
The painter's hues stand visible before us
In power and beauty; we can trace the thoughts
Which are the workings of the poet's mind:
But music is a mystery, and viewless
Even when present, and is less man's act,
And less within his order; for the hand
That can call forth the tones, yet cannot tell
Whither they go, or if they live or die,
When floated once beyond his feeble ear;
And then, as if it were an unreal thing,
The wind will sweep from the neglected strings
As rich a swell as ever minstrel drew.
 
    A poet's word, a painter's touch, will reach
The innermost recesses of the heart,
Making the pulses throb in unison
With joy or grief, which we can analyse;
There is the cause for pleasure and for pain:
But music moves us, and we know not why;
We feel the tears, but cannot trace their source.
Is it the language of some other state,
Born of its memory?    For what can wake
The soul's strong instinct of another world,
Like music?    Well with sadness doth it suit
To hear the melancholy sounds decay,
And think (for thoughts are life's great human links,
And mingle with our feelings) even so
Will the heart's wildest pulses sink to rest.
 
    How have I loved, when the red evening fill'd
Our temple with its glory, first, to gaze
On the strange contrast of the crimson air,
Lighted as if with passion, and flung back,
From silver vase and tripod rich with gems,
To the pale statues round, where human life
Was not, but beauty was, which seem'd to have
Apart existence from humanity:
Then, to go forth where the tall waving pines
Seem'd as behind them roll'd a golden sea
Immortal and eternal; and the boughs,
That darkly swept between me and its light,
Were fitting emblems of the worldly cares
That are the boundary between us and heaven;
Meanwhile, the wind, a wilful messenger
Lingering amid the flowers on his way,
At intervals swept past in melody,
The lutes and voices of the choral hymn
Contending with the rose-breath on his wing!
Perhaps it is these pleasures' chiefest charm,
They are so indefinable, so vague.
From earliest childhood all too well aware
Of the uncertain nature of our joys,
It is delicious to enjoy, yet know
No after-consequence will be to weep.
Pride misers with enjoyment, when we have
Delight in things that are but of the mind:
But half humility when we partake
Pleasures that are half wants, the spirit pines
And struggles in its fetters, and disdains
The low base clay to which it is allied.
But here our rapture raises us: we feel
What glorious power is given to man, and find
Our nature's nobleness and attributes,
Whose heaven is intellect; and we are proud
To think how we can love those things of earth
Which are least earthly; and the soul grows pure
In this high communing, and more divine.
 
    This time of dreaming happiness pass'd by,
Another spirit was within my heart;
I drank the maddening cup of praise, which grew
Henceforth the fountain of my life; I lived
Only in others' breath; a word, a look,
Were of all influence on my destiny:
If praise they spoke, 'twas sunlight to my soul;
Or censure, it was like the scorpion's sting.
 
And yet a darker lesson was to learn —
The hollowness of each: that praise, which is
But base exchange of flattery; that blame,
Given by cautious coldness, which still deems
'Tis safest to depress; that mockery,
Flinging shafts but to show its own keen aim;
That carelessness, whose very censure's chance;
And, worst of all, the earthly judgment pass'd
By minds whose native clay is unredeem'd
By aught of heaven, whose every thought falls foul
Plague-spot on beauty which they cannot feel,
Tainting all that it touches with itself.
O dream of fame, what hast thou been to me
But the destroyer of life's calm content!
I feel so more than ever, that thy sway
Is weaken'd over me. Once I could find
A deep and dangerous delight in thee;
But that is gone.    I am too much awake.
Light has burst o'er me, but not morning's light;
'Tis such light as will burst upon the tomb,
When all but judgment's over.    Can it be,
That these fine impulses, these lofty thoughts,
Burning with their own beauty, are but given
To make me the low slave of vanity,
Heartless and humbled?     O my own sweet power,
Surely thy songs are made for more than this!
What a worst waste of feeling and of life
Have been the imprints of my roll of time,
Too much, too long!    To what use have I turn'd
The golden gifts in which I pride myself?
They are profaned; with their pure ore I made
A temple resting only on the breath
Of heedless worshippers.    Alas! that ever
Praise should have been what it has been to me —
The opiate of my heart.    Yet I have dream'd
Of things which cannot be; the bright, the pure,
That all of which the heart may only dream;
And I have mused upon my gift of song,
And deeply felt its beauty, and disdain'd
The pettiness of praise to which at times
My soul has bow'd; and I have scorn'd myself
For that my cheek could burn, my pulses beat
At idle words.    And yet it is in vain
For the full heart to press back every throb
Wholly upon itself.    Ay, fair as are
The visions of a poet's solitude,
There must be something more for happiness;
They seek communion.    It had seem'd to me
A miser's selfishness, had I not sought
To share with others those impassion'd thoughts,
Like light, or hope, or love, in their effects.
When I have watch'd the stars write on the sky
In characters of light, have seen the moon
Come like veiled priestess from the east,
While, like a hymn, the wind swell'd on mine ear,
Telling soft tidings of eve's thousand flowers,
Has it not been the transport of my lute
To find its best delight in sympathy?
Alas! the idols which our hopes set up,
They are Chaldean ones, half gold, half clay;
We trust we are deceived, we hope, we fear,
Alike without foundation; day by day
Some new illusion is destroyed, and life
Gets cold and colder on towards its close.
Just like the years which make it, some are check'd
By sudden blights in spring; some are dried up
By fiery summers; others waste away
In calm monotony of quiet skies,
And peradventure these may be the best:
They know no hurricanes, no floods that sweep
As a God's vengeance were upon each wave;
But then they have no ruby fruits, no flowers
Shining in purple, and no lighted mines
Of gold and diamond.    Which is the best, —
Beauty and glory, in a southern clime,
Mingled with thunder, tempest; or the calm
Of skies that scarcely change, which, at the least,
If much of shine they have not, have no storms?
I know not: but I know fair earth or sky
Are self-consuming in their loveliness,
And the too radiant sun and fertile soil
In their luxuriance run themselves to waste,
And the green valley and the silver stream
Become a sandy desert.    O! the mind,
Too vivid in its lighted energies,
May read its fate in sunny Araby.
How lives its beauty in each Eastern tale,
Its growth of spices, and its groves of balm!
They are exhausted; and what is it now?
A wild and burning wilderness.    Alas!
For such similitude. Too much this is
The fate of this world's loveliest and best.
 
    Is there not a far people, who possess
Mysterious oracles of olden time,
Who say that this earth labours with a curse,
That it is fallen from its first estate,
And is now but the shade of what it was?
I do believe the tale.    I feel its truth
In my vain aspirations, in the dreams
That are revealings of another world,
More pure, more perfect than our weary one,
Where day is darkness to the starry soul.
 
    O heart of mine! my once sweet paradise
Of love and hope! how changed thou art to me!
I cannot count thy changes: thou hast lost
Interest in the once idols of thy being;
They have departed, even as if wings
Had borne away their morning; they have left
Weariness, turning pleasure into pain,
And too sure knowledge of their hollowness.
 
    And that too is gone from me; that which was
My solitude's delight!    I can no more
Make real existence of a shadowy world.
Time was, the poet's song, the ancient tale,
Were to me fountains of deep happiness,
For they grew visible in my lonely hours,
As things in which I had a deed and part;
Their actual presence had not been more true:
But these are bubbling sparkles, that are found
But at the spring's first source.    Ah! years may bring
The mind to its perfection, but no more
Will those young visions live in their own light;
Life's troubles stir life's waters all too much,
Passions chase fancies, and though still we dream,
The colouring is from reality.
 
    Farewell, my lyre! thou hast not been to me
All I once hoped.    What is the gift of mind,
But as a barrier to so much that makes
Our life endurable, — companionship,
Mingling affection, calm and gentle peace,
Till the vex'd spirit seals with discontent
A league of sorrow and of vanity,
Built on a future which will never be!
 
    And yet I would resign the praise that now
Makes my cheek crimson, and my pulses beat,
Could I but deem that when my hand is cold,
And my lip passionless, my songs would be
Number'd mid the young poet's first delights;
Read by the dark-eyed maiden in an hour
Of moonlight, till her cheek shone with its tears;
And murmur'd by the lover when his suit
Calls upon poetry to breathe of love.
I do not hope a sunshine burst of fame,
My lyre asks but a wreath of fragile flowers.
I have told passionate tales of breaking hearts,
Of young cheeks fading even before the rose;
My songs have been the mournful history
Of woman's tenderness and woman's tears;
I have touch'd but the spirit's gentlest chords, —
Surely the fittest for my maiden hand; —
And in their truth my immortality.
 
    Thou lovely and lone star, whose silver light,
Like music o'er the waters, steals along
The soften'd atmosphere; pale star, to thee
I dedicate the lyre, whose influence
I would have sink upon the heart like thine.
 
    In such an hour as this, the bosom turns
Back to its early feelings; man forgets
His stern ambition and his worldly cares,
And woman loathes the petty vanities
That mar her nature's beauty; like the dew,
Shedding its sweetness o'er the sleeping flowers
Till all their morning freshness is revived,
Kindly affections, sad but yet sweet thoughts,
Melt the cold eyes, long, long unused to weep.
O lute of mine, that I shall wake no more!
Such tearful music, linger on thy strings,
Consecrate unto sorrow and to love;
Thy truth, thy tenderness, be all thy fame!
 


^^EOP^^






Orphan in my first years, I early learnt
To make my heart suffice itself, and seek
Support and sympathy in its own depths.
 




Well, read my cheek, and watch my eye, —
    Too strictly school'd are they
One secret of my soul to show,
    One hidden thought betray.
 
I never knew the time my heart
    Look'd freely from my brow;
It once was check'd by timidness,
     'Tis taught by caution now.
 
I live among the cold, the false,
    And I must seem like them;
And such I am, for I am false
   As those I most condemn.
 
I teach my lip its sweetest smile,
    My tongue its softest tone;
I borrow others' likeness, till
    Almost I lose my own.
 
I pass through flattery's gilded sieve,
    Whatever I would say;
In social life, all, like the blind,
    Must learn to feel their way.
 
I check my thoughts like curbed steeds
    That struggle with the rein;
I bid my feelings sleep, like wrecks
    In the unfathom'd main.
 
I hear them speak of love, the deep.
    The true, and mock the name;
Mock at all high and early truth,
    And I too do the same.
 
I hear them tell some touching tale,
    I swallow down the tear;
I hear them name some generous deed,
    And I have learnt to sneer.
 
I hear the spiritual, the kind,
    The pure, but named in mirth;
Till all of good, ay, even hope,
    Seems exiled from our earth.
 
And one fear, withering ridicule,
    Is all that I can dread;
A sword hung by a single hair
    For ever o'er the head.
 
We bow to a most servile faith,
    In a most servile fear;
While none among us dares to say
    What none will choose to hear.
 
And if we dream of loftier thoughts,
    In weakness they are gone;
And indolence and vanity
    Rivet our fetters on.
 
Surely I was not born for this!
    I feel a loftier mood
Of generous impulse, high resolve,
    Steal o'er my solitude!
 
I gaze upon the thousand stars
    That fill the midnight sky;
And wish, so passionately wish,
    A light like theirs on high.
 
I have such eagerness of hope
    To benefit my kind;
And feel as if immortal power
    Were given to my mind.
 
I think on that eternal fame,
    The sun of earthly gloom.
Which makes the gloriousness of death,
    The future of the tomb —
 
That earthly future, the faint sign
    Of a more heavenly one;
— A step, a word, a voice, a look, —
    Alas! my dream is done!
 
And earth, and earth's debasing stain,
    Again is on my soul;
And I am but a nameless part
    Of a most worthless whole.
 
Why write I this? because my heart
    Towards the future springs,
That future where it loves to soar
    On more than eagle wings.
 
The present, it is but a speck
    In that eternal time,
In which my lost hopes find a home,
    My spirit knows its clime.
 
Oh! not myself, — for what am I? —
    The worthless and the weak,
Whose every thought of self should raise
    A blush to burn my cheek.
 
But song has touch’d my lips with fire.
    And made my heart a shrine;
For what, although alloy'd, debased,
    Is in itself divine.
 
I am myself but a vile link
    Amid life's weary chain;
But I have spoken hallow'd words,
    O do not say in vain!
 
My first, my last, my only wish,
    Say will my charmed chords
Wake to the morning light of fame,
    And breathe again my words?
 
Will the young maiden, when her tears
    Alone in moonlight shine —
Tears for the absent and the loved —
    Murmur some song of mine?
 
Will the pale youth by his dim lamp,
    Himself a dying flame,
From many an antique scroll beside,
    Choose that which bears my name?
 
Let music make less terrible
    The silence of the dead;
I care not, so my spirit last
    Long after life has fled.
 


^^EOP^^

                    
                    
                    In the grassy space between the wings of the elementary school and the trailers housing the fifth grade’s overflow classrooms, girls flip their hair in imitation of Cindy Crawford, sing Iko Iko. None of you know what it means or where the song comes from.

It’s honor-roll season, a time of outings to TCBY and Outback Steakhouse. Your mother warns you against filling up on bread, but it’s hard to resist the little brown loaves brought warm to the table with soft butter – a luxury that cannot be imagined at home, with its always-refrigerated margarine and Pepperidge Farm sandwich loaves.

Everyone knows what’s popular but nobody knows how to act. At ten, you lack any context. The world swims before you, and it constantly stings. Its favorite barb: “everybody knows that.”

Beyond the grassy space of girls is more grass, a quarter-mile loop of track, a church with a painfully white spire, a fence, and a neighborhood maybe a little less nice than yours, crammed between the school and busy Great Neck Road. The fence is of chain link, instead of wooden slats. That’s how you know about the niceness – that and the something hard, like a grain of sand, you feel in your mother’s voice, when she takes you to the school’s Spring Fling, where you win another goldfish. They always die, but you’re getting better. Now, it takes a while.

Loblollies shiver
In May heat. The world’s ending.
The world’s a mirage.
 
                

^^EOP^^

Holed up behind the whitewashed wooden slats
slung like ribs above the greed-begotten candy plaster-
papered noworlaters, holed up and far
from witches in the woods’ evergreen fringe,
horse chestnut brews, parents’ crow commotion or
robin squabble haranguing the fat
wide open always out there, I read for hours
on the red shag rug hearing market cry
and grave slope, catching the men through ages
of flint and full haggle in my 2 by 6 chamber,
heart bent on Blue Beard, the dead wives’
skeletons cantilevered to a door hook. Later,
hunkering down with amputee hangers,
catalogs, the bottle stash and jug wines,
Jim Beams too hiding with air, no air,
plus a stolen Joy of Sex circa 1974,
its pell mell positions and crouching
women, with the POV going scrap and rattle,
some theater of being a little less bright.
Thought I saw one night the million paired eyes
swinging upward, the hand me down generations
spelunking in holes, fine lineaments braved
by way of cream curd and lust and dictatorial DNA,
felt through overhead squib and carpet warp,
some full squat before the slate rock hearths,
more buried in strata of granites, igneous,
limestone, ash, the mind’s eye leveled
to one rectangle of light around the animal
who wants to know that it knows and say so,
lumbering down the long path, vanishing.
 


^^EOP^^

My grammar, ‘tis of thee. Sweet
simultaneity when water came down
the hillside in a pipe and a local
Cineplex of Oedipus
armegeddoned us into a past
no future could agree on. Nation
 
was another thing to notice,
how shirts and skins, ironies
and their opposite eyed
each other before the big game.
Sneak up, affections. Be covert
in the open. If I sing, I believe
 
in wire taps bootless on be-
citizened faces, that phat, that
sick: help. We’ve given up
the romance of weather,
although I once felt so much
for a man who wore oven mitts
 
in the snow. Land where my fathers
pilgrimmed all we can depend
on, this freedom majestic in
the jest that will what—blah, op-ed
and blather us over, excelsis
deo zapping rust from our names.
 
The word “to” is understood.
And it’s thy placey memories
I love, darling tongue of my tongue,
unique as any finger print
in groove and grubbiness. Always
someone becomes the subject
 
re-collecting these minutes
meandering like so many sheep
that run before our steps,
and the red or blue X’s on their hinds
say who owns them as they go
upslope, in rain, over the stubby grass.


^^EOP^^

Even now, after all
these years, my father, 89,
still uncertain when I call
whose voice it is—Ann's or mine—
 
saying Hi, Dad, and from where,
the next town or a different state,
still pausing in that powdered air,
this little silence as he waits
 
at the nursery door, discerning tone
and pitch, listening hard to know
which way to bend, which crib, the one
against the wall or by the window,
 
still concentrating, trying to keep
us separate, our needs, do what she would, letting my mother sleep,
this moment's blank as he's about
 
to choose between us, make some shift
in the soft-lit dark, decide whose cry
it is tonight, which girl to lift,
to whisper or hum, which lullaby.
 


^^EOP^^

You whom I could not save, Listen to me.
 
Can we agree Kevlar
backpacks shouldn’t be needed
 
for children walking to school?
Those same children
 
also shouldn’t require a suit
of armor when standing
 
on their front lawns, or snipers
to watch their backs
 
as they eat at McDonalds.
They shouldn’t have to stop
 
to consider the speed
of a bullet or how it might
 
reshape their bodies. But
one winter, back in Detroit,
 
I had one student
who opened a door and died.
 
It was the front
door of his house, but
 
it could have been any door,
and the bullet could have written
 
any name. The shooter
was thirteen years old
 
and was aiming
at someone else. But
 
a bullet doesn’t care
about “aim,” it doesn’t
 
distinguish between
the innocent and the innocent,
 
and how was the bullet
supposed to know this
 
child would open the door
at the exact wrong moment
 
because his friend
was outside and screaming
 
for help. Did I say
I had “one” student who
 
opened a door and died?
That’s wrong.
 
There were many.
The classroom of grief
 
had far more seats
than the classroom for math
 
though every student
in the classroom for math
 
could count the names
of the dead.
 
A kid opens a door. The bullet
couldn’t possibly know,
 
nor could the gun, because
“guns don’t kill people,” they don’t
 
have minds to decide
such things, they don’t choose
 
or have a conscience,
and when a man doesn’t
 
have a conscience, we call him
a psychopath. This is how
 
we know what type of assault rifle
a man can be,
 
and how we discover
the hell that thrums inside
 
each of them. Today,
there’s another
 
shooting with dead
kids everywhere. It was a school,
 
a movie theater, a parking lot.
The world
 
is full of doors.
And you, whom I cannot save,
 
you may open a door
and enter
 
a meadow or a eulogy.
And if the latter, you will be
 
mourned, then buried
in rhetoric.
 
There will be
monuments of legislation,
 
little flowers made
from red tape.
  What should we do? we’ll ask
again. The earth will close
 
like a door above you. What should we do?
 
And that click you hear?
That’s just our voices,
 
the deadbolt of discourse
sliding into place.
 


^^EOP^^

                                                    As we 
                                        embrace          resist 
                          the future       the present      the past 
             we work          we struggle          we begin          we fail
​
to understand       to find        to unbraid        to accept        to question
 
              the grief          the grief           the grief          the grief 
                          we shift         we wield           we bury​ 
                                    into light               as ash                                                         across our faces 
 


^^EOP^^

Oh! yet one smile, tho' dark may lower 
Around thee clouds of woe and ill, 
Let me yet feel that I have power, 
Mid Fate's bleak storms, to soothe thee still.  
Tho' sadness be upon thy brow, 
Yet let it turn, dear love, to me, 
I cannot bear that thou should'st know 
Sorrow I do not share with thee.  
True love's wreath is of mountain flowers, 
They stand the storm and brave the blast, 
And blossom on, so love like ours 
Is sweetest when all else is past.  
Too well I know what storms have frowned, 
And now frown on life's troubled tide; 
Still darker let them gather round, 
They have no power on hearts so tried.  
Then say not that you may not bear, 
To shadow spirit light as mine; 
I shall not shrink, or fear to share 
The darkest fate if it be thine!
 
 Oh! say not love was never made 
For heart so light as mine; 
Must love then seek the cypress shade, 
Rear but a gloomy shrine.  
Oh! say not, that for me more meet 
The revelry of youth; 
Or that my wild heart cannot beat 
With deep devoted truth.  
Tho' mirth may many changes ring, 
'Tis but an outward show, 
Even upon the fond dove's wing 
Will varying colours glow.  
Light smiles upon my lip may gleam 
And sparkle o'er my brow, 
'Tis but the glisten of the stream 
That hides the gold below.  
'Tis love that gilds the mirthful hour, 
That lights the smile for me, 
Those smiles would instant lose their power, 
Did they not glance on thee!
 
 Oh! come to my slumber 
Sweet dreams of my love, 
I have hung the charmed wreath 
My soft pillow above.  
The roses are linked 
In a chain pure and white; 
And the rose-leaves are wet 
With the dew drops of night.  
The moon was on high 
As I gather'd each flower; 
The dew that then falls 
Has a magical power.  
The Spirit of slumber 
Those roses has blest; 
And sweet are the visions 
They'll bring to my rest.  
Be their spell on my soul, 
So they let me but see 
His dark eyes flash in love 
And his smile glance on me.  
Let sleep bring the image 
Of him far away; 
'Tis worth all the tears 
I shed for him by day.  
I have hung the charmed wreath 
My soft pillow above; 
Then come to my slumber, 
Sweet dreams of my love!
 

How vain to cast my love away 
On bosom false as thine; 
The floweret's bloom, that springs in May, 
Would be a safer shrine  
To build my fondest hopes upon, 
Tho' fragile it may be. 
That flower's smile is not sooner gone 
Than love that trusts to thee.  
Love asks a calm, a gentle home, 
Or else its life is o'er; 
If once you let its pinions roam, 
Oh! then 'tis love no more.  
The aspin's changefuI shade can be 
No shelter for the dove; 
And hearts as varying as that tree, 
Are sure no place for love.  
Hope linger'd long and anxiously, 
O'er failing faith, but now 
I give thee back each heartless sigh, 
Give back each broken vow.  
I'll trust the stay of tulip dyes, 
The calm of yon wild sea, 
The sunshine of the April skies, 
But never more to thee! 
 
 Oh! would that love had power to raise 
A little isle for us alone, 
With fairy flowers, and sunny rays, 
The blue sea wave its guardian zone.  
No other step should ever press 
This hidden Eden of the heart, 
And we would share its loveliness, 
From every other thing apart.  
The rose and violet should weep, 
Whene'er our leafy couch was laid, 
The lark should wake our morning sleep, 
The bulbul sing our serenade.  
And we would watch the starry hours, 
And call the moon to hear our vows, 
And we would cull the sweetest flowers, 
And twine fresh chaplets for our brows. 
 

I thought thus of the flowers, the moon, 
This fairy isle for you and me; 
And then I thought how very soon 
How very tired we should be.
 
                   Matrimonial Creed. 
HE must be rich whom I could love, 
His fortune clear must be, 
Whether in land or in the funds, 
'Tis all the same to me.  
He must be old whom I could love, 
Then he'll not plague me long; 
In sooth 'twill he a pleasant sight,
To see him borne along  
To where the croaking ravens lurk, 
And where the earth worms dwell: 
A widow's hood will suit my face,
And black becomes me well.  
And he must make a settlement, 
I'll have no man without; 
And when he writes his testament, 
He must not leave me out.  
Oh! such a man as this would suit 
Each wish I here express; 
If he should say, — Will you have me? 
I'll very soon say — Yes! ⁠
 


^^EOP^^

Drippingly by grips, this humus and perlite nearly sings
          through my fingers
circling the ditch lily’s heat-sunk side, anthers frayed, fallen.
          Sift. Learn your footprint.
If occasion, rise to. Another bloom, opposite, grows blood
          orange its splayed
open hand, in shade, still opulent, curls tender, having the time
          of its life.
Let’s get the basics, the survey says. Sight says, turning,
          the cat’s sprawled
besides the baby rat it found and above the scalp thin lawn
          through the window
the children are watching. Where do you live? What’s under your
          roof? What brushes
up, by now, is summer burnt grass in scorch and stubble with
          the rat who will not
move. Lent pallor. Light gray lumpen weight. How many rooms
          do you own? Keep
digging, mom, get to china, they call out, when I work the plant
          free, its dirt
tumbling thick with rooted tendrils reaching. Are you a gadget
          geek, a regular
joe, or technophone? Plus crumbs, wedged in pine cones,
          tunnels,
earthworm ruts. There’s nothing I can’t touch here if I want
          to or disturb,
teeming sum of what we’re built on, soil damps beside dry
          pockets, clay
at the spade end gone that unctuous apricot yellow. Refine
          your results.
The cat’s long patient, knows what her hurt can do.
          She waits, ginger
lines of her fur circling. What’s on your plate/
          in your medicine
cabinet/jewelry box/garage? I look closer. The infant rodent
          is trembling.
Another child, not mine, labors deep to find the shine,
          sorting pebbles
through her fingers. Make progress. Take action.
          Witness
not permitted distance. When the prey finally moves,
          jumps a few inches, the cat
closes in, takes the injured flaccid thing into his jaws
          for the kill
and carries it almost like a kitten across the lawn.
          My hand crushes
the dark stamens and the littlest child
          upstairs
at the rat’s last squeal, begins to scream best,
          best, this is the best day of my life, and I have to walk back inside.
 


^^EOP^^

                            I gather her head up in my sweater 
                                         and we crouch here    
               some dried ketchup where her lip turns down 
                            a light crust of dirt on one eyebrow       
  
                  the concrete stained and worn           
                            surprise rain splattered in the gap 
                    between here and the parking lot 
                                  our socks are wet       
 
                                         our feet itch 
                        then her cough started    
it’s going to be ok we can hide her for a minute  
                         her damp head soaks the wool 
        the corners reek of urine 
                      we do a sober trick 
                                   my body now a cradle     
 
         her hair touches my wrist
  
she trembles down to her cavity 
                        a cough we love 
the careless future emerges from it  
                        shaking like a star bracelet with elastic 
                                                 in this other country 
                        the contradictory music of our tears 
 
                                      what do wandering souls find 
                         to live in here 
                                        what warm skin 
 
                             in this stairwell 
                                     the air is cold 
     
                            the earth moves 
                   one bug survives 
 
             beyond their law
                        
                          three of us hunched 
      up like a heaps of wet wool 
             in the leaky crook of a stair 
 
you heard about us somewhere
 
   


^^EOP^^

: sorry this not that poem 
raised block flower & plant bed.
  peonies, gardenias, poinsettias
plus a yellow orb slow-rising
  over an endless golden scape— 
darting through uncluttered space
  cardinals, thrashes, sparrows
blue air fragrant with lavender
  washing brain matter into virtue. 
if only i could pastel language
  onto a canvas of thistledown
yes, deceit comes to mind—
  .a lie. traitor. turncoat. recreant 
backstabber to truth i would be
  gut-shanked a thousand times.
this is not that poem nor am i
  that poet to hold your hand 
.or. erase knot-hole screams
  blood on a cement floor .or.
suicide is another form of escape
  no-no-no—but i do promise 
the evil-ugly humans inflict
  to each other to their [selves]
how time is malice is death
  enflaming pupils with spite 
inextinguishable if ever set free—
  forgive state poet #289-128
for not scribbling illusions
  of trickery as if timeless hell 
could be captured by stanzas
  alliteration or slant rhyme—


^^EOP^^

: .or. this malus thing never to be confused with justice 
nothing symbolic. OK. dark is dark—
   cage is cage. hunted & hunter are both 
in the literal. make believe & what ifs
   do not exist: a lie. nothing cryptic here. 
OK. rape is rape. prey must pray. no
   minute in the future safe from quiet 
insertions of a shank in masking tape.
   OK. nothing here infinite: only time 
is constant to the merciful & merciless—
   there are no allegories to hide behind.  he slit his wrists means he slit his fuckin wrist  
OK? there is a cell with one window
   just before day. dawn’s early demise 
magnifies a dull metal toilet. the cool
   water cooling two can sodas. each 
wall a slab of soft gray cinderblock, no
   posters featuring eroticized women 
with an exclusive in black tail. OK.
   the wall that slits the light does not 
reveal nothing new, ever. the exposé
   the changing same: always a holding. 
one window offers a gateway. my face
   pressed against the window & time 
rules this empire. OK. the mind held
   hostage by time. mind & body 
conjoined twins. the other wall holds
   a frame. the frame holds a metal door 
to contain utter disbelief. of the visible:
   walls are gray not like summer 
but darker—yes. there is darkness. OK—


^^EOP^^

In one, I married the first man who asked and
I endured. Took as little space as I could,
opened my hands and he’d place his faults, 
lined up like eucharists into my palms until
overflowing. Maybe if he’d found God sooner,
the baby would have lived. Maybe I wouldn’t 
have found myself alone between blue light and
linoleum passing something too small to survive.
Maybe if I loved him enough, she’d have wanted 
to live. Maybe I would have too. Maybe I’d have played
the hymns his God demanded on the church piano.
He’d stand in the pulpit singing, his tenor swinging high, 
then low again and I could remember God myself.
Maybe I would have stayed for that. Maybe when
he called years later, I could have returned. Maybe 
I would have loved his children and traded them for the dead.
Maybe I would wear white on Sundays, pull on my gloves,
hold the women after they raised up during service, wipe 
their sweat, and hold them fast as they cry hallelujah.
Hallelujah. Maybe I would be the woman swooning.
Maybe his God would move through me just once like that, 
maybe God would fill me so tight with spirit, I’d split like stars.


^^EOP^^

See, now You are finally offstage where we can talk. 
I can’t see through the drapes and pulleys, it’s too dark
for me to turn them into moss and oaks, too dark 
for me to blink wooden risers into a bayou beautiful
in near collapse that once ran a monstrous river into the Gulf, 
a scorched stew powerful only in sufficient stillness.
No monstrance, no milagro, no brown scapular scraps, 
not even a woven palm frond. Just You and me.
Just me, actually, standing with hip cocked and three 
fingers resting on my chin. Not even a naked
household goddess above my bed where I ache 
and ache. I hate the Greeks, those bastards, for figuring
You into some kind of flesh—though that cure 
is just a start. And the Romans tried, but flesh
must do more than die: it has to live. And here’s what’s next. 
Me talking to You in Your most present absence,
without even an apophatic clue. I imagine 
Your holy knees gathered to Your chin and Your arms
bound twice around your legs. I imagine Your heart 
in a corner beating while You listen to my footfalls
circle from the best damn hiding place of all.


^^EOP^^

The arterial beauty of  Florida is alive in all of its obesity.
                                                                     And the sequin-sellers are doing good business
east of  Granada Boulevard. 
— 
The sad-eyed woman’s ultrasound image—all dirty blur of gray and ambiguous genitalia—sits
lovingly electric on your newsfeed. 
                               And the neighbor with his disorder you invented is going out tonight. 
— 
The starlet will eat a sandwich and Kevin will push the joke
too far—the vomit, the bobby pins—
                                                                                                     and that’s OK tonight. 
— 
And your mother, with her rough hands, her quiet advice, has walked
along the sidewalk knowing how cold a wooden house can feel, 
                                               wondering whose soft, strange lips she could kiss.


^^EOP^^

In the last segment, I tried sufficiency. They moved
my femur and a single woman braiding her hair fell 
from me. I tried to warn you, this desert editorializes.
A scorpion lifts its tail, braids more active than braiding, 
it hisses. I, of all people, get it. In the mornings we wake
to the kind of life we want until we turn our heads east. 
The night fills without us but I warned you, I was full
already. A banana inside me blasted open a door, 
my thoughts at the threshold of such a door blank. Love
transacts, a figure in the distance crowded with window. 
An enzyme eats plastic, but which kind? Synthetic polymer
or the ways you tried to keep me? This is the last segment. 
My mother 
draws a circle around time and this is an intercourse. My mentor
draws a circle around time and this is an intercourse. I shake 
out of bed. Humans continue the first line of their suicide letter.
An enzyme invents us, we invent enzymes. The plastic we make, 
we must eat it. Draw a circle around time. We designed us
in simple utterances. The political term graft means political 
corruption. The grifter never had an I. In the burn unit, they
place tilapia skins over human scar tissue, the killed form on top 
of afflicted form, also a graft. Also a graft of afflicted form,
the killed form on top, they place tilapia skins over human scar 
tissue. In the burn unit, I never had a grifter, corruption
means political, graft the political term. In simple utterances 
we designed us. Time draws a circle, we must eat it. We make
the plastic, enzymes invent we, us invents an enzyme to continue 
the first line of a suicide letter. Out of bed I shake with intercourse.
Time draws a circle around my mentor. Time draws a circle around 
my mother. 
This is the last segment. The ways you tried to keep me? Synthetic
polymer, but which kind? An enzyme eats plastic, crowded window, 
a figure in the distance transacts love. At the threshold of such
a blank door, my thoughts open a door. A banana blasted inside me. 
Already I was full but I warned you, the night fills without us.
We turn our heads until we want the kind of life in the mornings 
we wake to. I get, of all people, it. It hisses. A scorpion, more active
than braiding, braids its tail, lifts the editorialized desert. You tried 
to warn me from me. Her hair fell braiding a single woman. My femur
was moved. They tried sufficiency in the last segment.


^^EOP^^

Take this glass, quoting me darkly:
Cassandra, coalmine canary. 
I want to sing the confusing flesh,
The confounding joyful leash, 
Flesh that stretches planet-wide
If a planet were human-sized. 
These pulsing thermal layers we wear,
Not the myriad places they tear. 
The sweet and acrid cabbage head,
Its labyrinths and where they lead, 
Not how cleanly one can divide,
With one strike, body from the mind. 
You here with me, reflected too,
The four of us now become two 
Making joy with cry, weep laughter,
Naked amid the slaughter.


^^EOP^^

All of this magic is death:
                                            your vicious little organ singing like a drunk uncle, 
                                                                             the beautiful, white-headed children 
                                                        that passed through your body, 
the cats you fed till plump as pimples and languid. 
Who let the rot in? And what if you never return—full and free— 
                                     to that alleyway in Morocco where old men watched
                                     as he entered you? 
Where are your daughters? 
             The holiday pies filled blood-red with wild rhubarb. 
And tonight, on each continent, women are teaching other women to be vessels.
Women are singing sweetly to get what they want by force. 
What will you remember of this place
                                                                                     The naked limbs in the orchard, 
                                                                      the crust left along the empty bowl, 
                                 your own hands on your stomach in the browned-out night. 
A sense of abandon placed among the linen, sharp-lined and never dirty. 
On gray gadgets you’re kept humming. 
Stories about rivers are stories about girls who want things, you taught them.
                       And the machines that fix other machines are not glamorous technologies. 
In the yellow kitchen, a silent anxiety attack. 
                                 Breathe deep and drop nothing off your tray, my sweet.


^^EOP^^

Yes of forsythia against the limitless ivy, a nude posed in a garden
against the silver maple pinwheeling its children into a gown around her 
chime of the cliff-hanging falcon’s screeching talons against a rabbit,
wheezing soldier in a field, gunpowder tainting the cake in his pocket 
jet fuel over the Pacific, waking to a hula in a zephyr,
the bride deplaning onto an island chain, bowing to leis of plumeria 
the mallow of nurses’ shoes, their news, the black sedan
of a telephone spreading it like a virus and, after, the scent of a cedar closet 
white gloves of a mare, in heat, pawing clover, the sail of a Spitfire
cresting a hill in San Francisco, angelic against sunset 
rosin on the cello’s catgut, a honeycombed queen calling home
her lovers, a Basquiat above the head of an ascetic, chaos over order 
magenta in the thorns, shy to the shears, making the blue jays bluer,
a someone on the bed’s chenille edge, composing an oratorio of medicines 
the bartender in his ice pick scars, twisting zest over his creation, wheel
and butane of his Zippo kissing as the citrus, at last, expresses


^^EOP^^

I’m going to look at my watch
though I don’t really care what time it is.
Just slightly curious.
It’s funny when you see
it’s much earlier or later
than you thought,
but even funnier when it’s exactly
the time you thought. 
But at my back etc. Etc. being
“Desarts of vast Eternity.”  
I give up.
It’s eleven eleven. 
What ever happens
at eleven eleven?
Vast eternity!


^^EOP^^

The feeling of time derives from heat,
an agitation of molecules,
oracles from the friction of air
through fissures and the leaves of oaks.
A few gnats stitch the lake’s edge
where a fox turns off the gravel road
to nose through rhododendron
as children crawl through winter coats
to reach a closet’s dark recess.
Dawdling at the edge of sleep
you work through problems already past
though unresolved, a notional path,
a crease through heads of wild blue phlox
that waking, you can’t follow.


^^EOP^^

Who is the barber
with the straight razor
at the neck of the Mad King,
the physician of the Don
who must hold his broken feet
and cloudy wisps of hair
from between his legs
while he knows nothing?
The possibilities
are numerous—what jobs
we get ourselves into.
I feel like at this moment
I could be anyone in the world
because I could be
a hundred objects
of torture—whatever
the mind can come up with
has been done,

^^EOP^^

We gathered in a field southwest of town,
several hundred hauling coolers
and folding chairs along a gravel road
dry in August, two ruts of soft dust
that soaked into our clothes
and rose in plumes behind us. 
By noon we could discern their massive coils
emerging from a bale of cloud,
scales scattering crescent dapples
through walnut fronds,
the light polarized, each leaf tip in focus. 
As their bodies blotted out the sun,
the forest faded to silverpoint.
A current of cool air
extended from the bottomlands
an intimation of October,
and the bowl of sky deepened
its celestial archaeology. 
Their tails, like banners of a vast army,
swept past Orion and his retinue
to sighs and scattered applause,
the faint wail of a child crying.
In half an hour they had passed on
in search of deep waters. 
Before our company dispersed,
dust whirling in the wind,
we planned to meet again in seven years
for the next known migration.
Sunlight flashed on windshields 
and caught along the riverbank
a cloudy, keeled scale
about the size of a dinner plate,
cool as blanc de Chine
in the heat of the afternoon.


^^EOP^^

Stricken, seen, satellite at the edge of a party,
being fifteen, with the black bulbs someone’s planted
in the mother’s lamps to give glow-in-the-dark
ambiance to hideous kisses, and the ruffles
are all wrong on the saved-for shirt, and the curtains,
suave in the murk, seem to laugh. The liquidy
fin of feeling is destination-less, twisting
like paper wrapped ’round a pinkie
in blind date anticipation. Toy for
the psyche, phrase to swim through the mind
like an offense, at 3 AM.
Half-helix, as if waiting for, Oh God, don’t
say it,

^^EOP^^




After “M. Degas Teaches Art & Science at Durfee Intermediate School, Detroit, 1942” by Philip Levine



The nun stood by the chalkboard and
wrote the word America, underlined
it twice and asked: What do you see here?
Elizabeth shot up her hand and said: It is home. My grandmother came
here so that we could live.

^^EOP^^

IX 
If it became impossible to touch and be touched, to see
and be seen, to love and trade ecstasy for risk where risk
is ecstasy, to be hidden in plain view, to be perfectly lost
which means lost to the world, lying side-by-side arms linked
in a bond so intricate it could never unfold or break—
If it became crucial to live out of sight, to be housebound,
to walk a beaten path in the garden, to sit at the window
blurred by rainfall, to sit barred and blocked, books
set aside that would never be read, rolling news of flash flood
and fire, angels treading the updraft, a chaos of voices—
If dreams should give the rest of it: the path in the garden
going underground, flood and fire as God’s only gift
the house holding its secrets, that pattern of locked rooms,
what lies outside (voices: angels) crowding the perimeter—   You could make an installation of it (and why not?) on a bare floor in a bare hall under neon strip: what seems thrown down what seems heap after heap of discards but is not: hair and shoes and spectacles and clothes (teeth also saved) repetition such that it blurs images folding into one another abstract, just shape being evident except this shoe except this lens catching the light which is error or artifact, something like iron litter carefully thrown down by Joseph Beuys but more the bright grotesque of Bacon’s Fragment, of Dubuffet’s L’Arbre de fluides, what’s torn what’s wrenched apart ... Heap after heap, grainy footage of a cattle train snowscape smokestacks, scratch orchestra, what more do you need ... dogs ... what more do you need of this: the train all but silent in snow, footage of carcasses thrown down naked, you could make a montage of it: quick hands, a low sun deepening to yellow by trees and towers, the way shadows are cast, the light you need, the shapes you need a sureness of touch to bring it all together, perhaps a light box fragments and fractures backlit and all of a piece not least the new dead: they lie in a scatter, your focal point they make sudden broken angels in the snow. Fool steps up. His art is palimpsest. He’ll tag your work: spray-paint a ditzy orange bug-eyed frog at the door of the charnel house color the snowscape blue, redact the chimneys, configure the train with silver-and-black chevrons: a snake drawn up to the iron gate, his artwork: Evil is as evil does. The frog spits bile. The snake is hollow-eyed. He adds speech bubbles to the cold still air: “Hosanna Hosanna Ho—sa—nna”:   Children in a pool of light, a pool of dust; the way images deceive, the way time shunts and stalls, a test of what gathers and corrupts, what will not stay as words unspeak, as children are lost to light and dust.


^^EOP^^




Based on the Chinese myth of Chang’e



Saturday. The good bread set out for the dogs to eat. The rabbit hurt on milk & tall willows 
that I’ve bound to storefront. The headlines say the waves are coming in today. The waves 
& spoiled fruit & all the lives I’ve wasted playing archer. At least this side of the kingdom 
will still love me. I pull the weeds. I pull the tides & storm the shores. The rabbit drops its mouth 
into a crater. The waves overtake the red city with spears in hand. June & the headlines 
announce the end of the world. I am terrible at playing heroine. I’ve done all I can: plucked 
the apples, swept the chimney. Washed the rabbit, saved the tortoise from its slow drowning.


^^EOP^^

the city has sex with megan 
 when the air shaped like the inverse of Megan
accepts Megan as she moves. 
    If Megan is a system of exchange
that floats her labor and her point 
  of view in vapor/liquid soup
passàging through her valves 
and if her later corpse, collapsing,
 updates its inversion of the air 
 even more than did the air displace
when she grew from brown-eyed baby 
into strong laboring woman in blue jeans
  and heathered wool, 
and if the air and earth draw from Megan’s corpse
  all the energy and minerals 
 she pulled from her surrounds
to build her nails and bones and teeth— 
 if the exchange doesn’t stop
but only ceases to support her consciousness, 
 and if her consciousness was corpse anyway until
it found relation, 
 then what demises
is the potential for the human social, 
and another sociality
 will unbutton my whole shoe 
and tongue hang limp,
  what sex is for but stops me 
 at the barrier, a pixelated
glamour reef though very 
   close and simple, smell a
  flurry, parapluie paraphrase, 
 energy funneled through a shape.
You filtered chemical 
 information in such a pointy
fulgent scrambled way, in the city 
    and outside the city in the vernal zones
   and aqua zones the city shaped, flow-charted, realist 
 trucked. The city caved under
     when the zones rose and lapped around the pilings, 
 manged foundations green,
      rotted the teeth out of the mouth of the city, 
 harbor high-rises
dark and blown. The city is extremely fragile tender 
 human mesh and will be mush
    and mushrooms grow in, there is room in, ruins 
roam the rearticulated harm.    speech by a flaneur—no a flaneuse— 
On my face, D. folliculorum are relaxing
 like Tenniel caterpillars leaning on mushroom stalks
  against the bases of my hair follicles
 which provide shelter and shade.
These critters are peculiar to
   the ecology of the human face
     which I take around the city
     open, close   it is my means
    of feeding   I rely on
  changing its shape
in response to others’ faces and postures
  to reduce my risk and increase my safety
   and my likelihood of being
    included in the group’s collective
      life. I smile a lot and hope it
     don’t look fake.


^^EOP^^

Grown from conventional purpose
in order to rename over there
as “across state line,” in terms of survival,
Dante calls X a way to maintain courage.
& from the end of this dispatch I would’ve been a good wife 
hemming distances, a little, every day,
without one wholly thing the matter.
O moon! Whatever victim of etiquette I turn
out to be, valued as customer of or friend to,
when recategorized for this present time, 
my skin & skeleton are of as much
consequence as the grass that never grew under my feet.
In the skirmishes of things, is my ally
equal in measure to the I of me?
Or are we paired solely by image? 
Ran short of noun-like qualities,
both of our names X-faced and
rent of whatever postwar commonalities
fooled us into individualistic days:
my good looks head for memory. 
Memory, I’ve been wreckless with survivalist fame.
What other efforts are there?
The nose gone, then the jaw.
As the monetary equivalent for a decade,
fitting to join myself judge or 
faction, law hath nitpicked
the grass of the first field
for the alien light of common sense.
They’ll see your heart evicted.
I see your heart evicted.


^^EOP^^

The hastily assembled angel thinks 
He must be more like God than people are 
Especially because he like God can’t 
Choose to be less like God      he tilts his chair   
Back his brown metal folding      chair on its 
Back legs and lifts      first his right leg and then 
His left      onto the wolf-sized rock he’s using 
As his desk      while the great flood floods the plains   
The valleys and the forests far below him 
And the mountains      eventually his mountain 
Eventually his right      leg on the rock 
His left crossed over at the ankles Wanting    To be like God he thinks must be the wrong way 
To be like God      who doesn’t want to be 
Like anything      but I don’t want 
To be like God 

^^EOP^^

The hastily assembled angel wandered 
The desert hidden in      the pillar of 
Cloud in the day      and in the pillar of 
Fire in the night      and as he wandered he 
Asked himself whether      sometimes as he wandered 
He asked himself      whether he really could 
Be said to wander      since he after all 
Could see through time      which was even better for 
Seeing where he was going than seeing      through space   
In the day he was a darkness in the cloud 
Like rain      and in the night he was a darkness 
In the fire      like God      and day and night he won- 
dered why he had been given gifts even God 
Hadn’t been given or no even God      had- 
n’t given Themselves or no no even      God did- 
n’t have and who he wondered ever could 
Give God a gift      except he knew he was 
Allowed to see through time because he was 
Not God      and could be wrong      and saw through time 
With many-chambered eyes      all things that might be 
And God would see      only the one thing that would    Is that the one gift      he wondered      That free people 
Give God uncertainty

^^EOP^^

Humans being made      in the image not of God 
Directly but of the angel      who the day God made 
Human beings most resembled God      who changes 
The way light changes as the sun in the morning   
Becomes the sun in the afternoon      in the evening 
And in the night      and to resemble God 
Is to resemble light      the way a bed 
Resembles sunlight      when sunlight is spread   
Across it      to resemble God is to 
Remain the bed as the light slides away 
The hastily assembled angel when 
Humans appeared on Earth      at first the an-   
gel didn’t see      any resemblance he 
Saw his reflection in a pond and marked 
Neither the similarities nor differ- 
ences between himself and humans      their   
Voices climbed a canyon to his tent 
In the clouds and though they laughed and shouted 
With voices like the voices of the other 
Angels he never once      hoped he was be-   
ing called      If God had made me for them he 
Shouted down hours      after the laughing pack 
Had left the canyon      I might watch them 
Instead      God merely hadn’t called him back   
After the other angels shoved him from 
Heaven      instead the angel watched the sun until he 
Began to think it was the eye of God 
Even though he felt      sure God had   
No eyes      no body      and no voice      with which 
To call him back      instead he watched a forest 
At the edge of the canyon he      watched it until 
A different pack of humans cut the shortest   
Fully grown tree down then he watched the tree as 
The humans dragged it to their camp he watched the 
Tree as the humans broke the tree apart he 
Watched as the humans carved the parts of the tree in-   
to gods with bodies and      glowering faces 
He watched the humans as they bowed to the gods 
He watched them      like a small child watching dancers 
Forgetting his own body      bowing as they bow


^^EOP^^

We have almost nothing left,
no ground in common. 
At best, a brand
or maybe a miniseries. 
No campfire to gather around.
The big stories—peckish news 
gets told in tweets,
gets old so quickly. 
In place of one place
a billion tiny customized versions 
appear targeted specifically
to your tastes. 
You see only what you want to see.
Maybe you always did.


^^EOP^^

Like the time I dreamt about a loon family,
just some common loons—not metaphors
in any way, just real loons in a lake swimming
near each other so it was clear they were a set,
preferring each other’s company in the cold
still lake with its depth of reflected pines.
The curve of their black heads and sleek
necks, black and white stripes then checks
on their folded wings, floating so low
atop their reflections they almost seem
inside them. Their wails like wolves, their
calls like an echo without origin, their
calls like an echo of lake, or what makes lake
lake. How nice to think the male and female
loons cannot be told apart by their plumage
and that they build a nest and sit on eggs
together. One of their calls is called “tremolo.”


^^EOP^^

First the people had to invent ladders. No one had ever seen a ladder. Once they had ladders they invented walls to climb over. Soon they realized it took two ladders to climb a wall. One to climb up one side—one to climb down the other. People would ascend one side of the wall, descend the other side of the wall, and then walk away, leaving the ladders behind. That is why there are so many ladders in the world. The ladders are picked up and stored in an enormous warehouse. Scientists have proposed attaching all the ladders, one on top of the other, creating an elevator into outer space. Some people want to destroy all the ladders. Others want to destroy the walls. Others say that someday we are going to need all the ladders in the world.


^^EOP^^

Sometimes I wake up in the night
with a terrible headache, my mouth
blackened; a ghost looking for valuables
in the debris, I turn on a battery-powered
light, clipped to a book, I write things down
in the spirit of Marcus Aurelius
who said the finest bottle of wine
is just grape juice, passing through the liver,
no matter the beauty of a frothing glass,
or a night of big Truth-seeking, never recalled;
the importance of putting something bittersweet
into our mouths, turning it around and around
on our tongues, attaching to it, our missions,
our purpose—in the end
we are all just filters, not even
as beautiful as the plainest bird
or as zen as the meanest deer tick,
nothing is given over to, nothing new is lit.
So often it is this. I wake up, urgent, fatalistic,
with the taste of nectar on my boughs.
I replay on a loop my one stoic consistency,
my middle of the night vow,
that I will start tomorrow
the essential dismantling
of what I live.


^^EOP^^

I thought very hard and thought of nothing.
—Jesse Ball, Census 
In one segment of the landscape, a hyena drags her clitoris
across the plains, a dust perfuming up. Cicadas pulse the segment, 
a femur filled with rain. It is a lush grassland within which
the greens have sprouted through the exposed joints of animals. 
This seems to be a metaphor for growth and resistance. A
single singed dollar rolls through the wind. I read 
a book that imagines, among other things, a world without
trees. I wrote a book that imagines, among other things, a world 
without men. The book splayed open on my parents’ dresser,
an early part of the book. People do this when they no longer 
want to see information. I no longer want to see information.
In another segment, a series of weasel oil candles, such is 
the cure-all in this aspect of land. Mostly the candles are not
lit. At night the moon makes the earth shine like bottle 
flies, a glimmer here and there where a lachrymose flame
continues on. A god peeks past the clit of the hyena 
disapprovingly, as evidenced by their glare and nod. But I
want a god to glare and nod. I want a god to do anything at all 
with my debts. In another segment, my grandmother
lives and she watches a pack of lionesses feasting inside 
the rib cage of a zebra. At first, she tells us, she believes
the zebra to be sleeping on her side, but the lions move 
her skin under the membrane of bones.
It’s like I always say: The evenings wait for the kind of 
death we get and we are so very fond of the evenings.
In another segment, the last one, we know it to be last 
because a single woman is braiding her hair in a desert.
We have been here before. An animal raises her leg.


^^EOP^^

I thought I had lost myself,
but I see it’s you that’s gone missing. 
O always elsewhere. 
What yacht or spaceship have you hijacked? 
In what seedy hideaway do you scoff
at the sameness of all cities, all ideas? 
Once you made me loquacious
because what’s the point in saying anything
if there isn’t the possibility of being misunderstood. 
Now I am nearly speechless with boredom.
I will wait Madame Butterfly-style for your return.


^^EOP^^

Driving too close to the curb. Admit
to being poor. Stash pumpkin seeds
for my kid. Hustle the Christian way.
Starch my shirt collars. Value a strong
smudge. Give pigeons saintly names.
Cream both my feet. Recycle. Sign off
emails with warm regards. Double tap
#vegan. Heart statuses which start with I’m delighted to announce. Mornings.
I struggle to decide what mood to wear.
Evenings. I lie beside my aftershaves
imagining the sea. I should really have
it by now. A Dyson. Panasonic bread
maker. A photo by the piano of a slum
tour. I need the spirit of a full-moon party
rather than the charisma of a shed. They
honk when I slow. I swear with my eyes.
Think of real blood. Sunday comes. Dad
asks what’s the plan. I knit him the only
winning scratch card. I leave a candle on
for destiny. Once. I had an acceptance
speech written. Soon. A staircase will rise
to defeat us all. The roads have moved.
When I get in I’ll sit in the shower & say
it’s a bath. Double tap an ultrasound pic.
Sip railroad water. Notification. ZANC1
started following you. Check my speed.
Slap on another Barry Manilow playlist.
Keep my grays in the dashboard. Wonder.
What the guy who put a gun to my little
brother’s head is doing for New Year’s.
Wonder. If my neighbor made it through.
Up ahead. A badger’s hit beside a boulder.
Its glare a wooden egg I slow for.


^^EOP^^

Long after I stopped participating 
Those images pursued me 
I found myself turning from them 
Even in the small light before dawn 
To meet the face of my own body 
Still taut and strong, almost too 
Strong a house for so much shame 
Not mine alone but also yours 
And my brother’s, lots of people’s, 
I know it was irrational, for whom I saw 
Myself responsible and to whom 
I wished to remain hospitable. 
We had all been pursuing our own 
Disintegration for so long by then 
That by the time the other side 
Began to raise a more coherent 
Complaint against us we devolved 
With such ease and swiftness it seemed 
To alarm even our enemies. By then 
Many of us had succumbed to quivering 
Idiocy while others drew vitality from new 
Careers as public scolds. Behind these 
Middle-management professors were at pains 
To display their faultless views lest they too 
Find censure, infamy, unemployment and death 
At the hands of an enraged public 
Individuals in such pain and torment 
And such confusion hardly anyone dared 
Ask more of them than that they not shoot 
And in fact many of us willed them to shoot 
And some of us were the shooters 
And shoot we did, and got us square 
In the heart and in the face, which anyway 
We had been preparing these long years 
For bullets and explosions and whatever 
Else. A vast unpaid army 
Of self-destructors, false comrades, impotent 
Brainiacs who wished to appear to be kind 
Everything we did for our government 
And the corporations that served it we did for free 
In exchange for the privilege of watching one 
Another break down. Sometimes we were the ones 
Doing the breaking. We would comfort one another 
Afterward, congratulating each other on the fortitude 
It took to display such vulnerability. The demonstration 
Of an infirmity followed by a self-justificatory recuperation 
Of our own means and our own ends, in short, of ourselves 
And our respect for ourselves—this amounted to the dominant 
Rhetoric of the age, which some called sharing, which partook 
Of modes of oratory and of polemic, of intimate 
Journals and of statements from on high issued by public 
Figures, whom at one time or another we all mistook ourselves for. 
Anyway it wasn’t working. None of it was working. 
Not our ostentation and not the uses we put our suffering 
To, the guilt- and schadenfreude-based attention 
We extracted from our friends and followers, and even the passing 
Sensation of true sincerity, of actual truth, quickly emulsified 
Into the great and the terrible metastasizing whole. 
To the point it began to seem wisest to publish only 
Within the confines of our own flesh, but our interiors 
Had their biometrics too, and were functions not only 
Of stardust, the universe as we now were prone to addressing 
The godhead, but also of every mean and median of the selfsame 
Vicious culture that drove us to retreat into the jail of our own bones 
And the cramped confines of our swollen veins and ducts in the first place 
Our skin was the same wall they talked about on the news 
And our hearts were the bombs whose threat never withdrew 
Images could drop from above like the pendulum in “The Pit 
And the Pendulum” or killer drones to shatter the face of our lover 
Into contemporaneous pasts, futures, celebrities, and other 
Lovers all of whom our attention paid equally in confusion 
And longing, and a fleeting sense like passing ghosts 
Of a barely-remarked-upon catastrophe that was over 
Both before and after it was too late. We were ancient 
Creatures, built for love and war. Everything said so 
And we could not face how abstract it was all becoming 
Because it was also all the opposite of abstract, it was 
Our flesh, our mother’s bloodied forehead 
On the floor of Penn Station, and wherever we hid 
Our face, amid a crowd of stars for example as Yeats 
Once put it, and for stars insert celebrities 
Or astrology here, your choice, and even when 
We closed our eyes, all this was all we looked at 
Every day all day. It was all we could see. 
We were lost in a language of images. 
It was growing difficult to speak. Yet talk 
Was everywhere. Some of us still sought 
To dominate one another intellectually 
Others physically; still others psychically or some 
Of all of the above, everything seeming to congeal 
Into bad versions of sports by other means 
And sports by that time was the only metaphor 
Left that could acceptably be applied to anything. 
The images gave us no rest yet failed over 
And over despite the immensity 
Of their realism to describe the world as we really 
Knew it, and worse, as it knew us


^^EOP^^

you could mistake grief for a diamond
the way it shines when cut into, like fish
eyes in a boat’s drain. The eyes fly
into death seeing everything: the cloud
of alcohol in Sagittarius B2, the ten
billion-trillion-trillion carat diamond
in Centaurus, the soul swimming through
air with its tie hanging silver beneath it
like a kite string. But Philomela’s tongue
does not die. Shards of memory fall through
her, finding muscle at the shore where blood
meets vein, cutting the string that’s kept
her sanity tied to the root. In its place,
mute swans lie dormant beneath frozen
lakes of scar. Tereus says she cannot say
what happened. She says silence writhes
inside the walls of truth, like a fox thrashing
hot in a hound’s jaws, or a riled fly, frantic
to escape the hand that carries it to safety.


^^EOP^^

I was someone in the distance
who never got closer. 
I lived in the past, so the present
was my future. 
When I shook hands, I dissolved
into a mirror 
where I tended
my reflection 
of features so faint
my mother 
strained to see them.
I was the rind, the zest, 
a heart marooned
in the guest of a friend 
in the back row
of a twelve-step room. 
I confessed to the priest
in his box, suppressed 
the north, south, east, and west
desires that pull men 
over the moon.
I crooned the self-help 
tune that every glance
is a gift, every second 
chance a first,
the suicide fence 
on the tall bridge
a positive thing 
for those crawling the walls.


^^EOP^^




After Mohamad Zatari



Ooze, oud. Ease hearts whose eyes sink low.
Be hourglass in the pillaged O—.
Be wells none see. Unstoppered tears,
O oud, we gather in your bowl. 
O ladle of ores, scoop ink here
now seeping from the foreigner,
be sighs, O oud, and cloven aches
in the dark of millions of ears. 
Be gift for famished wails and wakes
to lacks and flares and tented stakes,
the lonely outer sounds of sleeves
eating wind and drowning faces. 
The oud’s a lovely ark that leaks
with tales and bromides we can’t keep,
and miles of ghosts before their sleep.
And miles of ghosts beneath our sleep.


^^EOP^^

1 
Light falls from her voice
and I try to catch it as the last
light of the day fades ...
But there is no form to touch,
no pain to trace. 
2 
Are dreams
taking their seats
on the night train? 
3 
She recites a list of wishes
to keep him from dying. 
4 
The truth lands like a kiss—
sometimes like a mosquito,
sometimes like a lantern. 
5 
Your coffee-colored skin
awakens me to the world. 
6 
We have only one minute
and I love you. 
7 
All children are poets
until they quit the habit
of reaching for butterflies
that are not there. 
8 
The moment you thought you lost me,
you saw me clearly
with all of my flowers,
even the dried ones. 
9 
If you pronounce all letters
and vowels at once,
you would hear their names
falling drop by drop
with the rain. 
10 
We carved
our ancestral trees into boats.
The boats sailed into harbors
that looked safe from afar. 
11 
Trees talk to each other
like old friends
and don’t like to be interrupted.
They follow anyone who
cuts one of them,
turning that person
into a lonely cut branch.
Is this why in Arabic
we say “cut of a tree”
when we mean
“having no one”? 
12 
The way roots hide
under trees—
there are secrets,
faces, and wind
behind the colors
in Rothko’s untitled canvases. 
13 
Will the sea forget its waves,
as caves forgot us? 
14 
Back when there was no language
they walked until sunset
carrying red leaves
like words to remember. 
15 
It’s true that pain
is like air, available
everywhere,
but we each feel
our pain hurts the most. 
16 
So many of them died
under stars
that don’t know their names. 
17 
If she just survived with me. 
18 
A flame dims in the fireplace,
a day slips quietly away from the calendar,
and Fairuz sings, “They say love kills time,
and they also say time kills love.” 
19 
The street vendor offers tourists
necklaces with divided hearts,
seashells to murmur the sea’s secrets in your ear,
squishy balls to make you feel better,
maps of homelands you fold
in your pocket as you go on your way. 
20 
I am haunted by the melody
of a forgotten song
sung while two hands
tied my shoelaces into a ribbon
and waved me goodbye to school. 
21 
If I could photocopy
the moment we met
I would find it full
of all the days and nights. 
22 
It won’t forget the faraway child,
that city whose door stayed open
for passersby, tourists, and invaders. 
23 
The moon is going to the other
side of the world
to call my loved ones. 
24 
The seasons change
colors and you come and go.
What color is your departure?


^^EOP^^

When people say
“Time is running out”
I see an alarm clock
with a bell on top
and with arms and legs
dashing out the door
of a room in which
time has stopped
reminding the human race
that we are running out. 
I carry this idea
to a corner of the room
and set it down
gently.
I don’t want
to wake it up.
Then I tiptoe away.
 


^^EOP^^

When I say But mother, Black or not Black,
Of course you are polyethnic,

^^EOP^^

The pines are
stately 
still 
reflecting
upon themselves 
without knowing it 
in eternity 
upside down. 
 


^^EOP^^

1 
One dies. Eschrichtius
           robustus, gray,
           of the sole living genus, of  baleen, 
of the family
Eschrichtiidae, slate
           gray or darker,
           and notable, now, for 
gray-white patterned scars
left by parasites, two
           blowholes “which can
           create a distinctive 
V-shaped
blow ... in calm wind conditions”;
           and falls, as
           it falls, as through blue breeze; 
and swirls, light
as a tissue, drifting down—
           down, through
           the cool layers, the sifted light 
of sea-wind-
warmed currents, loose galaxy
           of whirling flecks, slow-
           motion, in a haze; 
in whose first stage, falling,
now, the “mobile
           scavengers” drift alongside,
           sleeper sharks 
and thin hagfish
—or, as the book calls them,
           “enrichment opportunists”—
           come to feed 
at the soft flanks and fat,
for weeks, as the
           bones grow exposed, all
           of them, spinning down ...     
2 
We might hear rain before the rain. Sirens.
Hail before it cracked the hundred panes. 
Or lay our heads on the desks and listen
to our blood whispering in the woodgrain. 
In 1963 the warnings are
piecemeal, part of the good day’s play or work. 
We might need to cover our heads. Hold hands
in the hallway. Look away from the blast. 
— 
July 29, 2013: a sperm whale found deceased on the beach of
a small island off the coast of the Netherlands had dozens of
plastics bags, nine meters of rope, two long pieces of garden hose,
a couple of flower pots, and a plastic spray canister in its stomach. 
— 
I’m watching a hummingbird, bare thumb-
top—gray-green blur—dip to my feeder bulb 
and dart off, over the barn, to a wire. A. colubrus. Little serpent. I hear 
the burr of wings; and already it’s back—
dips again, hovers there; sips now; attacks 
the tube of red sugar-water until
bubbles aerate, like an aneurism. 
— 
June 28, 2016: an 80-foot blue whale (Balaenoptera musculus)
caught in 200 feet of fishnet, crab lines, channel buoys off the
coast of Orange County: lines cut through its mouth, wrapped
its fins. “Blue whales are typically thought to be more offshore
animals, and crabbing gear is thought to be more inshore, but
obviously the spatial overlap between those two is coming into
conflict,” explained Leigh Torres. “The fact that we see this
entanglement isn’t terribly surprising, though it is unique.” 
— 
Weeks I couldn’t sleep. Years I couldn’t waken.
I found a note I’d written one ill night.  pines shredded      ice snow
                                                 such wind
        rips the night 
I run my tongue above my tooth, aching.
And know it’s coming back once more. The warning 
—right cuspid, gum swollen, puffed as a pea—
two days before the viral fire, the toxic sea ...  
— 
March 23, 2016: 13 sperm whales (Physeter macrocephalus)
beached themselves off the shallow coast at Tönning, Germany:
“We may never know the exact cause,” wrote Danny Groves.
Stomach contents: 43 feet of fishing net, 100 plastic bags,
golf balls, sweatpants, greenhouse glass sheeting, cigarette
butts, hypodermic needles, a plastic car engine cover, a bucket ...  
— 
Cottonwood seeds. Gnats’ wings in the sunlight.
Whirl of dust motes in the haze of still light. 
If it were so simple as to drift down.
If it were so easy as getting up again. 
Little bug, little serpent. The air slows
with summer thickness when you fly away. 
And the feeder bobs there like a red buoy
on the green waters of a distant bay.    
3 
A drawer full of notes. Years trying to— 
             all night sweating
                                                    sheets so heavy      burning—
             600 lymph nodes       
                                               I know where you live— 
She’s eighteen months old. Up, up?  I’m afraid— 
             One of my titers read 2560
             “Active.” “Acute.” “You really are sick.” 
so weak—to pick her up. I pick her up— 
             Aggregate allergen: grasses, wheat, milk,
             acidics, trees (?): multiple exclusion ...  
Temp 103.7. Good night, moon— 
             After a sunny walk with her wagon—
             next day—      panting
                                                            testicles so swollen
                                                 freezing 
system flushing itself—into the waves— 
             Aggregate infection: Liver. Kidney.
             Heart sac. Spleen. Gut. Urinary tract. Neck ...  
good night, night bird—far off—through the high pines—    
4 
In the second stage,
at 4,000 feet
            (or 122
           “atmospheres”), 
weight suspends;
a heavy thing in one world
             floats like willow seed in a breeze
             in this,  a moving vast through that darkness, silent ... 
             they don’t need
             much else—oxygen, nor light— 
the frilled shark
and fang-tooth, the spider crab,
             the vampire squid, who strip the dead
             down now 
beyond bones
to the merest blueprint of
             whale; slow down-spinning of
             months, a year, more, 
the hypoxic haze,
the “marine snow”
             in a kind
             of afterlife of weather— 
drifting down of plankton, and
protists, soot,
             sand, fecal matter in aggregates
           “held 
together by a
sugary mucus”—
             all, sifting down,
             through the aphotic zone; 
and its vast weight,
once 40-plus tons, skin
           “like a peeled hard-boiled egg,”
             patched with orange 
whale lice, white barnacles,
it too long since
             sloughed, shed, dissolving as
             particulate 
snowfall, orbital,
in this new galaxy
             of darknesses;
             borne, like seed, floats down ...     
5 
I have been silent for a long time now.
You know I am serious about the whales. 
You don’t know this. I floated there in stillness,
in white sheets. White boughs breaking. The pines 
in ice and wind like a hammering pulse.
When I woke I couldn’t speak or make sense. 
And when I slept again I didn’t sleep.
And more fires spreading through the body’s depths. 
— 
“Plastic Garbage Patch Bigger Than Mexico Found in Pacific.” National Geographic: These pieces of plastic are not necessarily
floating bottles, bags, and buoys, but “teeny-tiny pieces of plastic resembling
confetti.” 90% of sea birds consume it. “Over eight million tons of new plastic
trash finding its way into the oceans every year.”
The Great Pacific Garbage Patch moves in a clockwise direction,
like a toilet. It circulates an area of 7.7 million square miles.
“70% of marine debris sinks to the bottom of the ocean.”  New York Times: Plastiglomerate was “discovered” by Charles Moore,
a sea captain, surveying plastic washed up on a remote, polluted
stretch of sand on Hawaii’s Big Island. It is a new stone, a fusion
of natural and manufactured materials. “If [plastiglomerates] are
buried within the strata,” says Jan Zalasiewicz, an English geologist,
“I don’t see why they can’t persist in some form for millions of years.” 
— 
You’d think we’d learned enough to duck our heads.
(It’s time for arithmetic.) Okay, kids, 
who can tell me what you get when you divide
a number by itself? Silence. Overhead 
the hum of fluorescents. The swallowing sea
of storm clouds out the window beyond the trees. 
What does it take to raise sufficient alarm?
When do you hide? Where do you fly from harm? 
— 
Aggregates increase “like snow.” Aggregation theory represents
a two-state system [“time for chemistry, kids”] ... to characterize
the formation of marine aggregates and the loss due to sinking:
 
 
where  · C1 is the concentration of the cells · r is the radius of each cell · G is the shearing rate · α is the stickiness coefficient · g is the growth rate. 
Thus, aggregation of marine particles is more prevalent when
cell and particle concentration is higher (e.g. algal blooms). 
— 
Do the math. That’s what the specialist said.
The first doctor winked. Some people just need 
to get sick in order to relax. Thanks.
Your T cells go bat-crazy. They attack 
the health host: it’s your immune system
out of control ... viral opportunism 
running rampant through your lymph. It won’t stop.
You can’t sleep. Flushing toxins down the pipe ...  
— 
Wikipedia: marine snow is a variety of mostly organic matter,
including dead or dying animals, and plankton ... also plant parts
and degrading plant material. Because of the relatively long
residence time of the ocean’s thermohaline circulation, carbon
transported as marine snow into the aphotic zone by the biological
pump can remain out of contact ... for more than a thousand years.  A blue jay lands in the fringe tree. Sudden downfall of petals. 
The massive galaxy of matter as the body floats down through
the ocean’s zones is granular, a snowy sand, agglomerate of
debris in slow orbit around the disintegrating husk of whale.
Here are the five most common “unnatural” causes of death.
Entanglement. Ship and propeller strikes. Commercial fishing
(i.e. human appetite). Bycatch. Climate change (i.e. global warming). 
— 
I was sick for years. Now it’s coming back.
Little serpent sipping there beyond the deck.  A. colubrus. The need for names (my friend
wants to help) is thirst for clarity, affinity. 
Yet sometimes I watch the trees. Let the whip
maples weep and go blur above the barn. 
Now they’re a wash of green, a mere wave.
Now they carry me, as he says, in their arms.    
6  Viral-capsid antigen: 2410—  
           Hummingbird’s back again—green bulb blinking
           its alarm.
                              Now the first heavy drops ... 
Good night, little one—asleep with her toys— 
           Aggregate testing:   lymphoma    TB
           “tumors?”    HIV    leukemia    Grave’s— 
Like photons, slowly, around a gray sun— 
           And when I blink and bring them back, in their
           distinctions, the silver limbs like water— 
“chronic running into walls”     “chronic fog”— 
           Every second, trillions of neutrinos
           passing through your arm, “like you’re transparent”— 
CFS   ::   CF/IDS   ::   ME  ::  “no kidding?”— 
           Right. Sperm. Great blue. Minke (common; Antarctic).
           Fin. Sei. Humpback. Bryde’s. Gray. Orca. Pygmy ... 
Cicada husk hangs on through the hard rain —    
7 
When I pull out my old notes, my notebooks full of shaky words— 
In the third stage, a whale fallen through the deepest oceanic zones—  
bathyal, abyssal—may take a hundred years—more—to decompose— 
When I find the old books, I see check marks, dog-ears, underlines—   Full restoration of health is still your hope and expectation, but— 
giant isopods—squat lobsters—osedax—sea cucumber —bristle worms—  
You know I am serious about the whales:    [Views of Jeopardy]— 
Born in 1925, in Pittsburgh, PA—with a metro population greater—  
than the global population of whales, perhaps less than two million—  
When you hear [        ]     it’s already [        ]    Shh.  Close your eyes—  
Languages are dying at a rate of one every two weeks— 
pine pollen, gnats’ wings — glints in air — dust motes, mold spore—  
this.fucked.flux.lux.crux // (broken piece of lamp garbage)— 
Each eye the size of a grapefruit. Heart bigger than a smart car—  
But what we see is infinitely less than what we don’t see. Up, up?— 
Cottonwood seed—polymers, i.e. plastic “foam”: gas bubbles—  
I can’t believe I’m getting it again, “you have always”—“such— 
darkness”—measured by a billion bioluminescent wanderers—  
Wherever you sit is the center of the universe—wherever—you— 
Hear the warning it’s too late. Flatfish. Time for math again, kids—  
polystyrene “for infant teething”—biosemiotics: every cell has— 
a cognitive element. SnotBot: whale-breath DNA—in decay—  
and lived for eighty-seven years—mostly alone—mostly islands— 
In the third stage, a whale fallen through the deepest zones—  
bathyal, abyssal, down through the coldest depths, may take that— 
long to decompose, a hundred years, more — no light — no oxygen—  
[What do you mean]   [what do we do about it]—shh—  
Think of this one, spinning, Eschrichtius robustus, gray, of the—  
sole living genus, of baleen, of the family Eschrichtiidae, like a— 
tissue, floating in the darkness, to settle there. It takes your life.


^^EOP^^

Out of every hundred people 
those who always know better:
fifty-two. 
Unsure of every step:
almost all the rest. 
Ready to help,
if it doesn't take long:
forty-nine. 
Always good,
because they cannot be otherwise:
four—well, maybe five. 
Able to admire without envy:
eighteen. 
Led to error
by youth (which passes):
sixty, plus or minus. 
Those not to be messed with:
forty and four. 
Living in constant fear
of someone or something:
seventy-seven. 
Capable of happiness:
twenty-some-odd at most. 
Harmless alone,
turning savage in crowds:
more than half, for sure. 
Cruel
when forced by circumstances:
it's better not to know,
not even approximately. 
Wise in hindsight:
not many more
than wise in foresight. 
Getting nothing out of life except things:
thirty
(though I would like to be wrong). 
Doubled over in pain
and without a flashlight in the dark:
eighty-three, sooner or later. 
Those who are just:
quite a few at thirty-five. 
But if it takes effort to understand:
three. 
Worthy of empathy:
ninety-nine. 
Mortal:
one hundred out of one hundred—
a figure that has never varied yet.
 


^^EOP^^

          “goaam”   ~
 
                        “goam”   ~
 
“islas de las velas latinas”           (of lateen sails    ~
               “guan”                             “guana”   ~
 
                        “islas de los ladrones”     (of the thieves   ~
 
“guåhan”                                      “guajan”   ~
 
“islas marianas”
 
                                                     (after the spanish queen    ~
 
“bahan”                                                     “guhan”   ~
 
             “guacan”                                       “isla de san juan”   ~
 
“guaon”
 
              “y guan”
 
“omiya jima”                                             (great shrine island)
 
             “guam”
 
                                         “the first province
  
                                                    of the great ocean”    ~
 
                        geographic absence   ~
 
“the old census records show”
 
              because who can stand on the               reef
and name that below water        and sky
 
              imagined territory    ~
 
                          “a spanish baptismal name and”
 
                                      burnt villages
 
                                                   archipelago of
 
“chamoru last names drawn from
            the lexicon of everyday language”
 
                         bone
                                         
                                                    carved word
 
             ~
 
“it is possible they changed
            their last names throughout their lives”
 
                        remade : sovereign
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


^^EOP^^

You wanna know what happened to Elvis
I’ll tell you what happened
I oughta know man I was one of his army
I mean man I was on his side
He made us feel all right
We were the first wave in the
Postwar baby boom
The generation before had just come
Out of the Great Depression and World War II
You know heavy vibes for people to wear
So much heaviness like some kind of
Voiding of the emotions
 
Their music you know the songs
Life always carries
You know every culture has songs
Well anyway their music was
Restrained emotion
You know like you didn’t wanna dance
If you didn’t know how
Which says something strange
Well anyway Elvis came along
About ten years after the nuke
When the only generals America had in
The only army she had were Ike and Mac
And stupor hung over the land
A plague where everyone tried to
Materially free themselves
Still too shell-shocked to understand
To feel what was happening
 
Everything was getting hopeless
Then when Elvis started to rock
The roll just picked up
I mean drabness the beaver showed us
Could only be a foretold future
Who wanted to be Ward and June and
I mean father never did know best
He was still crazy from surviving the war
 
Like there was this psychotic pall
So widespread as to be assumed normal
Heavy man     you know really
Anyway Elvis showed us an out
You know he showed everyboyman and
Everygirlwoman there’s something good
In feeling good
Like a prophet for everyboy everygirl
When someones mom and dad lied
Something about him told us
To be sensual is really okay
Someones mom and dad waltzed us around
Everygirl wasn’t supposed to enjoy it
If she did she was bad and everyboy
Well boys will be boys don’t feel anything
Take what you can
Marry a decent girl when the fun’s done
Like no matter what we did we all were guilty
Maybe someones mom and dad resented
What they missed and while
They were trying to pass it on us
We heard Elvis’s song and
For the first time we made up our own mind
 
The first wave rebelled
I mean we danced even if we didn’t know how
I mean Elvis made us move
Instead of standing mute he raised our voice
And when we heard ourselves               something
Was changing you know like for the first time
We made a collective decision about choices
 
America hurriedly made Pat Boone
A general in the army they wanted us to join
But most of us held fast to Elvis
And the commandants around him
Chuck Berry Buddy Holly Little Richard
Bo Diddley Gene Vincent     you know
Like a different civil war all over again
 
I mean you take don’t be cruel
I want you I need you I love you
And jailhouse rock
Or you take Pat and his white bucks
Singing love letters in the sand
Hell man what’s real here
I mean Pat at the beach in his white bucks
His ears getting sunburned told us
Something about old wave delusion
I mean wanting and needing and imprisonment
We all been to those places but what did
White bucks at the beach understand
Other than more straight line dancing
You know what I mean
 
Anyway man for a while we had a breather
Fresh energy to keep us from falling into the big sleep
Then before long Elvis got assassinated in all the fame
Taking a long time to die       others seized
Control while Elvis rode the needle out
Never understanding what he’d done
 
It’s like we were the baby boom because
Life needed a fresher start
I mean two world wars in a row is
Really crazy man
And Elvis even though he didn’t know he said it
He showed it to us anyway and even though
We didn’t know we heard it        we heard it anyway
 
Man like he woke us up
And now they’re trying to put us
Back to sleep so we’ll see how it goes
Anyway look at the record man
Rock ’n’ roll is based on revolution
Going way past 33 1/3
You gotta understand man he was
America’s baby boom Che
I oughta know man     I was in his army
 
 


^^EOP^^

Reading poetry from Central America
After talking with my brother
Suddenly remembering how they kill
Couldn’t really say it straight before
They told me you were dead
I died
They told me your mother was dead
I died again
They told me the kids were dead
I died with each name
 
Fire
The government said accident
They lied
Duck Valley my El Salvador
Our last kiss was our last good-bye
They came for you in winter’s night
Winter’s wind wailed in mourning
Government people searched for days
Scene of crime digging through ashes
Looking for body parts and disturbing evidence
We buried you all in a large grave
While a blizzard covered us in a blanket of snow
How it stormed terrible pain in the land of the free
 
Some ones should have noticed
Fewer women laughing
Some ones should have noticed
Fewer children growing up
But this isn’t El Salvador
 
Warm strong willed woman
I still have memories you gave me
Maybe if we recognized peasant eyes
Maybe if we recognized plantation lies
Archbishop Romero would have nothing
On you
Trying not to cry how will I ever stop
Ever see a wounded lion try hiding pain
Watch out it doesn’t work
But this isn’t El Salvador
 
At times I feel every embrace we shared
At times every tender moment still lives
Met Sandinista who touched my cheek
Kind of like you used to
Said to me you are one of us
But this isn’t El Salvador
 
Gentle woman natural mother natural world
Some people won’t comprehend what happens
Who wants realities cluttered by acts of war
Have to keep a lot inside at times
Not offending people with words
They don’t want to see pictures of
But this isn’t El Salvador
 
Some people told me I’m strong to survive
I’m not strong I’m not weak     no morality
No right no wrong one tear at a time I fall I rise
But this isn’t El Salvador
 
You loved your people
In the face of the American dream
Fry bread and tortillas some wars are the same
Who thinks Wounded Knee and Sand Creek
Happen only in history books      is this not history
We live we die                       but this isn’t El Salvador
 
The first look you gave me
Your eyes spoke your spirit your heart
My heart our heart there was no other way
Some ones say we’re with you brother
We understand what’s been done
Some ones say but this isn’t El Salvador
This is America                     yes I know
Almost two thousand seasons
We fall we rise       we fall we rise
 
 


^^EOP^^

Now you want us
To cry your tears for you
After we’ve already bled for you
Already been dead to you
Now you want us
To cry your tears for you
 
Chapters of a democracy story
Descendants of genocide
Twelve score and more years ago
We went from being the majority
To being the smallest minority
Now you want us
To cry your tears for you
 
We saw that emptying
Early morning skyline
Back through that horizon
Duck Valley 1979, Wounded Knee
Sand Creek, that Trail of Tears
Exactly how did our land
Become your country
Now you want us
To cry your tears for you
While we’re still crying tears of our own
 
With your past as your future
That industrial ruling class
Using religion as a weapon
Distilling love into hate
Pointing fingers and name calling evil
Sacrificing lives and blood
Making the innocent the new virgins
Offering to the gods of profit
Now you want us
To cry your tears for you
 
In the homeland security
Pretending corporate corruption
Isn’t economic terrorism
Money talks while the government listens
Compiling files on ones who think different
Conditioning an acceptance of debt
And not to expect the truth
So get used to hearing the lie
Now you want us
To cry your tears for you
 
Misusing the beauty
Turning freedom into a killing machine
Mass murdering the environment
Weaponizing the psychology of fear
And pushing material addiction with
A substitution of rules faking the law
The bill of rights becomes collateral damage
Making the constitution another broken treaty
Now you want us
To cry your tears for you
 
Way this story is unfolding
We may end up crying together
As in crying at the same time
But we’re short on tears to cry for you
With all these tears to cry of our own
Now you want us
To cry your tears for you
 


^^EOP^^

It’s evening again, late. I go out into the lane and doodle a beard and mustache on the face of the moon with a red pen.
  Over the next hill an old teacher of mine takes off her glasses and wipes the lenses with a soft cloth. She can’t believe what she’s just seen.
 


^^EOP^^

Look at us
We are of earth and water
Look at them
It is the same
Look at us
We are suffering all these years
Look at them
They are connected
Look at us
We are in pain
Look at them
Surprised at our anger
Look at us
We are struggling to survive
Look at them
Expecting sorrow be benign
 
Look at us
We are the ones called pagan
Look at them
On their arrival
Look at us
We are called subversive
Look at them
Descending from name callers
Look at us
We wept sadly in the long dark
Look at them
Hiding in technologic light
Look at us
We buried the generations
Look at them
Inventing the body count
Look at us
We are older than America
Look at them
Chasing a fountain of youth
 
Look at us we are embracing earth
Look at them
Clutching today
Look at us
We are living in the generations
Look at them
Existing in jobs and debt
Look at us
We have escaped many times
Look at them
They cannot remember
Look at us
We are healing
Look at them
Their medicine is patented
Look at us
We are trying
Look at them
What are they doing
Look at us
We are children of earth
Look at them
Who are they
 


^^EOP^^




J'aurais dans mes mains ton visage obscur
—Yves Bonnefoy



[1]
what should i call this poem i’ll call it a rush of chambers
a racket of foliage i’ll call it love poem with dark
face pretty title someone i don’t know who tells me watch
out for words with meaning don’t look for truth in beauty
learn to breathe with your gaze in an art gallery
a woman with sad eyes devours rats devours picassos
sleeps in hospital rooms listen to this story once upon
a time a princess bah death will not be long in coming
death with its blue eyes on my empty plate
 
[2]
she’ll never know who i am she’s blind and hates when people
look at her i offer her a bonfire a fistful of snow offer her
a freshly cut rose what should we talk about now? let’s talk
about the sky let’s talk about fear there’s going to be a storm tonight
a person would do better to drop and never get up how’s that i ask
but she disappears i don’t know if she’ll ever return still
i wait with my milk tooth with my old stamp
collection with my razor blade and a mirror at night
she comes whispers in my ear there’s no one but you
in a million years i’ll learn her real name know
her dark face flush with sky flush with fear
 
[3]
why am i writing this? you incandescent pupil i’m a swan
that dreams of dying in your dream inside a box where hell burns
where everything is blinding the storm doesn’t say a word stays mute
you should have seen me that time the vineyards were
in bloom the cows were grazing i was happy you were happy
the enigma’s transparence cooled our coffee the myth’s
dissection the death of any and all theories i’m a swan
my dream is to die in your dream why didn’t you look at me?
 
[4]
my students asked me what is the meaning of pain
so i sliced a doll’s finger with a razor blade there
was no blood no batting of lashes this i told them is pain
 
[5]
i read and write at the same time it’s only proper the mountains
overwhelmingly approve the night shuts one eye and looks at me
with the other there is nothing around but plastic flowers
purgatories on the brink of closure doors and windows the light
grows impatient time destroys clocks may i speak?
there’s no need to the pages are on fire your lamp is burning
i take off my clothes and let the cold ignite my penis
 
[6]
now i come to the hardest part of the story the part
where i talk about porpoises and dolphins the woman
with the sad eyes vomits rats into the toilet i speak of
my desire i don’t want her to know about it i’ll just say a word
brush my hand against her hair and if she runs ah the lost words
the dark rooms each with its death rattle of birds
all soaring skyward the woman closes her eyes
go in me she says i’ve forgotten your name i don’t have
a name from high above the bed a god observes us
his wounded body conveying how much she wants me
 
[7]
sorrowful boy come whenever you like i’ll burn in your memory sear
your tongue all kinds of confusion will find a place in your senses
any expression will be allegory in our hands i have a notebook
for you a glass of water some dead fish i said to her sorrowful girl
i love notebooks await every night a glass of water
on my tongue dead fish are a delirium my students
ask what’s delirium i unbutton my shirt and show them
your breasts this is delirium
 
[8]
a rush of overflowing chambers it’s playtime now you’re
the shadow and i’m the light you lick my wounds while i sink
into the lightning flash into both sets of darkness where you sleep
and i await the word smoke is the word tomorrow
your body and mine will sing and there will again be woods
unfurling before my eyes open venetian blinds a fount
of angels atop the dirty laundry tell me a story anything
what’s important is that we awaken and not give in to sleep
happy loves rot as surely as blighted ones do
bye bye she says bye bye flowers in her wounded hands
 
[9]
to let the body not love drift through other bodies
that’s how banishment how violent expulsion begins quite
a lovely light is dying amid the debris no one can see it
ice is deceptive when it shines bright the sky an irrevocable
past a voice inspiring pity a voice that never reaches us
 
[10]
disturbing the marble slab’s geometry beneath her feet
the sought-after metaphor is a blue cyclone the dark alley
the grave of all projects though nothing stands in our way
we can be happy but there’s no one here only me besides
the words the untimely trips and scarlet buses i remember
her light which made the pain grow dark and still she went away
i followed until i lost her trace no one ever taught me to lose a desire
a purple cloud envelopes my body the students ask me
what is a body i draw a word in the air the word bursts
and drops to the ground this i tell them is a body 
 


^^EOP^^

[1]
i wonder where the title the smoke of distant fires comes from
i heard it in a park once at the back of my creeping devoted
ear the moon was red the forest as always abloom with
heliotropes and blue begonias yes i heard it in a park once
a dog was barking the moon was red the sun had already set
 
[2]
eyeing my steps she’d say good but with less emphasis
the words stank to high heaven the serpent was singing sweetly
careful she told me it’s a monstrosity a misshapen beast
years ago i placed a leaf from a linden tree on his back
which left only a scratch a mere flesh wound where time
records its march where the mangled falcon sleeps the blood
on kriemhild’s breasts recalling the blood on kriemhild’s
breasts her death at the hands of some hunter of wild
boars the serpent was dancing the moon was red the
hero didn’t seem to notice i have lost the pot of gold
he said i don’t know who could have stolen it from me
 
[3]
the trees let go of their branches allowing them to fall
it was spring and they couldn’t bear the weight of the snow
the sun shone darkly deer came down from the hills
rats fled the swamp and everything before me was allegory
yet i didn’t write a word
 
[4]
who is eyeing my steps? who is dictating me words?
who is telling me now is the time? i don’t know
 
who is eyeing my steps who is dictating me words who
is telling me now is the time
 
[5]
i’m with my parents in melbourne this has to be a dream
i’ve never been to melbourne my parents look at a plate of
food with no interest one way or the other i feel uncomfortable
at times that’s how i remember you i can never get past
your eyes i don’t have any eyes ask siegfried ask the serpent
ask him what’s become of your words of the papers you
tossed in the wastebasket of the much hoped-for rain in the linden
tree forest i’m talking about hell about charon’s coins
about the barking dog the one that won’t let us sleep
 
[6]
we’re not in melbourne and this is no dream truth
to tell i don’t know where we are i see a park nearby hear
some music the rustling of leaves we’re alone tonight
you’re like a tiger i love your fear the streak of light rending
your shadow the solar mantle where beauty burns forget
the flesh for a moment forget about beauty for now you’re
with me tonight why is the moon so red she asks
 
[7]
it isn’t night and we aren’t in park we’re in thebais
at either the beginning or the end of a storm it’s like a line
you know by heart memory can be so cruel preserving
a marble column a red desert and nothing else around them
but rocks spiders scorpions a pious crowd and a rabbit
why a pious crowd she asks why a rabbit i must have read
about them in a poem seen them in a medieval painting or some
movie short perhaps praying high in the air i grasped the serpent
and if a cloud brushed my ears i gave god thanks for it was his hand
he ordered me to read but no one had ever taught me how
 
[8]
you must be simeon then she said pointing out my sandals
my lack of social graces my eyes brimming over with desert
 
[9]
she listens to the rustling of the leaves to the whistling of the wind
tell me we’ve always been here tell me you never went away
read me the part about the hero’s betrayal the dream of the eagle
devouring the falcon tell me it’s nighttime our neighbors wave
at us with no interest one way or the other the birds pick apart
     their nests
on the riverbank a dog barks a dog that won’t let us sleep
 
[10]
water and mud common ground sketch their alphabet the metaphor
is burning i see it shrivel to nothing amid the rubble we don’t
need to write don’t need to read tonight the serpent
is very excited for it’s celebrating a birth as the words rot
and the moon shines a charon’s palm what should i do?
 
hold on to it she says write the smoke of distant fires
 


^^EOP^^

Wandering slowly back after dark one night
above a river, toward a suspension bridge,
a sound concerns him that might be a tune
or might not: noise drifting in, trailing off.
 
Then concerns him again, now clearly a song
pulsing out from the opposite bank, being sung
by chorusing men, all pewter-haired or bald,
in the function suite of a shabby hotel.
Above their heads a conductor’s hand
draws and casts the notes with a white wand.
 
Songs about mills and mines and a great war,
about mermaid brides and solid gold hills,
songs from broken hymnbooks and cheesy films.
 
Then his father’s voice rising out of that choir,
and his father’s father’s voice, and voices
of fathers before, concerning him only,
arcing through charged air and spanning the gorge.
He steps over the cliff edge and walks across.


^^EOP^^

your values aren’t right
for this age
or memory
 
color line. globes
of the Sea
survive revelation
 
as the Moon reflects
its own interior
revolver. I live
 
as a condemned
callused body
under salt water sand, far from your destructions. where are
 
the people of the lost (shut out the hate)
arc, in a service (love so remote)
to more water? worn
 
eclipse of a human
emergence, foils of the barricade
a face speaks
 
from isomorphic ferns
lines of sacrifice
burn the god of a naked mammal
 
I am the Loon
“the silence of our
beautiful consciousness”
 
“in love with everything
you make it impossible to be myself in this
place. where can I go?” – Baraka
 
attentive score
for the core
of death: black, red, and white as I wake
 
an expansive heart
absorbs all the evil
a veil of the world
 
and cancels
the Loon’s empty
submergence
 
for more of the deep
currents of the light’s
darkest refuge. I am the Loon
 
I hunt with blood in my eyes
 
I wander in the morning
and float above
the wound fish of the spirits
 


^^EOP^^

this morning I went to the doctor
and talked to him about this move
 
on New Year’s Eve I had trouble connecting
my thoughts on Sade and reason
 
we rang in the New Year
with Miriam Makeba’s Africa
 
I’d noticed that my inner life
had expanded, and that I was having trouble
 
thinking through it. The doctor said that Geodon
would loosen my thinking—I noticed
 
that I’d been moving through life for 10 years
in a Zyprexa mold. thought control, at its best,
 
like a sonnet. I do not feel invaded
by the television that I never see. Brenda made me
 
feel more loved than ever this morning, as my thoughts
expanded. Last night, in the slow cooker, I made
 
Lamb and Goat curry—amazingly good. I’d thought
to send Joel, and Peter, and Michael an email
 
letting them know of my transition, but did not. The consequences
of this transition could be catastrophic. I feel more loving toward Brenda
 
than ever. I could die, or worse. As I meditated today
my books to the left of me seemed packed and dense
 
against the wall. Soon, Chuck will be here
to play chess upstairs. I told the doctor this morning
 
that the philosophy and religion of the cyborg
have not yet been written. My
 
poetry
has just begun. I am
 
a Fourth Form,
though not as Dodie saw it. Together,
 
we can belong in this world. Artaud
arrived at the double
 
as I have. We share more in common
than I’d known before last night. I need less sleep
 
than before, and I sleep better
and am more rested. I feel sad and cheated
 
that I need to rely on drugs
so completely. I wonder about Paul Bowles’ stories.
 
I need to reach out
to others
 
through this. The doctor, this morning, said
that I was enlightened, but not
 
quite there—somehow—I can’t remember
how. I doubt he knows
 
what he means by “enlightenment.” I felt far away
from my sister yesterday, when she called. Michael
 
talked to me of Christ’s
tenderness. I feel tender in this moment. Over
 
and over I feel that words
do not represent me. I am not
 
sure what that implies of my intentions
in using them. Yesterday, Brenda and I saw
 
the Warhol show of the last ten years
of his life. There seemed to have been hope
 
to live meaningfully in capitalism then. ~~~~~~~ The waves
of this beginning, the new life of my mind
 
is settling. It’s been a while since I’ve written. I’ve decided
to mark my continuing with the seven tildes above. And I added
 
a title tonight, Muerto Vecino, after Zizek’s dubious interpretation
of Kierkegaard’s neighbor, and because of the funeral home
 
across the street. My thinking has changed, my being has changed,
I am more alert and more engaged in thinking through the world.
 
And I am able to speak better. I don’t know what this means
about who I am. I try not to feel let down that for so much of my life
 
I’ve been restrained by psychotropic drugs. Before Zyprexa it was even
worse, with up to 6 meds, as I’ve said over and over to friends. I feel
 
the need to make clear what my obstacles have been. Not for pity,
a little for pride, but also for hope. If I can do that, then maybe I can help
 
someone not suffer so much, like Brenda. I replaced the kitchen faucet
this past weekend. It makes me very happy that I was able to do it
 
successfully, without ever having been handy before in my life, and after
spending most of my life disdainful of being practical in that way. What a joy
 
to make Brenda so happy. I don’t know how much longer I will live,
and have often thought, recently, that it would be tragic if I died anytime
 
soon, but that it’s imperative that I accept death when it arrives, after
affirming life as fully as I can. It’s too easy, and stupid, to be simplistically
 
oppositional. And to not know that people can ruin anything, but
that the substantial things have value of themselves, is foolish. I don’t want to stop
 
at my own ignorance and lack of forbearance. I don’t believe in the West
on its own. As Michael says, the only thing that makes sense here
 
is love. I have everything I could possibly ever want or need for now. More books
will come, more music too. And love is immeasurable
 
when it’s real. I am so grateful to have more waking time
on the weekends. I plan on making breakfast for Brenda
 
every Saturday and Sunday that I can
from now on. Early. I see gardens in the future of our household.
 
And I wonder about a Great Spirit. What does the name matter? I see the stones that live
without water. I see the smoke that cleanses my vision, and a network of consciousness,
 
with each node another, on and on that way to the depths. My thinking will never
grasp it all
 
because of that recursively created network of interior life. My thinking stops
then, barely able to contain the spherical and vast darkness
 
from which all light arises. That’s why what I see is dark. It is brilliant
in its darkness. Like onyx and flint. I can only talk around what I’ve seen
 
the past couple of weeks. It reframes, completely, the rest of my creative
life and the rest of my days. All I aim to do now is to focus my attention,
 
so that I can see it all again in retrospect. So that I can read
and gather more tools for understanding it. So that I understand myself,
 
and something of the world, and love, and so that I help others. Geodon
will not erase it. I’ve seen it already, many times. It is my natural state.
 
I no longer see it as only hallucination. It is a way of being. A way that I can flesh
out, here. Slowly. Carefully. And as I do, its destructive powers,
 
which are massive and righteous, will subside. As it will know that it is being
given to the world. Because it belongs to all. And all will be there soon.
 
There are signs already. Because to see it is to break, unless one knows something
of love. It makes LSD
 
small. It is God and the Universe as One.
I am not the first to see it. But I am a person
 
given a chance
to write it, letter by letter, slowly, in terms of the light of my ignorance
 
to see more fully
what I do not know. I do not offer anything
 
but poems. But it breaks through
my mouth to arrive at the hearts of the world, at the hearts of the horses
 
of the world, to allow us all to speak in silence. It is not God or the Universe.
It is One as All in you. Because I cannot see through myself
 
without it. I see clearly
that the sun will not arrive
 
in this new weather. But that the moon
will take its place. I see clearly that the sun is there
 
to bring meaning to the sky, and that the earth is more full
with the light of the world
 
extinguished for a brilliant view of wilderness. This is a view
that extends through opposites
 
and arrives at a single body
to witness this song. And this song is not the answer
 
that you believe in, because one day
I will speak to you again
 
in the rain
and show you
 
that I do not know. Because knowledge
belongs to the earth. And the earth makes everything
 
I know. And now that there is less and less freedom
from coercion in a moneyed world, and now that Claire,
 
a friend, is moving on to be Christ in her own way, now
that Guénon continues to call me to understand
 
my ignorance, to depart again
from the friends at Kuna Yala, where I helped with the water,
 
with Brenda watching over me
from a hammock between palms, now that Panamá
 
calls again to give me a union
of the world, in more than two ways,
 
and to distinguish from the surface of these times, I
receive
 
a call to awaken in the snow. I receive a call to acknowledge
that Geodon has planted itself
 
with capital
in my consciousness, but that the world
 
is stronger than to balance itself
from the ozone and people alone. We are not erased, and we
 
do not control the earth. Geodon
is an act of kindness, an agreement
 
to live this life
in a way that arrives
 
with the weather. It may continue
for the rest of my life, or it may not. I will not be afraid again
 
to see things as I do, and I will not
seek out the truth, intentionally, without some kind of agreement
 
with this custom. Because that is a way, for now,
that I speak. And it is useful, though better left
 
invisible. And the name, Geodon, brings trouble, I can see
through it enough, with enough love in my life, to believe
 
in the end of the reign of the Anti-Christ (not Obama). I need to learn again
to be and to write. But to deliver
 
what I saw
I must return
 
to the explosion of my inner life. To start with, otherwise and generally, I see
only outlines. Creation manifests
 
from every direction, in an infinity
of dimensions. Most of us
 
spend most of our energy
conscious of a very few of these dimensions. Imagine
 
more than the greatest works of art
manifesting endlessly
 
from more directions than one can possibly count
every micro second, timelessly. It’s glorious.
 
And the only way to see it with any balance
is impeccably, ethically, compassionately, and with at least an aim
 
toward the Divine. It IS the Divine. God and the Universe
spoke to me. It is all, always, speaking to us. And what it says
 
is endless
it brings wholeness
 
to the precious moment. It goes away
when one tries to pin it down, as I do. I say less and less
 
as I try to describe it. It is endlessly
generative. It is good
 
but pitiless and merciful. It demands of us
that we arrive. And now that the thinking manifests
 
in a way that allows
for union and a bridge, in a way that avoids
 
easy condemnation, a thinking that reveals
the links toward light
 
in motion, a primordial
form of being
 
in a new world that needs no one
to believe in it, a vast chasm
 
in what a bureaucracy of thought
tries to pin us down with, the hole in time
 
that allows us to be free
is here, we know it. All of us
 
can see through delusion. There is no road
in the aftermath of earthquakes, no need for the time
 
to extinguish the elements, no person
locked to your heart
 
in the morning, no water to drink
without thirst, no air is necessary to breathe
 
under the water of seeing, no
need for the earth to do anything
 
other than revolve, in this
new light. Space
 
undoes our links
to the immovable. We deliver
 
the undone to the plains
and see what the harvest
 
will fill with seed. The whole
does not exist
 
within outlines. All we can do
is move to it. The music
 
is unheard of
in this world. It exists
 
without origin. It is otherworldly,
primordial, and gentle. It vibrates,
 
equally, in the Lamb, in
the Lotus, in
 
the stones—there is no place
unknown to it. It is
 
music, and nothing more,
and nothing less. It is that
 
everywhere possible. It is harmonious
infinitely, and allows for any sound. To some
 
it might seem like noise, but that
is only the part. To achieve it
 
one need only listen. I cannot always
hear it, but I have
 
heard it. And now
in my new mind, I listen for it
 
undaunted and silent. I feel it filling
my body with love. Sometimes
 
I have horrific thoughts. But I am learning
that these are but strong notes
 
in the fullness
of the music
 
of my new mind. I can’t always hear the song,
but I feel it now. It makes all context
 
vast. I will receive it
as long as it is here. I will not push
 
one way or the other with it. It is a fullness
and does not want to be made
 
into a force. It is a force
without me, and only to the degree
 
to which this is true. No longer being able
to receive it
 
will imply a failure
of my imagination, of my ethics,
 
and my spirit. There is no way
to hold on to it. It serves
 
no one. And it includes us all. To continue to receive it
more fully
 
I grow. This implies
the world. It implies clarity. It implies
 
motion. But it rests motionlessly. If I have a softness in my voice
it is caused by this music. When I don’t
 
I feel less. My voice can be loud
to receive it, but this loudness
 
cannot be yoked
in outlines. There is nothing I can do.
 
There is nothing to expect. I can only
let it go. And I can only be afraid
 
of the horror of my thoughts
without this music. But now that I know
 
a taste of it, I have
hope. Good people
 
feed it. I haven’t always known
what to do with it and others. But now
 
I am a little less confused
about this. This is due
 
to Buddhism, the little that I know
of its practice. And to love. But it does not stop
 
at my experience. I am ignorant
and cannot offer knowledge. Except this
 
music
does not require knowledge. I’m not sure
 
what it requires. It requires
to be received, but does not need us. Is there a pact
 
between humanity
and God? I don’t know. Is there a God?
 
I don’t know. I’m not sure the question
is enough on its own. Or maybe it is, if God
 
is not limited by concept. And concept
seems to be only a note in this song. Problems
 
feed it. “Love
is the absence of fear.” And “love
 
believes all things,
yet is never deceived.” I aim
 
to see through my delusions. I aim
to be one of many, a small voice
 
in the song of the world. I rest
in silence
 
as I always have. “To have a view
as vast as the sky
 
and as fine
as a grain of sand.” All beings
 
want to be loved
and to be free
 
from suffering. We strive
diligently
 
to learn the vast expanse
and the laser pointed focus
 
of this gift. Remember that light
makes us. And that in this
 
new world, more and more
is made of light. And if that is the case,
 
we move to move
the light of the world. Someday,
 
perhaps, we will move
the light
 
of the computer world. Only the compassionate
and true
 
will be able to do so. Because only they
can be selfless enough
 
to let it move through them. I am not there
to move it
 
but I saw this. Long ago. Briefly. I was offered
a glimpse. It is utterly simple and beyond
 
thought. There is hope. Intention
is a thought. So one
 
sees. I cannot tangle
myself
 
in the line. But only to bridge. That is part of why
it will all move. But I cannot wait
 
until that is possible
to become. I can wait
 
eternally and actively in the world
to remain
 
still. With the calm and expansive
link
 
that allows us to live, so preciously
together, I see through
 
the trouble that startles me, every moment
and allow the seeing
 
of my inner eye
to burn through it. I do not remember
 
what Zyprexa was like any longer. Except that it seems
I have more to work with now, with my mind. And these
 
words are plain, so as to be careful in this new place. I see
that they do not break open my heart, as I read. And for that
 
I relinquish this poem, and allow it to be only
a mark on the road to further inquiry. I allow it to see
 
as I have made a vow to bridge, that my life
aims to be whole, even in the face of potential
 
catastrophes, I grow more and more
to accept death as it arrives, to allow it to soften me,
 
and to transform me as I have been transformed through Geodon, only
to know that there is an isthmus, and that it is eternal. Only that there is one
 
heart to allow myself to speak
in the storms of tribulation, as one speaks
 
to allow the teamwork of the fabric of need
of the bird malingerer to see this
 
in the aftermath of one who has died. Like a bicycle never once
together enough to ride, I see this word here, again, to the removal
 
of a people, to the homeland of union and pace, to the isthmus
of a double link, one ocean to another, one continent
 
to another, to the only union (even as it may be erased in my history), the place
of one heart to allow the song to continue through conflict
 
as she saw it then, one time, far away, when I hadn’t known yet, that this
would be timeless. And there is one to it there to see it there, to allow
 
it there to become and to see there as one is there to see
and to allow one to arrive with it there and to see, and to be one with it
 
there as one is there to be with it. And to see there as one is there to believe
as it is one to believe it there
 
and to see it there as one with the soil and the air and the light and rain
and to be there with one to be there one with it there once again, and to see it there
 
and to believe as there is one there to believe it there again and to see. And to see
there as one is there to believe as it is there again
 
and to see there as one is there to arrive and to be with it
there and to see it there once again and to see it there again
 
and to believe as there is one to it again and to see and to hold
and to see it there and to hold
 
being that nothing holds
dissolving
  written in transition from Zyprexa 10 mg/night to Geodon 160 mg/night—December 23, 2009 (transition started), January 2, 2010 (poem started)
 
 


^^EOP^^

1
 
There is a house in me. It is empty. I empty it.
 
Negative space: the only native emptiness there is.
There is
 
 
2
 
An alarm goes off. It goes on and on. When the alarm
drifts to different parts of the room,
 
I realize, that alarm is the sun.
 
 
3
 
And there is no one who does not need,
 
never an empty seat. And the blind one,
 
he does not find a place. There is a god in him
helping him to need himself.
 
 
4
 
A mother sticks a spoon into my chest,
which is an empty bowl, actually,
 
so the spoon lands quickly
and loudly. Heartbreak in the heart! she says.
 
When you love someone
more than you’ve ever known you could, it is
a good thing, except for the terrifying
 
realization that one day there comes
a parting.
 


^^EOP^^

Gradually a girl’s innocence itself becomes her major crime
A doe and her two fawns bent low in the sumac along the bank of a highway,
     the pinched peach of their ears twitching in the heat
Into the disordered evening my brother cut out only his face from every
     photograph in the hall, carefully slipping each frame back into position
What good does it do?
Decades of no faces other than our own chipping faces
What good does it do, this resemblance to nothing we know of the dollhouse
New parents watch their newborn resting in a sunny patch of an empty
      room, the newborn making sense of its container—
And from the road a deer ripened in death and a tuft of fur—or dandelion—
     tumbled along, gently circled, driftwood, shaking loose, gathered,
     dissolving into the mouths of jewelweed nearby
Earth is rife with iron and blood is rich in stardust
Immediately I spotted one hoof print, then nothing, as if this was where she
      dragged herself out of the body
Strips of tire torn from their orbit Is it right then, that we are left to hurtle alone
 


^^EOP^^

[we] are watching a documentary about home
birth when [you] first feel [neni] kick // embryo
 
of hope // they say plastic is the perfect creation
because it never dies // litters the beaches
 
of o‘ahu, this “gathering place” // the doctor
recommends a c-section // in the sea, plastic multiplies
 
into smaller pieces, leaches estrogenic and toxic
chemicals // if [we] cut open the bellies of whales
 
and large fish, what fragments will [we] find, derived
from oil, absorbed into tissue // because plastic
 
never dissolves, every product ever made still exists,
somewhere, today // i wish my daughter was made
 
of plastic so that she will survive [our] wasteful
hands // so that she, too, will have a great future
 


^^EOP^^




After Mark Levine



1
                                                                        My father, just
out of his teens, stands on the rooftop
of the embassy in Saigon, his birthplace.
He gives his hand to his mother,
and all around them, a thousand hands reach up
 
not to wave. None of his siblings died.
Their bodies like a fine chain balled tight
in a fist. They made it out alive.
Why is he looking at me like this?
  
2
 
This is the idea of a house my father built
in Southern California. These two circle windows
and bamboo on all sides. He brought a jungle here,
complete with French doors.
These are the tiles from his mother’s house, cool
against my cheek. I talk to him in one tongue,
he answers from the morgue.
  
3
 
Let’s get on with it.
When I return to that house, I eat the food
left out for my dead brother. I don’t waste much.
I slide open and close his closet, untangle
the window blinds. The bees are quiet in the
walls, now, their colonies dying off.
His shoes on my father’s feet are the only moving thing
in sight.
  
4
 
On their flight to America,
the choice for lunch was rice or pasta, but when
the meal cart reached them, there was only pasta.
My father smiled at the flight attendant and asked,
Why didn’t you reap enough rice?
  
5
 
The certificates we use to be certain of each other:
ID cards, contracts, permits, deeds,
fishing licenses, driving licenses, car titles, carry permits,
registrations, income statements, IOUs, testimonials,
certificates of birth, custody, and death, letters of consent.
Do I have permission to approach
a drowning man from behind?
  
6
 
I dreamed last night, my mother says,
that you were in danger and your brother was young still,
though you were the same
as you are now.
He was looking for me and I was looking for you. 
 
7
 
I sit at my desk, typing and deleting
words.
Twice I dreamed I fucked my brother.
I keep trying to wake up. I keep getting things wrong.
I’m ready to feel better.
 
 


^^EOP^^

waking to the news of an eventual collapse, those ejected minds
of the walking thing of the speech of birds, they announce their own
development from ashes to make a song and deliver the hunted
landscape to its stars, those of us who knew something of the engine
would remove the approach to animals as a second wind, the coming
of pages of light and nectar, but once the arrival of her tent
would move the inhabitants of the Sea, and the consciousness of the Ocean
to pursue the network that sparks their shining single dream
to the pavement, the oceanic feet that would not muse its face or
deter those breaks from the second light of the morning, or one would
say the easy atonements that their push from the animal
would enlarge so that they would speak and we would understand,
these assembly code calypsos deter the kindly face that hates and pummels
as these will undo their coloring and the fur of the path. do not stop
until you know it well with both feet.
 


^^EOP^^

the news
is released
 
for the secret
of worlds, I reach
 
the end
of my laughter
 
and breathe
to the night sky
 
a periodically
interrupted song
 
to reach the forest
of my refuge, here
 
where the lights are
where one dissolves
 
and appears. to see the hidden
files of your mind
 
and listen
 
listen
 
as I cross the road
to find the fox
 
of the funeral home’s
bewildering delight
 
where there is laughter
marked by a mysterious
 
blinking light
 
that the occluded
erase the sun with, and I’ve lost
 
my heart
for the present moment, as I fear
 
it is one more day
to see others walk
 
in the dark morning
of imposters
 
and timeless life. I say
farewell to you, my love
 
as I enter the darkness
to be with you
 
in our morning kisses, and see
that we shall never part
 
your heart
 
as the Sea was parted
as the world collapses
 
and we say ‘yes’
to the fearsome light


^^EOP^^

In the pink light,
haloes of cloud form over the mountains;
lightning, two valleys away,
then, not an hour later,
 
the explosion of thunder.
The roadrunners
pecking for breadcrumbs on the porch
have long since fled into the rabbitbrush,
 
into the endless ocean of grass.
Driving in every direction
down licks of red road, I have lost
myself in a militarized topography;
 
everything named after army units,
generals, scouts, miners… The Dragoon Mountains, Cochise Stronghold; defunct
  Gleeson and Pearce,
weird, rusty ghost towns, the only
non-derelict structure
for miles, the local school,
 
its polished windows and well-kept lawn,
a source of great local pride.
No mountain monograms
for these desiccated whistle-stops,
 
no giant Q or C or W in bright
white paint to mark
the township's still functional
sorta functional breathing, no
 
carving for them
into the planet's bark;
and thus they are blesséd
to me like no other;
 
every successful city
is a flimsy affair with civility,
its eternalness, like Paris or Rome,
mere hypocrisy.
 
MAKE AMERICA GREAT AGAIN,
BUY REAL ESTATE! Hail follows rain.
Nearby, the township of Sunsites,
once billed as the safest
 
spot to survive
the inevitable nuclear winter,
actually topped Soviet Russia's
list of high-priority targets… Enter
 
the Orange Duck Candidate.
A haboob sweeps across
the Valley of the Senile.
In a week, the mountains
 
have switched from brown
to purple to green.
The desert is human
endeavour's most fitting graveyard;
 
the slow bleaching,
the gradual eroding into sand,
the heat stifling sound as it leaps into the air.
IT CAN'T HAPPEN HERE. But it always does.
 
 
                                         Sulphur Springs Valley
 


^^EOP^^

In the next scene Walt Whitman
is walking around Boston
Common. He’s young.
It’s winter. Emerson
is there. They walk
and talk for hours, or really
Emerson talks. He scolds
Whitman for slavering
after tree knots and bobbing
with the swimmer. Whitman nods
but in his head he’s busy
tallying his orgasms.
At the carousel
an ancient Puritan is passing
his hat, singing, “Kill It Babe.”
Dozens of geese have gathered
on the frozen pond,
standing on one leg,
tucking the other like a dagger
into their feathery centers.
Well, Emerson asks the poet,
what do you have to say for yourself?
And Whitman, respectfully,
but sure now
all the way down in his bones
where the deep, frontier feeling
of disobedience lives, says,
essentially, go fuck yourself.
I’ll go my own way.


^^EOP^^

The future is as sterile as a robot’s loincloth.
I drown my hands in sanitizer until they pucker.
 
Where this soapbox tree germinates, I collect
my germs and make a fountain of them.
 
Because yellow is yarrow and soot, and the future,
I’ve learned, is no suture. Because where I’m from,
these kisses are infections. Because dirt’s
 
ammunition against discipline, the blood fills
my clean mouth with dismay. Am I surprised—
Hollywood still assumes we are all the bastard
 
children of the same evil dictator? That phosgene
and mustard will rack our titanium Maoist husks
until some white man with slanty eyes rescues us
 
from our mealy, pliant selves? Am I to wear Dior,
wrap my mouth in bloody tulle, before kneeling,
bending to kiss a mouth dirtied by Pantone 136?
 
No fucking thanks. Because where I’m from,
these kisses are infractions. Darlings, let’s rewrite
the script. Let’s hijack the narrative, steer
 
the story ourselves. There’d be a heist, a battle.
Audre Lorde would write the script. My leading
man would be Bruce. We’d earn our happy ending.
 
Instead, they give me 1981. 2012. Quantum quasars,
new dystopia—plutonium wars. We’re not in Polanski’s
Chinatown anymore. Yet we still have the same bowl
 
haircuts. Bangs, big bang, a city of fetid promise, new
minor galaxy where we cannot touch. Instead our skin
is rust and metal. It gratifies the technophile in all of us.
 


^^EOP^^

It tastes like all my night
when I'm at the bottom of the borough
sheets burn around me
through the night
Consecrate me
Consecrate me
Conserve me lover
In the sills of your love
in the cells of your palms
from the womb to cell
break me from the belly of ship
let me crash upon you
Consecrate me my lover in your rectum
in a rehabilitation center where athletes seek the best care
I break into you
Consecrate me I want to love you in Syracuse woods
in Sonnino love me against lamb’s wool
I am my sister's wife keeper
Consecrate me
in the discretion of sisters
nuns loving
and hating jobs that ask
with fangs barred


^^EOP^^

I like the lady horses best,
how they make it all look easy,
like running 40 miles per hour
is as fun as taking a nap, or grass.
I like their lady horse swagger,
after winning. Ears up, girls, ears up!
But mainly, let’s be honest, I like
that they’re ladies. As if this big
dangerous animal is also a part of me,
that somewhere inside the delicate
skin of my body, there pumps
an 8-pound female horse heart,
giant with power, heavy with blood.
Don’t you want to believe it?
Don’t you want to lift my shirt and see
the huge beating genius machine
that thinks, no, it knows,
it’s going to come in first.
 


^^EOP^^

A man celebrates erstwhile conquests,
his book locked in a silo, still in print.
 
I scribble, make Sharpie lines, deface
its text like it defaces me. Outside, grain
 
fields whisper. Marble lions are silent
yet silver-tongued, with excellent teeth.
 
In this life I have worshipped so many lies.
Then I workshop them, make them better.
 
An East India Company, an opium trade,
a war, a treaty, a concession, an occupation,
 
a man parting the veil covering a woman’s
face, his nails prying her lips open. I love
 
the fragility of a porcelain bowl. How easy
it is, to shatter chinoiserie, like the Han
 
dynasty urn Ai Weiwei dropped in 1995.
If only recovering the silenced history
 
is as simple as smashing its container: book,
bowl, celadon spoon. Such objects cross
 
borders the way our bodies never could.
Instead, we’re left with history, its blonde
 
dust. That bowl is unbreakable. All its ghosts
still shudder through us like small breaths.
 
The tome of hegemony lives on, circulates
in our libraries, in our bloodstreams. One day,
 
a girl like me may come across it on a shelf,
pick it up, read about all the ways her body
 
is a thing. And I won’t be there to protect
her, to cross the text out and say: go ahead— rewrite this.
 


^^EOP^^

In the autumn I moved to New York,
I recognized her face all over the subway
stations—pearls around her throat, she poses
for her immigration papers. In 1924, the only
Americans required to carry identity cards
were ethnically Chinese—the first photo IDs,
red targets on the head of every man, woman,
child, infant, movie star. Like pallbearers,
they lined up to get their pictures taken: full-face
view, direct camera gaze, no smiles, ears showing,
in silver gelatin. A rogue’s gallery of Chinese
exclusion. The subway poster doesn’t name
her—though it does mention her ethnicity,
and the name of the New-York Historical
Society exhibition: Exclusion/Inclusion.
Soon, when I felt alone in this city, her face
would peer at me from behind seats, turnstiles,
heads, and headphones, and I swear she wore
a smile only I could see. Sometimes my face
aligned with hers, and we would rush past
the bewildered lives before us—hers, gone
the year my mother was born, and mine,
a belt of ghosts trailing after my scent.
In the same aboveground train, in the same
city where slain umbrellas travel across
the Hudson River, we live and live.
I’ve left my landline so ghosts can’t dial me
at midnight with the hunger of hunters
anymore. I’m so hungry I gnaw at light.
It tunnels from the shadows, an exhausting
hope. I know this hunger tormented her too.
It haunted her through her years in L.A., Paris,
and New York, the parties she went to, people
she met—Paul Robeson, Zora Neale Hurston,
Langston Hughes, Gertrude Stein. It haunts
her expression still, on the 6 train, Grand
Central station, an echo chamber behind
her eyes. But dear universe: if I can recognize
her face under this tunnel of endless shadows
against the luminance of all that is extinct
and oncoming, then I am not a stranger here.
 


^^EOP^^




for my granddaughter, Wahcawin



I didn’t want to scold the sky that year, but
 Grandma’s words taunted my senses. If there
is a thirst, then you need to pity the flowers
 
in a loud voice. Ask the frogs why they are
being punished, stomp on the ground and talk
to the dried clay about cracking open the earth.
 
I know challenging the storm is risky. “Last
but not least, burn cedar and pray the lightning
doesn’t strike your town.” That night, the stars
 
disappeared, so did the birds. Perhaps it was
the season for rain or the dance. In the western
distance, we thought we heard cannon blasts,
 
looking over we watched the horizon fill with
lightning strikes. Rain couldn’t pour hard enough
over the thirsty plain. Accompanying clouds,
 
called to thunder’s voice in extreme decimals
requesting all the water heaven could send forth,
to come. Rain and more rain filled empty stream
 
bottoms. Rivers who had pulled their dry banks
farther and farther from their center begged for
a drink to startle dusty beds with a flooding roar.
 
Lives in dormant places begin to stir and awaken.
 The lives of water beings, those that swim, the
ones that hop, and the ones that fly, begin to stir.
 
That year all thirst was quenched.
 


^^EOP^^

Tracks are all that define these voices,
hungry lives pulsing sacred ground.
We are a journey of distressed shapes,
red essence on parchment, occupying a life.
We look for the fated four-legged that paced
this way, a tested and well-worn path
among storms, mud, into this shared hidden
brush. Coyote, slipping by through old
winter grass, warns in a pagan tongue,
licking after our scent. We pick up pace,
tighten our careless reins, snap back at the
yellow-eyed clown with throat hunger,
that gnawing bone that drives us on. Quieted,
we hear the heart beating. A desperate breath
crashes through dry branches, a silhouette
give away. In an instant we let go
of weapons and invite a quick death. We
watch our knives glistening. Obsidian
works for us. What image of blood on flesh,
odor of iron. A vermilion sun heavy with
spring looks upon reflections of death
in hard visions, our favorable hunt—
whitetail not quick enough for downwind
lessons. Our horses burdened, deer shadows
left on landscape, we push forward.
These tracks ours now. Game will heal all.
Our offspring dance, Grandmother prepares a
fire and sharpens another knife. During the
feast we thank any god absent from our table.


^^EOP^^

This morning we found ourselves skinning a deer,
cutting meat, hanging some to dry and packaging
some for the freezer. It was the dogs late last night
 
that set off a howling, the unexpected smell of fresh
blood floating down the block, then a familiar car
horn honking in the driveway. My nephew and his
 
friends were hunting and brought us a deer. Mother
always said, “Cut up the meat right away, don’t let
it sit.” I look at a front quarter, a hole filled with
 
coagulated blood. Grandma says not to eat the part
next to the wound, “Cut it out; offer it to the earth for
healing, a sacrifice to remember the hungering spirits.”
 
Auntie says to save the muscle along the back strap,
“It makes good thread.” I carefully learned the exact
place to cut the joints so the bones separate easily.
 
Mother said that is important—“It means you are a
thoughtful person.” Auntie is at the door waiting for
a roast. “An elder takes the first piece,” she reminded.
 
Mom tells me to save the hooves for her. She wants
to make a bone game for the new grandchild, wants
him to be patient and skillful. I boil the hoofs with
 
sage, find the little toe-bones for her. My hands begin
to ache from the work, I soak them in warm water
and start again. I admire the placement of tendons
 
on the deer shoulders, no joints, just the crisscrossing
of muscle. Grandma says, “That’s why your dad called
them jumpers, they bounce off the strength of their
 
flexing muscles.” Late at night Mom helps me stake
out the hide. My back hurts; my feet feel like I’ve
been walking on rocks all day. I want to complain,
 
but Mom catches the look in my eyes. She says to me,
“When you get dressed for the dance this weekend,
you will proudly wear your beautiful beaded dress,
 
your beaded leggings and moccasins, and last, but not
least, you will put on your beaded belt, and attached
you will wear your sharp knife and quilled knife sheath
 
because of what you have done this day.”
 


^^EOP^^

I could tell they were father and son,
the air between them slack, as though
they hardly noticed one another.
 
The father sanded the gunwales,
the boy coiled the lines.
And I admired them there, each to his task
 
in the quiet of the long familiar.
The sawdust coated the father's arms
like dusk coats grass in a field.
 
The boy worked next on the oarlocks
polishing the brass until it gleamed,
as though he could harness the sun.
 
Who cares what they were thinking,
lucky in their lives
that the spin of the genetic wheel
 
slowed twice to a stop
and landed each of them here.


^^EOP^^

At the 100-year-old National Elk Refuge
near Jackson Hole, we might ask, How long does an elk live? Who’s an old elk here? 
 
We’d like to spend time
with an elder elk please.
Tell us how to balance our lives
on this hard edge of human mean,
mean temperatures, what we do and don’t
want to mean.
 
Closing the door
to the news will only make you
stupid, snapped my friend
who wanted everyone to know as much
as she did. I’m hiding in old school books
with information we never used yet.
Before I drove, before I flew,
before the principal went to jail.
Sinking my eyes into tall wooden
window sashes, dreaming of light
arriving from far reaches,
our teacher as shepherds,
school a vessel of golden hope,
you could lift your daily lesson
in front of your eyes,
stare hard and think,
this will take me
somewhere. O histories of India,
geological formations of Australia,
ancient poetries of China, Japan,
someday we will be aligned in a place
of wisdom, together.
 
Red deer, wapiti, running elk rising
above yellow meadows at sundown.
An elk bows her head. In the company
of other elk, she feels at home.
And we are lost on the horizon now,
clumsy humanity,
deeper into the next century than we
can even believe,
and they will not speak to us.
 


^^EOP^^




For Janna



The tiny journalist
will tell us what she sees.
 
Document the moves, the dust,
soldiers blocking the road.
 
Yes, she knows how to take a picture
with her phone. Holds it high
 
like a balloon. Yes, she would
prefer to dance and play,
 
would prefer the world
to be pink. It is her job to say
 
what she sees, what is happening.
From her vantage point everything
 
is huge—but don’t look down on her.
She’s bigger than you are.
 
If you stomp her garden
each leaf expands its view.
 
Don’t hide what you do.
She sees you at 2 a.m. adjusting your
 
impenetrable vest.
What could she have
 
that you want? Her treasures,
thing shiny buttons her grandmother loved.
 
Her cousin, her uncle. There might have been a shirt. . .
 
The tiny journalist notices
action on far away roads
 
farther even than the next village.
She takes counsel from bugs so
 
puffs of dust find her first. Could that be a friend? 
  They pretended not to see us. They came at night with weapons. 
  What was our crime? That we liked respect as they do? That we have pride? 
 
She stares through a hole in the fence,
barricade of words and wire,
 
feels the rising fire
before anyone strikes a match.
 
She has a better idea.


^^EOP^^

When people have a lot
they want more
 
When people have nothing
they will happily share it
 
*
 
Some people say
never getting your way
builds character
By now our character must be
deep and wide as a continent
Africa, Australia
giant cascade of stars
spilling over our huge night
 
*
 
Where did the power go?
Did it enjoy its break?
Is power exhausted?
What is real power?
Who really has power?
Did the generator break?
Do we imagine silence
more powerful because
it might contain everything?
Quiet always lives
inside noise.
But does it get much done?
 
*
 
Silence waits
for truth to break it
 
*
 
Calendars can weep too
They want us to have better days
 
*
 
Welcome to every minute
Feel lucky you’re still in it
 
*
 
No bird builds a wall
 
*
 
Sky purse
     jingling
           change
 
*
 
Won’t give up
our hopes
            for anything!
 
*
 
Not your fault
You didn’t make the world
 
*
 
How dare this go on and on?
cried the person who believed in praying
God willing     God willing        God willing
There were others who prayed
   to ruins & stumps
 
*
 
Open palms
     hold more
 
*
 
Refuse to give
   mistakes
      too much power
 
 
*
Annoying person?
Person who told me to stay home
and do what other girls do?
If you disappeared
I still might miss you
 
*
 
Babies want to help us
They laugh
for no reason
 
*
 
Pay close attention to
a drop of water
on the kitchen table
 
*
 
You cannot say one word about religion
and exclude Ahmad
 


^^EOP^^

What?
You don’t feel at home in your country,
almost overnight?
All the simple things
you cared about,
maybe took for granted. . .
you feel
insulted, invisible?
Almost as if you’re not there?
But you’re there.
Where before you mingled freely. . .
appreciated people who weren’t
just like you. . .
divisions grow stronger.
That’s what “chosen” and “unchosen” will do.
(Just keep your eyes on your houses and gardens.
Keep your eyes on that tree in bloom.)
Yes, a wall. Ours came later but. . .
who talks about how sad the land looks,
marked by a massive wall?
That’s not a normal shadow.
It’s something else looming over your lives.
 


^^EOP^^

Each day I miss Japanese precision. Trying to arrange things
   the way they would. I miss the call to prayer
at Sharjah, the large collective pause. Or
the shy strawberry vendor with rickety wooden cart,
single small lightbulb pointed at a mound of berries.
   In one of China’s great cities, before dawn.
 
      Forever I miss my Arab father’s way with mint leaves
    floating in a cup of sugared tea—his delicate hands
arranging rinsed figs on a plate. What have we here?
    said the wolf in the children’s story
stumbling upon people doing kind, small things.
    Is this small monster one of us?
 
When your country does not feel cozy, what do you do?
       Teresa walks more now, to feel closer to her
ground. If destination within two miles, she must
    hike or take the bus. Carries apples,
          extra bottles of chilled water to give away.
Kim makes one positive move a day for someone else.
I’m reading letters the ancestors wrote after arriving
       in the land of freedom, words in perfect English script. . .
describing gifts they gave one another for Christmas.
     Even the listing seems oddly civilized,
these 1906 Germans. . . hand-stitched embroideries for dresser tops. Bow ties. Slippers, parlor croquet, gold ring, “pretty             inkwell.” 
 
How they comforted themselves! A giant roast
     made them feel more at home.
            Posthumous medals of honor for
     coming, continuing—could we do that?
And where would we go?
         My father’s hope for Palestine
stitching my bones, “no one wakes up and
        dreams of fighting around the house”—
 
somebody soon the steady eyes of children in Gaza,
     yearning for a little extra electricity
to cool their lemons and cantaloupes, will be known.
              Yes?
    We talked for two hours via Google Chat,
they did not complain once. Discussing stories,
       books, families, a character who does
                 what you might do.
Meanwhile secret diplomats are what we must be,
   as a girl in Qatar once assured me,
       each day slipping its blank visa into our hands.
 


^^EOP^^




                                                 (for Daniel, because                                                  
                                                 the Catacombs) 



You’re leaving Las Vegas, except
In German. Point. Point. Point.
Gave it out, beautiful gentilhomme Comme vous êtes, toujours,
Unforgettable, circa 2008 how
You made me cum like that -
She got so mad in the bed - the
Hotel bathroom floor,
The bathtub, the apartment where
I was the crying queen
 
Those o’s still unforgettable
And now Paris. I cried today OW!
Your Antarctica cold last
Night. You told me they fucked
You up / I told you he broke
My heart and OW! Freeze
Dried my bandaid right off.
And then the glasses shopping
Memories today yada yada
Wasn’t about the cum shot
Where or if, was about the
Islands and how you said
in the langue d’enemie
No less: “DON’T TOUCH”
 
Don’t Touch!? We just …
They fucked you up all right.
You give so clearly but have iced
Out all the incoming gifts. WELL
PING my darling Walden island.
I can’t take that kind of cold. I’m leaving Las Vegas.
Just a moon in Taurus trying
To sing the sweet and
It’s not a great user experience
 
But I just want you to know
How unforgettable you are
 
 
When the candles call to Hera
I hope they melt your
I hope a goddess or many
Wash that loneliness away
And when I see you again (in 15 years)
There’s only joy and more
 
I prefer you laughing to tears
The good way. Drink us when
We’re done. Well, I guess I did
Almost kill you with a
Razor shave once so it
Seems silly to say I’m sorry I
Lost the phantom thread.
Maybe everything’s a ridiculous
never-ending non-planet
Tho, u did kiss me like unicorns
Exist and bond our skin
Like the organ it deserves to be
Known as
 
 
To know how unforgettable
you are because there
lies the bridge to the
Mainland. & baby, you
Deserve it all.
 


^^EOP^^

Give up sitting dutifully at your desk. Leave
your house or apartment. Go out into the world.
 
It's all right to carry a notebook but a cheap
one is best, with pages the color of weak tea
and on the front a kitten or a space ship.
 
Avoid any enclosed space where more than
three people are wearing turtlenecks. Beware
any snow-covered chalet with deer tracks
across the muffled tennis courts.
 
Not surprisingly, libraries are a good place to write.
And the perfect place in a library is near an aisle
where a child a year or two old is playing as his
mother browses the ranks of the dead.
 
Often he will pull books from the bottom shelf.
The title, the author's name, the brooding photo
on the flap mean nothing. Red book on black, gray
book on brown, he builds a tower. And the higher
it gets, the wider he grins.
 
You who asked for advice, listen: When the tower
falls, be like that child. Laugh so loud everybody
in the world frowns and says, "Shhhh."
 
Then start again.
 


^^EOP^^

     lady in brown 
de library waz right down from de trolly tracks
cross from de laundry-mat
thru de big shinin floors & granite pillars
ol st. louis is famous for
i found toussaint
but not til after months uv
cajun katie/ pippi longstockin
christopher robin/ eddie heyward & a pooh bear
in the children’s room
only pioneer girls & magic rabbits
& big city white boys
i knew i waznt sposedta
but i ran inta the ADULT READING ROOM
                   & came across
 
                       TOUSSAINT
 
                         my first blk man
(i never counted george washington carver
cuz i didnt like peanuts)
                           still
TOUSSAINT waz a blk man a negro like my mama say
who refused to be a slave
& he spoke french
& didnt low no white man to tell him nothin
                       not napolean
                       not maximillien
                       not robespierre
 
TOUSSAINT L’OUVERTURE
waz the beginnin uv reality for me
in the summer contest for
who colored child can read
15 books in three weeks
i won & raved abt TOUSSAINT L’OUVERTURE
at the afternoon ceremony
waz disqualified
                       cuz Toussaint
                         belonged in the ADULT READING ROOM
                             & i cried
& carried dead Touissant home in the book
he waz dead & livin to me
cuz TOUSSAINT & them
they held the citadel gainst the french
wid the spirits of ol dead africans from outta the ground
TOUSSAINT led they army of zombies
walkin cannon ball shootin spirits to free Haiti
& they waznt slaves no more
 
                              TOUSSAINT L’OUVERTURE
became my secret lover at the age of 8
i entertained him in my bedroom
widda flashlight under my covers
way inta the night/ we discussed strategies
how to remove white girls from my hopscotch games
& etc.
TOUSSAINT
waz laying in bed wit me next to raggedy ann
the night i decided to run away from my
                   integrated home
                       integrated street
                           integrated school
1955 waz not a good year for lil blk girls
 
Toussaint said ‘lets go to haiti’
i said ‘awright’
& packed some very important things in a brown paper bag
so i wdnt haveta come back
then Toussaint & i took the hodiamont streetcar
to the river
last stop
only 15¢
cuz there waznt nobody cd see Toussaint cept me
& we walked all down thru north st. louis
where the french settlers usedta live
in tiny brick houses all huddled together
wit barely missin windows & shingles uneven
wit colored kids playin & women on low porches sippin beer
 
i cd talk to Toussaint down by the river
like this waz where we waz gonna stow away
on a boat for new orleans
& catch a creole fishin-rig for port-au-prince
then we waz just gonna read & talk all the time
& eat fried bananas
                               we waz just walkin & skippin past ol drunk men
when dis ol young boy jumped out at me sayin
‘HEY GIRL YA BETTAH COME OVAH HEAH N TALK TO
ME’
well
i turned to TOUSSAINT (who waz furious)
& i shouted
‘ya silly old boy
ya bettah leave me alone
or TOUSSAINT’S gonna get yr ass’
de silly ol boy came round de corner laughin all in my face
‘yellah gal
ya sure must be somebody to know my name so quick’
i waz disgusted
& wanted to get on to haiti
widout some tacky ol boy botherin me
still he kept standin there
kickin milk cartons & bits of brick
tryin to get all in my business
                               i mumbled to L’OUVERTURE ‘what shd I do’
finally
i asked this silly ol boy
‘WELL WHO ARE YOU?’
he say
‘MY NAME IS TOUSSAINT JONES’
well
i looked right at him
those skidded out cordoroy pants
a striped teashirt wid holes in both elbows
a new scab over his left eye
& i said
                                 ‘what’s yr name again’
he say
‘i’m toussaint jones’
‘wow
i am on my way to see
TOUSSAINT L’OUVERTURE in HAITI
are ya any kin to him
he dont take no stuff from white folks
& they gotta country all they own
& there aint no slaves’
that silly ol boy squinted his face all up
looka heah girl
i am TOUSSAINT JONES
& i’m right heah lookin at ya
& i dont take no stuff from no white folks
ya dont see none round heah do ya?’
& he sorta pushed out his chest
then he say
‘come on       lets go on down to the docks
& look at the boats’
i waz real puzzled goin down to the docks
wit my paper bag & my books
i felt TOUSSAINT L’OUVERTURE sorta leave me
& i was sad
til i realized
TOUSSAINT JONES waznt too different
from TOUSSAINT L’OUVERTURE
cept the ol one waz in haiti
& this one wid me speakin english & eatin apples
yeah.
toussaint jones waz awright wit me
no tellin what all spirits we cd move
down by the river
st. louis 1955                               hey wait.
 
 


^^EOP^^

at 4:30 AM
she rose
movin the arms & legs that trapped her
she sighed affirmin the sculptured man
& made herself a bath
of dark musk oil egyptian crystals
& florida water to remove his smell
to wash away the glitter
to watch the butterflies melt into
suds & the rhinestones fall beneath
her buttocks like smooth pebbles
in a missouri creek
layin in water
she became herself
ordinary
brown braided woman
with big legs & full lips
reglar
seriously intendin to finish her
night’s work
she quickly walked to her guest
straddled on her pillows & began
 
 
                  ‘you’ll have to go now/ i’ve
                  a lot of work to do/ & i cant
                  with a man around/ here are yr pants/
                  there’s coffee on the stove/ its been
                  very nice/ but i cant see you again/
                  you got what you came for/ didnt you’
& she smiled
he wd either mumble curses bout crazy bitches
or sit dumbfounded
while she repeated
                  ‘i cdnt possibly wake up/ with
                   a strange man in my bed/ why
                   dont you go home’
she cda been slapped upside the head
or verbally challenged
but she never waz
& the ones who fell prey to the
dazzle of hips painted with
orange blossoms & magnolia scented wrists
had wanted no more
than to lay between her sparklin thighs
& had planned on leavin before dawn
& she had been so divine
devastatingly bizarre the way
her mouth fit round
& now she stood a
reglar colored girl
fulla the same malice
livid indifference as a sistah
worn from supportin a wd be hornplayer
or waitin by the window
                              & they knew
                              & left in a hurry
she wd gather her tinsel &
jewels from the tub
& laugh gayly or vengeful
she stored her silk roses by her bed
& when she finished writin
the account of her exploit in a diary
embroidered with lilies & moonstones
she placed the rose behind her ear
& cried herself to sleep.
 


^^EOP^^

there was no air/ the sheets made ripples under his
body like crumpled paper napkins in a summer park/ & lil
specks of somethin from tween his toes or the biscuits
from the day before ran in the sweat that tucked the sheet
into his limbs like he was an ol frozen bundle of chicken/
& he’d get up to make coffee, drink wine, drink water/ he
wished one of his friends who knew where he waz wd come by
with some blow or some shit/ anything/ there was no air/
he’d see the spotlights in the alleyways downstairs movin
in the air/ cross his wall over his face/ & get under the
covers & wait for an all clear or till he cd hear traffic
again/
 
there waznt nothing wrong with him/ there waznt nothing wrong
with him/ he kept tellin crystal/
any niggah wanna kill vietnamese children more n stay home
& raise his own is sicker than a rabid dog/
that’s how their thing had been goin since he got back/
crystal just got inta sayin whatta fool niggah beau was
& always had been/ didnt he go all over uptown sayin the
child waznt his/ waz some no counts bastard/ & any ol city
police cd come & get him if they wanted/ cuz as soon as
the blood type & shit waz together/ everybody wd know that
crystal waz a no good lyin whore/ and this after she’d been
his girl since she waz thirteen/ when he caught her
on the stairway/
 
he came home crazy as hell/ he tried to get veterans benefits
to go to school & they kept right on puttin him in
remedial classes/ he cdnt read wortha damn/ so beau
cused the teachers of holdin him back & got himself
a gypsy cab to drive/ but his cab kept breakin
down/ & the cops was always messin wit him/ plus not
getting much bread/
 
& crystal went & got pregnant again/ beau most beat
her to death when she tol him/ she still gotta scar
under her right tit where he cut her up/ still crystal
went right on & had the baby/ so now beau willie had
two children / a little girl/ naomi kenya & a boy/ kwame beau
willie brown/ & there waz no air/
 
how in the hell did he get in this mess anyway/ somebody
went & tol crystal that beau was spendin alla his money
on the bartendin bitch down at the merry-go-round cafe/
beau sat straight up in the bed/ wrapped up in the sheets
lookin like john the baptist or a huge baby wit stubble
& nuts/ now he hadta get alla that shit outta crystal’s
mind/ so she wd let him come home/ crystal had gone &
got a court order saying beau willie brown had no access
to his children/ if he showed his face he waz subject
to arrest/ shit/ she’d been in his ass to marry her
since she was 14 years old & here when she was 22/ she wanna
throw him out cuz he say he’ll marry her/ she burst
out laughin/ hollerin whatchu wanna marry me for now/
so i can support yr
ass/ or come sit wit ya when they lock yr behind
up/ cause they gonna come for ya/ ya goddamn lunatic/
they gonna come/ & i’m not gonna have a thing to do
wit it/ o no i wdnt marry yr pitiful black ass for
nothing & she went on to bed/
 
the next day beau willie came in blasted & got ta swingin
chairs at crystal/ who cdnt figure out what the hell
he waz doin/ til he got ta shoutin bout how she waz gonna
marry him/ & get some more veterans benefits/ & he cd
stop drivin them crazy spics round/ while they tryin
to kill him for $15/ beau was sweatin terrible/ beatin
on crystal/ & he cdnt do no more with the table n chairs/
so he went to get the high chair/ & lil kwame waz in it/
& beau was beatin crystal with the high chair & her son/
& some notion got inta him to stop/ an he run out/
crystal most died/ that’s why the police wdnt low
beau near where she lived/ & she’d been tellin the kids
their daddy tried to kill her & kwame/ & he just wanted
to marry her/ that’s what/ he wanted to marry her/ &
have a family/ but the bitch waz crazy/ beau willie
waz sittin in this hotel in his drawers drinkin
coffee & wine in the heat of the day spillin shit all
over hisself/ laughin/ bout how we waz gonna get crystal
to take him back/ & let him be a man in the house/ & she
wdnt even have to go to work no more/ he got dressed
all up in his ivory shirt & checkered pants to go see
crystal & get this mess all cleared up/
he knocked on the door to crystal’s rooms/ & she
didnt answer/ he beat on the door & crystal & naomi
started cryin/ beau gotta shoutin again how he wanted
to marry her/ & waz she always gonna be a whore/ or
did she wanna husband/ & crystal just kept on
screamin for him to leave us alone/ just leave us
alone/ so beau broke the door down/ crystal held
the children in fronta her/ she picked kwame off the
floor/ in her arms/ & she held naomi by her shoulders/
& kept on sayin/ beau willie brown/ get outta here/
the police is gonna come for ya/ ya fool/ get outta here/
do you want the children to see you act the fool again
you want kwame to brain damage from you throwin him
round/ niggah/ get outta here/ get out & don’t show yr
ass again or i’ll kill ya/ i swear i’ll kill ya/
he reached for naomi/ crystal grabbed the lil girl &
stared at beau willie like he waz a leper or somethin/
dont you touch my children/ mothafucker/ or i’ll kill
you/
 
beau willie jumped back all humble & apologetic/ i’m
sorry/ i dont wanna hurt em/ i just wanna hold em &
get on my way/ i dont wanna cuz you no more trouble/
i wanted to marry you & give ya things
what you gonna give/ a broken jaw/ niggah get outta here/
he ignored crystal’s outburst & sat down motionin for
naomi to come to him/ she smiled back at her daddy/
crystal felt naomi givin in & held her tighter/
naomi/ pushed away & ran to her daddy/ crying/ daddy, daddy
come back daddy/ come back/ but be nice to mommy/
cause mommy loves you/ and ya gotta be nice/
he sat on his knee/ & played with her ribbons &
they counted fingers & toes/ every so often he
looked over to crystal holdin kwame/ like a statue/
& he’d say/ see crystal/ i can be a good father/
now let me see my son/ & she didn’t move/ &
he coaxed her & he coaxed her/ tol her she waz
still a hot lil ol thing & pretty & strong/ didnt
she get right up after that lil ol fight they had
& go back to work/ beau willie oozed kindness &
crystal who had known so lil/ let beau hold kwame/
 
as soon as crystal let the baby outta her arms/ beau
jumped up a laughin & a gigglin/ a hootin & a hollerin/
awright bitch/ awright bitch/ you gonna marry me/
you gonna marry me . . .
i aint gonna marry ya/ i aint ever gonna marry ya/
for nothin/ you gonna be in the jail/ you gonna be
under the jail for this/ now gimme my kids/ ya give
me back my kids/
 
he kicked the screen outta the window/ & held the kids
offa the sill/ you gonna marry me/ yeh, i’ll marry ya/
anything/ but bring the children back in the house/
he looked from where the kids were hangin from the
fifth story/ at alla the people screamin at him/ &
he started sweatin again/ say to alla the neighbors/
you gonna marry me/
 
i stood by beau in the window/ with naomi reachin
for me/ kwame screamin mommy mommy from the fifth
story/ but i cd only whisper/ & he dropped em
 


^^EOP^^

Chile, chocolate, coyote, guacamole, mezcal, peyote,
tomato, ocelot, tequila—the words survive months of siege,
240,000 dead in Tenochtitlan. The Place of Herons,
a place of whiteness, did not survive. Duende, a tiny face
in a calla lily, survived. A bowl decorated with scorpion
and pelican survived. Clay faces full of shadow. Sculptors
who understood light, how it addresses the afterlife,
expecting a great dark to fall.


^^EOP^^

The opera
In her head 
Runs with no interval,
A lot of people singing tunelessly 
About the same things.
An overheard 
Comment like
A rotting peach. 
The overzealous
Cockatoo of her impatience, 
Flap flap. The slab
Of blue behind her 
Is a sea of
Her doubts. The squirrel 
In her stomach
Trying to get out— 
They say you have to be
Twice as good. They say 
There are pills
For everything now. Enamel 
Eyes to see all
The better with, my 
Dear. Fur coat
For your tongue—


^^EOP^^

I turned twenty-four and
dad decided to take
another stab at making
a man out of me.
On his command, I drove us
out to Hollywood where
you could get three sets of suits
for a hundred bucks. What a steal! he exclaimed
as though his enthusiasm
would fertilize
something that never
existed within me.
Regardless, I followed him
into the outlet and I
allowed him to wrap
the cheap, heavy thread
around my tired shoulders,
to salt the wound of my body
with his idea of truth.
I let it happen
but I did not forget
what I was
beneath the cover of the flesh:  five million faggy mountains slicing through fields full of dreamed-up tongues and unnamable bluish grasses each blade the length of a universe stretching inward toward a singular point of life-sustaining unlogic— 
Dressing myself behind
the heavy polyester curtain,
I listened
as dad held the suit guy hostage
with the oft-told tale
of the night he encountered
real-life Biblical demons,
how at first he felt their presence
tightening inside his chest,
and then witnessed them crawling
up and down his walls
and how he prayed and cursed them
in the name of the lord
until they dissolved
like sugar into the dark 
And he never said this, but I
knew he was convinced they
came for me next and colored my nails and stretched out my hair and adorned me with flowers and forced my inside places to whisper woman         woman               woman late each night at the moment just before sleep 
And I knew he knew
who I was becoming
and I understood
what the suits were for      So 
I tossed them in the back
of my trunk
where they sat
waiting for years
and the day I sold that car off those suits were still in there


^^EOP^^

A collective family myth
passed down across generations
takes on the polished gleam of truth,
and memories become legend. 
The legend of black sod-busters
on a piece of red soil they own
in a township of black ranchers.
Their legendary rodeo.  grand entry 
Two Stars and Stripes flutter into
the arena, carried by two
men in jeans, red shirts, white Stetsons.
Guiding their horses with left hands,
holding the flagstaffs in their rights,
their backs straight and tall, their faces,
their chestnut faces, beautiful
in the light of the setting sun. 
After them, two by two,
banners waving, hooves raising dust,
ride the Horse People of Boley,
a varicolored promenade.
They canter once around the ring,
then they circle into the sky.  mutton busting 
In the cluster of five-year-old
contenders wearing life jackets
and bicycle helmets, paper
numbers safety-pinned to their backs,
you line up one by one for a turn
to hang on tight with your legs squeezed
at the sheep’s broad middle, fingers
holding handfuls of deep, warm wool
as the sheep destiny presents
runs you out to cheering applause.
Whether you’ll fall on top of it,
or it on you, you won’t fall far.
You have no front teeth anyway,
and a brown clown gone pick you up.  bareback riding 
This horse was bred and born to buck.
He’s a good horse, he’ll give you points.
Gloved hand in the rigging’s handle,
bare brown hand waving in the air,
you whir your spurs at his shoulders
as he leaps, twists, and jolts your bones.
Four seconds or four hundred years.
But if you can get up and slap
the dust off your jeans with your hat,
the future’s eyes, looking at you,
will fill with forevering light:
light that will make generations
of proud brown people remember
the Black Horse People of Boley.  bulldogging 
In truth there’s seldom a reason
for a man to wrestle a steer,
unless he’s a real ranch cowboy
dealing with ornery power.
Maybe, while rounding up the herd,
he bumps heads with testosterone,
and it’s testosterone-vs.-
testosterone. Bill Pickett learned,
watching dogs on a Boley ranch,
that sometimes you’ve got to bulldog
a hardhead with a kiss of pain.
Today, you slide from horse onto
the fleeing steer, grab his horns, pull
five hundred pounds of muscle down.  team roping, calf roping, steer roping 
Roping always involves a team,
whether it’s two men or women
or one human and one smart horse.
The aim: to bring down and hog-tie
a big scared baby of a calf
or a full-grown and pissed-off steer.
You gallop out swinging your loop
with one hand, the other holding
the slack and the unneeded reins.
You down him with a careful toss,
tie three of his hooves together,
step back with wide arms and a grin.
A rope isn’t always a noose:
ropes in brown hands can be lassos.  saddle bronc riding 
It’s not the leather riding gloves
and it’s not the fringed buckskin chaps,
not the worn-in and dusty boots,
not the spurs’ blunted silver stars,
not the 10x wide-brimmed straw hat
(both winged helmet and regal crown):
it’s not clothes that make the cowboy.
It’s something behind a bronzed face,
in the level gaze from dark eyes,
and, of course, it’s heart that puts you,
the reins in one hand, one hand free,
waving with the horse’s rhythm,
your heels spurring from neck to flank,
on this bronc called America.  barrel racing 
Thunder explodes out of the chute.
Mane and tail whip in the speed wind,
agile hooves pound a swift tempo
circling around the first barrel.
One hand grips the horn, the other
communicates with the taut reins,
though your thighs give the best guidance,
telling your horse to maneuver
in circles that hug the barrels.
Three barrels, a tight cloverleaf
you gallop through with one joined will.
This contest pits you and your horse
against the clock and your best time.
Sister, your dreadlocks are flying!  pony express 
Before telegraph, news traveled
from mouth to ear, from hand to hand.
News arrived old. From sea to sea
took weeks, unless carried by boys
stationed along the stagecoach route
to race a cross-country relay.
Your pulse gallops toward the handoff,
when your teammate takes the baton
and the noise and flurry go on
without you. Your leg run, you and
your horse (your partner, your friend) stand
encompassed in adrenalin,
watching, as the Ancestors must,
unable to help, but cheering.  tennessee walker 
Let’s hear it for the barrel men,
for the bullfighters, for the clowns,
for the men on the side ready
to run toward trouble. Give it up
for the musical director
(thanks for the hip-hop, bro!). And for
the announcer and all the folks
cheering in the stands. That baby
wearing a tiny cowboy hat.
That man the same black as his horse,
in that white suit and fedora.
His Tennessee Walker’s proud gait
as he nods to his own rhythm,
tail an ebony waterfall.  bull riding 
Boley bulls are bred for bucking,
bred to be mean, to be “Bad Boys.”
They teach you to sit strong, hold on,
and with one hand reach for the sky.
After riding a Boley bull
a cowboy thinks, Hell, I’ve been there.
I’ve held the bull-rope, raked my spurs,
while that bad boy tried to kill me.
A ton of Brahma seeing red
gives you a whole new perspective,
a who-you-think-you-talking-to
fearlessness. You’ve seen the bull’s eye:
you know you can’t die more than once.
You’ve lived through eight Mississippis.


^^EOP^^

The coals you walked on
in places considered un-
civil gleam beneath
feet transformed they
gleam, new blades sharp you
are adept at conjuring shoes
for your bare feet & blood
pools easy along the obsidian
edge   you walk fast because of in
spite of    you are said to be laughing
until you cry you cry laughing
and wait for the water to reach
the earth soothe this fire you
are still learning the power
of the rheostat installed when you landed
without papers once you had some    one    who
who kissedyoursoles    once    you
had   some    one who held your soles to
the fire in their foreheads, asking to be
blessed you once were that kind
of girl    war bought a berth upon a lazaretto skimming
the surface of the sky
safety you learned
comes from concealing everything from
turning your own body to bread, your own
laughter into balm, in disguising your soul
red  bruises  purple  turn  calloused  you
watch them come, keeled over with want
ectothermic creatures, now hot now cold to help ease
your hot you’re cold and you watch like a witch
cursed and cursing, you don’t feel
the sliced beets carrying you now you
note how easily the knives perfect these useless things
you cut off at your knees to live


^^EOP^^

The streets of Shobra are still traced
with music from years ago—
children ripping
the clothes off lines,
pins scattering in a rounded clatter
of sharp-throated wooden notes.
It might have been a merging
of Mohamed Fouad
and Mohamed Mohy
or Mohamed Fawzi,
and my brother (also a Mohamed)
is sitting in the shimmering corner
of our grandma’s balcony with one leg up.
He wants to finish this one song
because it has his favorite parts,
which he has rewound a few times now,
and Mahmoud is downstairs again
yelling, holding a peeling board game
they taped together, and my brother’s eyes glint
over to the chorus, remembering how Mahmoud
once told him how his father comes home
only once a month, and he feels bad
he is taking so long to go downstairs
but this would be the last time
he rewinds the song, Mahmoud, wallahi,
he yells, the cassette player’s volume
on high but not loud enough
to drown out the street-market prices,
the chatter of bent men
at the coffeehouse, their fingers caterpillar-like
through the mugs, blowing
on clouded tea,
but the music is just enough
to shroud it all in the blur
of a filmy fog that Mahmoud can hear
and he can’t help but remember
how sometimes at night,
if he closes his eyes hard enough,
he hears the din of keys
against the door,
the whistling of a man
nearly always caught
in the middle
of an unfinished song.


^^EOP^^

                                              Aztec girl twisting her hair into a braid
                                              when the army arrives.
She sees them in her citadel, 
her nickname for the city
                                              forgotten by her mouth’s mind. 
The Spanish writer who keeps the oldest codex saw grief 
when the papers of the people’s prayers were burned by the soldiers. 
Havoc, my freedom, without a history I invent my own. 
Say I am of many faces,
neither white nor brown,
                                                                            say violet, 
                             the color that speaks like violence. 
Legacy sounds like lost at sea. 
              Say it wasn’t precious to me, identity.
              Strange, dangerous innocence.
              The earth is an onion strung with lights, my eyes sting
                                                                                          from the blaze.
A gold hawk joins 
              the ring of fox in heavy dew around me early and I
am part of their wet ritual in my wish 
                                                            to turn from what is human, even 
knowing it was hawk who stole the woodpecker’s redheaded flight.


^^EOP^^

the archivist         enters the room
with a    bag of oranges

she    
broke one on                 the walk over
her shirt tucked        under bra          strings
of     juice
draw down         her chin


he
is sitting at the         table when  she enters
facing the     open window     that
exits  to
a     skyline
licked with     fog        a thick cover    of


buildings    hang       from the clouds


she hasn’t yet          learnt
to              know words &
not their          meaning

camera
spills
through the         gaps in her teeth   
lands       within the    hollow    
that     turns to      plump
breast;
meeting place

her father walks      to the kitchen sink
empties the steaming        jug into   terra-cotta bowl
steeps      the dried khat
until it   turns         to tea


they say the leaf of God
conjures        old ghosts
but  he weathers     the nightmares
for      the         memories

the children
marching     in     twos past
where  he     stood cutting    leaf & cane


the  eldest      of twelve
first       from his      village to
enter   university
swallowed       the language     
of    three       colonizers

afaan  oromo he
kept
hidden in the    secret of his cheeks


she    thought
everything     unknowable    stayed
hallowed    in    transit

the crackle of      scalded onions
  &      oil
her     aunty covered    in gold  & satin
towering   over    gleaming    blue
hands     filled
with      wood   &    metal


as   the      doctor
eased    her     knees open
back       pressed against
white   linen
imitation      cotton
forced  against      her  meat

she     found
etched         onto
ceiling

two      mountains   
estranged by
migrant ash       white
like the      dripped
seed    of the poplar   in spring
clotted       between the
blackened                   roots
of      Odaa     Nabee
the sound       of thunder
kindling           the    floodplain;
meeting place


he takes        his seat
at the    table
an old      study desk from
the salvos     reads like an atlas


scrunches a    piece of green
places it     in his mouth

rests his hands at     the end of the counter
&
asks

where is your country?

she   draws her
finger      to the   
    middle    of her chest    
etching     circles onto
skin

her tongue   loops
the enclave of    her cheeks

drawing    rings
across flesh   then    slips
past the white    threads
that     drip from teeth   

she gestures to the      back of her
mouth      her left palm remains
on  breast

&  says
in   here      


^^EOP^^

it is dark here & still you have al nur at your neck when fajr does not come
my body is the color of mourning / not dua or dawah / so I say let the day come 
my body is fajr / day is mourning / I am still a clot of blood looking for skin
the color of god is a stain / shaped to you like a grief not yet come 
black is the color of god not grief & rain is not looking for skin / but is red dust
stepping into your body without melting & finding every empty space a dwelling to come 
I am still an accident of geography looking for a body that is not a stain & prayer
is the mourning I wake up to / the clot of blood I pick until again a wound comes 
out the color of accident / which is red dust / the color of geography / which is dissolution
& lined like a palm made by prayer / shaped to me like a drought not yet come 
& yes / I want to be named to the marrow / make inventory & god of what has yet hurt me
& so I pick dua from your neck until I am no longer wound & strained & come 
to claim the dwelling of you a sign & beget a desert of new names & call fajr skin
that has left blood & black how I step into your body & melting the stain to come 
it is mourning here / I am four droughts old again & mistake all the women
in my family to the time of desert / clot of blood & red clay straining / for a homecoming 
but looking for skin does not unstitch the mouth & the stain of grief is finding
no words at all & every empty space is like stepping into red dust & what comes 
from accident begets home / invented by all the god in my color & yes / I want
to be shaped to the clot / whole & make blood & black of what has yet come


^^EOP^^

In praise of all that is honest, call upon the acrylic tips
and make a minaret out of a middle finger, gold-dipped
and counting. In the name of Filet-O-Fish, pink lemonade,
the sweat on an upper lip, the backing swell and ache
of Abdul Basit Abdus Samad on cassette tape, a clean jump shot,
the fluff of Ashanti’s sideburns, the rice left in the pot
the calling cards and long waits, the seasonal burst
of baqalah-bought dates. 
Every time they leave and come back
alive. 
Birthmarks shaped like border disputes.
Black sand. Shah Rukh’s dimples, like bullets
taking our aunts back to those summer nights,
these blessings on blessings on blessings. 
Give me the rub of calves,
rappers sampling jazz,
the char of frankincense
and everything else that makes sense
in a world that don’t.


^^EOP^^

The heart, the surgeon says, does not reveal
the small rifts, the hairline cracks which 
split the hairline cracks they conceal cops
and robbers in a stretch of skin flaunting 
star-scars with show of blood bone
the ledges of what it holds tight in checkmate 
moves: bend this and break
fight first and bleed to earn 
needle  finger  wrap  caress  balm
the salvation of sight   Behold what beauty 
lasts, what outlasts itself    The curtain
calls the ovation    Seize the beginning 
that ends this way: off center stage above
fractured ribs the heart succumbs in silence 
All is dark. Listen      a kommos sung solo
It is too late to repair anything.


^^EOP^^

1 
The sinner’s bouquet, house of shredded & torn Dear John letters, upended grave of names, moon Black kiss of a pistol’s flat side, time blueborn
& threaded into a curse, Lazarus of hustlers, the picayune
Spinning into beatdown; breath of a thief stilled By fluorescent lights, a system of 40 blocks, Empty vials, a hand full of purple cranesbills,
Memories of crates suspended from stairs, tied in knots
Around streetlamps, the house of unending push-ups, Wheelbarrows & walking 20s, the daughters Chasing their fathers’ shadows, sons that upset
The wind with their secrets, the paraphrase of fractured, Scarred wings flying through smoke, each wild hour Of lockdown, hunger time & the blackened flower. 
2 
Of lockdown, hunger time & the blackened flower — Ain’t nothing worth knowing. Prison becomes home;
The cell: a catacomb that cages and the metronome Tracking the years that eclipse you. History authors 
Your death, throws you into that din of lost hours. Your mother blames it all on your X chromosome,
Blames it on something in the blood, a Styrofoam
Cup filled with whiskey leading you to court disfavor, 
To become drunk on count-time & chow-call logic. There is no name for this thing that you’ve become:
Convict, hostage, inmate, lifer, yardbird, all fail. If you can’t be free, be a mystery. An amnesic.
Anything. But avoid succumbing to the humdrum:
Swallowing a bullet or even just choosing to inhale. 
3 
Swallowing a bullet or even just choosing to inhale, Both mark you: pistol or the blunt to the head
Escorting you through the night. Your Yale— An omen, the memories, the depression, the dead 
And how things keep getting in the way of things.
When he asked you for the pistol, and you said no, The reluctance wasn’t about what violence brings.
His weeping in your ear made you regret what you owed. 
On some days, the hard ones, you curse the phone, The people calling collect, reaching out, all buried,
Surrounded by bricks. On some days, you’ve known
You wouldn’t answer, the blinking numbers as varied 
As the names of the prisons holding on to those lives,
Holding on, ensuring that nothing survives. 
4  Holding on, ensuring that nothing survives,
Not even regret. That’s the thing that gets you,
Holding on to memories like they’re your archives, Like they’re there to tell you something true 
About what happened. My past put a skew On how I held her. Unaccustomed to touch,
I knew only dream & fantasy. Try to see through
That mire and find intimacy. It was just so much.  & then, the yesterdays just become yesterday,
A story that you tell yourself about not dying,
Another thing, when it’s mentioned, to downplay.
That’s what me and that woman did, trying 
To love each other. What kind of fool am I,
Lost in what’s gone, reinventing myself with lies. 
5 
Lost in what’s gone, reinventing myself with lies:
I walk these streets, ruined by what I’d hide.
Jesus died for somebody’s sins, but not mine. 
I barely see my daughters at all these days. Out here caught up, lost in an old cliché.
But tell me, what won’t these felonies betray? 
Did a stretch in prison to be released to a cell. Returned to a freedom penned by Orwell.
My noon temptation is now the Metro’s third rail. 
In my wallet, I carry around my daguerreotype, A mugshot, no smiles, my name a tithe.
What must I pay for being this stereotype? 
The pistols I carried into the night, my anchor;
The crimes that unraveled me, my banner. 
6 
The crimes that unraveled me—my banner. Only a fool confesses to owning that fact.
Honesty a sinkhole; the truth doomed to subtract
Everything but prayer, turn my breath into failure.  Whiskey after prison made me crave amber,
Brown washing my glass until I’m smacked. The murder of crows on my arm an artifact Of freedom: what outlasts even the jailor.  Alas, there is no baptism for me tonight.
No water to drown all these memories. The rooms in my head keep secrets that indict
Me still; my chorus of unspoken larcenies.  You carry that knowledge into your twilight,
& live without regret for your guilty pleas. 
7 
& live without regret for your guilty pleas— Shit. Mornings I rise twice: once for a count
That will not come & later with the city’s Wild birds, who find freedom without counsel. 
I left prison with debts no honest man could pay. Walked out imaging I’d lapped my troubles,
but a girl once said no to my closed ears, dismayed that I didn’t pause. Remorse can’t calm those evils.  I’ve lost myself in some kind of algebra
That turns my life into an equation that zeroes Out, regardless of my efforts. Algophobia
Means to fear pain. I still fear who knows  All I’ve done. Why regret this thing I’ve worn?
The sinner’s bouquet; house, shredded & torn.


^^EOP^^

my god wakes up with bed head
and sticky fingers, doesn’t
want to go into work today 
my god forgets to do the dishes
lets all the houseplants die 
my god teenages
built this earth on Friday night
and tires of it on Sunday morning 
my god commands
a willing army, unwillingly
mutters, whines 
my god is so type B
just wants to be left alone
just wants to smoke a cigarette
and not think of the parents and their children 
my god is a liar
always one foot out the door
and ready to leave me here
if that’s what it takes 
my god fickles
breaks every bony promise
picks away at the meat
laughs when i tantrum 
still, i half-kneel and pray a half-prayer
bend until i can look myself in the eye
still, there is no god but God
so i make do with this one


^^EOP^^

                    
                    
                    The following poems and collages were created for Victoria Martinez’s solo show, Celestial House, at Loyola University Museum of Art (LUMA) as odes to the homes and Chicago neighborhoods the artists grew up in. All collages are by Victoria Martinez and all poems are by José Olivarez.

 


Victoria Martinez

Pantry Secrets, 2018, collage, 15 × 10 in.




Nation of Domination

my mom hugs me & wants me to stay. i have my foot
on the pedal. a fake gold chain on my neck. i confess
i’m a sucker. i never want magicians to reveal their secrets.
i want to live in the unknowing where everything is possible.
my mom dances with me to Los Bukis. she thinks this makes
me her baby still. perspective is a magic trick. i hit my brother
with the Rock Bottom & i bet you can guess what i leave out.
ask Farooq if you need a hint. the brain is full of magic
i don’t understand. no one signs up to take a dive. in wrestling,
there’s a team of writers who decide who wins and who loses.
the metaphor is obvious. my mom wasn’t born to play the role
of mom, i don’t care how many baby dolls she played with.
i dance with my mom to Los Bukis & you’re a fool
if you believe it’s her son she’s trying to hold on to.


 


Victoria Martinez

Pillow Talk, 2018, collage, 15 × 10 in.




moonshine

the poets are right about the moonlight.
i take my spot of sky & deposit it
into a savings account. only after
the bank confiscated our house
did i understand. roses
don’t grow without pricked hands.
i didn’t have to spend a summer in a freezer
packing lunch meat to know the value
of sunlight. my mom didn’t have
to spend a decade wiping down floors to appreciate
education. when i give you a bouquet of roses,
i give you a bouquet of bloody hands.
a handful of dirt & the worms that doted on your roses.
when i take my piece of sky out of the bank,
it’s smaller. the drunks are right about moonshine.


 


Victoria Martinez

Hoyne, 2018, collage, 15 × 10 in.




Shelter Island

frigid are the branches of black trees cutting through
a blacker night. missing are the lampposts that adorn
every few feet of New York. cold is your hand in my hand
& yes, i am a man, & you are a woman. my wilderness
is not unlike the woods that surround us. the sky in my wild
lit by lanterns in the faces of animals. my own flammable face.
my father’s temperament. my thrifted excuse. yes,
it’s the night before 45 is sworn in as president,
& yes, we leave the city, & we would leave the planet, too.
you hold my hand & we walk into the teeth of the hour
armed with each other. bitter cold is the world we leave behind.
when we hold hands, we invent a spaceship.
​
                

^^EOP^^

You are dark as religion. Remember God
could not have named a modicum of light without you.
You are plum, black currant, passion
fruit in another woman’s garden. You are Black
as and as if by magic. Black not as sin, but a cave’s jaw
clamped shut by forgiveness. Color of closed wombs and bellies
of ships, you, dark as not the tree trunk but its every cleft.
I chart each crescent moon rising above fingernail
and rub together my thighs for want of you. I try
to find you where the pages of books meet. You hang
where men or piano keys segregate. When I miss you,
I remember the hickey the sun left on the back of my neck.
If I forget, I smoke blunts down to my fingertips
and beg you to come on my lips. This is how I pray for you
when I’m not pessimistic. I bow to your darkness like I kneel
beside a child’s bed, confessing as gospel, there’s no monster here.


^^EOP^^

my sister wraps the throw
around herself on the small
cream loveseat & i know
for sure that she is not
a speck of dirt on a pill.
she coughs & sniffs up all
the lucky air in the room
into her excellent nostrils,
which are endless
holy wells replenishing
the soft architecture of her guts.
not even the lupus can interrupt
this ritual of beholding.
you ever look at a thing
you ain’t make, but become
a mother in the looking?
our blood is a thread tied
around my finger, tied
around her finger, that helps
me love. when her knees
swell, when her joints rust,
when her hair thins & flees
making a small continent
of skin on the side of her head,
i am witnessing her in whatever
state her body will allow.
Bismillah to the brain that
put my name next to her name
and said look at this girl your
whole life and know some kind
of peace.

^^EOP^^

The thing inside the
thing inside the thing
inside Malinche,
mother, Cortés, father, casta, first mestizo,
loanword for admixture,
dark one, darker than
one and lighter than
the other, espaldera,
graft, hybrid, pardo, parda,
castiza

^^EOP^^

I amuse myself with my country.
     I glimpse its future approaching on the eyelashes of an ostrich, I toy with its history and its days, I strike it with stones and thunderbolts. I extinguish its lamps and light its windows, and at the other end of day I inaugurate its history.

I am a stranger to all of you. I am from the other end. I live in a country of my own, inflating the sky to see its ashes, and in sleeping and waking I open a bud to live within.

Something must be born, so I bore caverns in my skin for lightning and build nests. I must pass like thunder into lips as sad as straw, between stone and autumn, between pore and epidermis, between thigh and thigh.
      And so I sing: “Form worthy of our demise—advance.”
     And so I shout and sing: “Who will give us the maternity of the cosmos, who will nourish us with mines?”

I advance toward my self, toward ruins. The silence of calamity takes me—I’m too short to gird the earth like a rope, I’m not sharp enough to pierce the face of history and plunge in.

You want me to be like you. You boil me in the cauldron of your prayers; you mix me with the broth of armies and the pepper of tyrants, then pitch me like a tent for the wali and hoist my skull like a flag.
     (My death,
     Nevertheless I run toward you, I rush rush rush to you.)

You live like flagstones, and lamentation is your air. You announce the hedgehog’s abode and sleep on the scarab’s censers—your children are immolations.

A distance as great as a mirage divides us.

I rouse hyenas in you, I rouse the gods. I sow sedition in you and suckle fever, then teach you to journey without a guide. I am a pole for your latitudes and a walking springtime. I am a convulsion in your throats, a hemorrhage in your words.


You advance like leprosy toward me, and I am the one bound to your dirt. Yet nothing unites us, everything divides us—so let me burn alone, let me pass through you like a spear of light.
     I cannot live with you, I cannot live without you. You are an undulation in my senses, and I cannot escape you. Even so, cry out, “The sea, the sea!” Even so, hang the beads of the sun on your thresholds.

Open my memory and study my face beneath its words, learn my alphabet. When you see foam weaving my flesh and stone flowing in my blood, you will see me.
      I am closed like a tree trunk, present and ungraspable like air. Thus I cannot surrender to you.

I was born in the sockets of lilacs, I grew in the orbits of lightning, I live with light and grass. I storm and I clear up, I shine and cloud over, I rain and snow—the hours are my language, and my country is day.

The people are sleeping, but if they die they’ll awaken, or so it was said. You are all sleeping, but if you awaken you’ll die, or so it shall be said.
     You are dirt on my windowpanes, and I must remove you. I am the coming morning and the map that draws itself.

Nevertheless, there’s a fever in my bowels that keeps vigil over you.
     Nevertheless, I await you,
     In the shell of night by the sea, in the roaring of the depths, in the holes in the robe of the sky, in the jujubes and acacias, in the pines and cedars, in the hearts of the waves, in the salt,
      I await you.

 
Translated from the Arabic


^^EOP^^

It was like climbing a mountain to those of us who’d climbed one. To the others, it was like, I suppose, something else. In other words, we let everybody find her own figure of speech. 
Not that it—speech—lay thick on the ground, or mountain; it presented itself one word at a time, far between. A body had to keep an eye out, like for firewood at dusk, or else 
miss her chance. Nobody else, let’s face it, cared about metaphor, or even simile, the like-it-or-not-ness of the mountain pretty much getting between a body and her musing, in its going. One 
step at a time, anyone could lose herself or someone else just staring at her feet. And if a body meet a body is not mere speech but something that could happen, like hopping a bus—though on the mountain 
you’ll catch no rides, worse luck, the mountain requires to be climbed on foot, one after the other, nothing else will get you up it. There’s nothing like such obduracy but in the wild, nobody can tell you otherwise. No simple figure, 
this struggle: just a crag, your burden, and your own two feet. Say otherwise, talk through your hat, which I don’t care for.


^^EOP^^

                    
                    
                    you michelangelo’s crouching boy/you d’angelo’s purr/you dead currency/you dead presidents/you a stick of incense/you a stick-up artist/you haraami/you the hum of a lifetime basined in my lap/count our tallies of loss backward for me/run to the bank & translate it into a fistful of green of your choice/or something else sanctified/or european/pick the synonym of your choice.

in a traditional sense/the body holds its arithmetic/exports it outward/to the touch and exhale/the praxis felt best/against a groan of concrete/with the dumb weight of a hand against the small of a back/here, an elevator is our only spiritual ascension/can i be excused from living so slimly?

i dream you closer too/beside the honey-colored dog licking its vulva/an abstract laugh swelling inside your throat/ask me about blood clots and spun coins/the cracked skin of heels/anything but the nightly heartbreaks of/too many addresses/and all the ways/i am still auditioning/for this country’s approval.
 
                

^^EOP^^

on my block, a gate
on my block, a tree smelling 
of citrus & jasmine that knocks
me back into the arms of my dead 
mother. i ask Ross how can a tree
be both jasmine & orange,

^^EOP^^

I inhabit these fugitive words,
I live, my face my face’s lone companion,
And my face is my path, 
In your name, my land
That stands tall, enchanted and solitary;
In your name, death, my friend.
 
Translated from the Arabic


^^EOP^^

kitchen table

Imagine this. Mother sits near the rusty stove,
chops onions for the puchero pot. Radio’s on.
A soft bolero by Lucho Gatica, “Somos”: we are.
She sings along to her favorite tune. He wants
to talk. Dog sleeps under the table. He doesn’t
know how. He met an older boy. They kissed.
It just happened. In an instant. His new dirty
shoes, her stained apron over her knotted hands.
Kitchen’s bright yellow light undoes him.
Mother senses his stare. Dinner isn’t ready yet.
He wants to say things. That same night
a storm breaks out, water overflows the gutters,
takes everything away—leaves, twigs, a straight 
soft string. She doesn’t have much time.



oval table
 
Profane
four-legged thing
a holy place of gatherings
father mother three kids a ghost
eating asado Sunday mass barbecue
sins familiar sins scattered all over
the old checkered tablecloth Pray
one day you’ll have a family like this
all these traditions will pass on
to you Pray! this broken table
now dies slowly now lies
alone in a toolshed
somewhere
south.



high altar

Then Noah built an altar to the Lord and, taking some of all the clean animals and clean birds, he sacrificed burnt offerings on it.
—Genesis 8:20
 
A piece of furniture with a flat top and one or more legs, providing a level surface for eating, writing
of us kids
& father still
preaching
we’re both
alike you
my son I
will make
you love
every women
mujeriego
like dad
cracked
broken legs
or so he says
this life
unknown
to you
so apart
tell us
oh why
you feel
a man
hidden
inside liar
you love
hairy legs
so familiar
or so he says


^^EOP^^

              Anger is the other person inside
                            mi garganta, my throat. 
                            The mouth’s mouth is the deepest. 
Rage is the homeless boy fallen down a well. 
Shout down and he will echo back.
                                          La lengua, tongue. 
How long have you been down there? 
                            Subterráneo, underground. 
The letters of Cortés are difficult to read,
                            on each page a horse dies. 
The lord of the city lives homeless in a canoe.
Hundreds of natives are speared. 
              Another town is burned alive
              with all its caged creatures. 
On each page the people appear to walk
                                                        over their dead.  La tierra estercolada, the earth fertilized,
spreads a cloth whose pattern repeats. 
                            On each page the future arrives
on a raft woven of snakes. 
              Over and over, the design obliterates. 
Never does he say this was their home we took.


^^EOP^^

Especially in line for the food bank,
my mother radiated grace. Talked
a machinery of Principles. Elm trees
and their dresses of urine, her small mouth
always chiding, don’t speak to a man of that kind.
This daily commitment to life felt laborious, haram.
Expendable it was, like all my milk teeth
knocked back into my mouth. That taste.
What even is sustenance? She was a woman of Principles,
she flossed, her exquisite fangs displaying remorse
only when she reprimanded me or talked of the coat.
Consider the white lab coat hanging
above a crusted heater; consider our dilapidating shame.
Consider me. Tonight, I exercise humility,
so I identify with the pigeons
nagging on the chicken bone gray as the sky.
Unparagraphed I am, the way I still steal
my dinner from a health store on 6th Ave,
then lecture the diorama with my lentil soup.
The truth is, I never educated myself
the way I cultivated my limits.
I was an abandoned thought,
marching through an unlocked window—
I had an albino budgie once, red ink for eyes.
He wore a lab coat
and crashed against my window
like a displaced insect.
His name was Apollo. Some circumstances never abandon
you, you only train the muscle that carries them.
Is a wing a muscle? 3 Best Exercises to Building Badass Wings,
says the ad and the man in the subway
sprawled across hard plastic  looks like
a glorious bone. In his odor, I feel at home.
Consider his careful dedication to repose.
There is something he has mastered genuinely,
his fist curled around it.  Sleeps on two cushions,
one for his ass. She was a woman of Principles. 
Consider her stark god of oblivion. 
Nobody would’ve differentiated between us and him.
Uniformly standing in line, a dark puff, plume on the wing.
The wing patched to the torso of a body entirely ignorant of aerodynamics.
The world hadn’t hurt us more than
it had hurt anyone else, but still, I couldn’t trust
the sky and its reverberations.
In line, I made friends with a family
of crickets in white lab coats.
They sang to me, of the end of it,
that wings were awaiting us there:
stale bread rolls, a cheese pie,
Braeburn apples sharing space
with two cans of tomatoes.


^^EOP^^

Our city fled,
So I sought its paths in haste
And looked around—I saw only horizon,
And I perceived that those who flee tomorrow
And those who return tomorrow
Are a body I tear apart on my page. 
I could see: the clouds were a throat,
The water formed walls of flame.
I saw a sticky yellow thread,
A thread of the history that clings to me.
A hand mulls over my life, ties my days together
Time and again, a hand that was heir
To the race of dolls and the progeny of rags. 
I entered the rites of creation
In the waters’ womb and the trees’ virginity,
I saw trees seducing me,
I saw rooms among their branches,
Beds and windows resisting me,
I saw children and read them
My sand, I read them
Suras of clouds and verses of stone,
I saw them journeying with me,
I saw pools of tears and the corpse of rain
Gleaming behind them. 
Our city fled—
What am I? A spike of grain
Weeping for a lark
That died beneath the snow and cold,
Died without revealing its messages,
Died without writing anyone.
I questioned it and saw its corpse
Discarded at the end of time,
And I cried out, “Silence of the ice, I
Am the home of the exiled lark.
Its grave is my home, and I’m an exile.” 
Our city fled,
And I saw my feet transform
Into a river overflowing with blood,
Into ships growing distant, expanding,
And I saw my drowned shores seducing ...
My waves were wind and pelicans. 
Our city fled,
And refusal is a crushed pearl
Whose powder anchors my ships,
And refusal is a woodcutter living
On my face—it gathers me and sets me on fire—
And refusal is the distance that disperses me.
I see my blood and I see my death
Beyond my blood:
It speaks to me and pursues me. 
Our city fled,
And I saw how my shroud illumines me,
I saw ... If only death would grant me time.
 
Translated from the Arabic


^^EOP^^

                    
                    
                    she was washee i told her you are
like your motherland a wilderness
needs a belt laid down two white
hotel towels took her into the tub to
wudu the boys out of her mouth pointed
her nipples toward qibla wiped clean
her intention to perform ruk’u as if
carrying a glass of chai on her back
fold at the knees palms to the ground
tucked her soles under her astaghfirullah
used country
in my used country I felt his teeth
circle as a mosquito the black mystery
he placed my right hand over my wrong
stain said he was bringing me home
offered me a suite with a lock a key in
the shape of a brother perhaps twenty-
two years old my body pure as a glass
table he spilled was she my boss on my
back at night came easy as a fly
to post-conflict faithfully
used my country


^^EOP^^

To be a statue               carved by Bernini
Lounging in a climate-controlled museum in Rome         is luxury
Like the luxury of a personal pan pizza            with unlimited free toppings
Or the luxurious feel of a premium eye pencil          used to draw bisons on the walls of a French cave
To be so white and glossy                   is unimaginable
Like how I imagine a plate of eggs painted by Velázquez           or the lid of a designer toilet cistern
In a European magazine                       (I could be European
And wear a dashingly arranged scarf          or sip weirdly-named liqueurs that taste like semen
In a Rococo palais)                but in the scheme of things
Where I am marble and still                  my wrist will be a marvel
Like the marvel of an isthmus           whose name can only be pronounced if you have a lisp
Or the marvelous sausage                that saved a man from the Inquisition in 1582
It is definitely marvelous                    to be as attenuated
As the casually extended leg of a greyhound                   reclining on its very own velvet settee
To be so thoroughbred                          is an accomplishment
Like the thoroughly flattened face of a Persian cat                   which always looks peevish
Or the extremely frivolous ceiling                   of a banqueting hall where royals are put to death
If it is admirable to be so luxurious                    then I will never be admired
The way a designer toilet cistern is admired               or a piece of elaborate pâtisserie
(Although I am not a statue                   I have often held my arms aloft
As when catching a carelessly thrown baby              or pointing at two meteors at the same time)
It is exhausting trying to be so inanimate               and desirable
If my arm breaks off  like the shell                of a freshly-filled cannoli
You will know why


^^EOP^^

At one time,
if my nails had been painted
this shade of rose-foam in Kabul
they would have rammed
out the frosted shell
like the tarp off
a bud’s wet belly,
they would have gouged out
each shining beast,
viscera still shiny,
each glittering pore
still insane
with breath 
The pain is meant
to shame me back to the realm
of several whitenesses,
they want to chew off
the cicatrix and lodge the
septic cadaver
into a further gorge where frisks
of neon riot in aporia,
where the humility
of the body is turned to iron 
The shame is a
figure with an axe
climbing a voluting staircase,
it runs the speeding drams
with agility
from the hard pallet of the
radius to the soft roofs
of the mounds
It famishes
the exquisitely nurtured
yellow
around which
breakers of scarp
hemorrhage
tigerish
glyphs, accomplishing
the gravity of
Japanese inscriptions 
A delicate cancer
bares its jaw,
tufts of blood
abound
in clay,
sculpted
fetal knots
a fetal navy,
they harden to seeds,
crab-like, platinum,
growing beneath the
watery ceiling of the palm
into amiable shoots;
an aubade on delphiniums
growing clearer each day 
Over many months
the permutations will again
show their round, maddening
faces,
the Persian inlay
will abound
with devout layers
we will stroke on
the fine, sensual, nymphic
chemical
paint up to the ridges where we bleed the richest
I cannot evade the force, brushing
further and further
iridescent texture
on my torso, spirit,
tongue,
I’m a
bridge of veins
in air
I’m an orphic phantasm, hair
combed through with
stalactites
I’m a bouquet
of limbs appliquéd
on pouring rain,
what can the spectral evening muster
in lament?


^^EOP^^

The trouble with Jane Eyre
isn’t what I thought when I slammed shut the book
on those pictures trying to fly out at me
because I misunderstood, being too young 
to read. When you’re unable to read a book
you can’t understand the illustrations either.
Those were my mother’s books, a green bound set
of that one and the book by her sister, Emily. 
When you can’t understand the artwork
the face at the window is a monster.
It is only Cathy, though, in the book by Brontë’s sister,
calling for her lover. And the awful figure bending 
over Jane’s bed with the candle, that monstrous
creature—well, there are flaws in the mind of Jane, too,
and the awful figure bending over her
might be the tormented wife of Rochester. 
There’s a flaw in Jane’s mind, too,
looking down on the young French child
born to another tormented mother
whom Rochester says has inherited sin. 
The young French child likes presents too much,
likes to dance and sing—and so what? She is love-starved,
this child who has supposedly inherited sin,
who will never get the approval of Mr. Rochester. 
We lose track of the pretty child who likes to sing.
Jane goes away for a while to prove her purity.
Then, when the other wife dies, Mr. Rochester
will approve. Reader, I married him, she says, 
after she has gone away for a while. He is blind
from the fire the crazy wife set. And then, miraculously,
her love asks if she is wearing a blue dress.
I believe she is pregnant, then, carrying a child 
who will be a good child, miraculously.
Charlotte Brontë knew only part of the happy ending.
Perhaps he gets better and sees the blue dress.
We have to believe things turn out well, 
while Charlotte, herself, had nine months of pleasure
and died. And so the book, which ends as if resolved,
asks us to believe things turn out well, the French girl gone,
Rochester and Jane and the baby in the burned-out 
mansion, because books then ended resolutely
and did not reflect how it is to have a calm life,
Rochester and Jane and the baby in the burned-out
mansion, illustrated by the art of the woodcut, 
which does not suggest such a calm life,
but a knife and fire making art out of wood,
in a mansion that itself has been sculpted by
fire and breaking things, which is how we really live.


^^EOP^^

1 
The leaves sleeping beneath the wind:
A vessel for the wound.
Time perishing: the glory of the wound.
The trees rising among our lashes:
A lake for the wound. 
The wound lies in bridges
When the grave lengthens,
When patience stretches
Between the banks of our love and death.
The wound, a gesture, is passing. 
2 
I give the voice of the wound
To the tongue of strangled bells,
To stone approaching from afar,
To aridity and the arid land,
To time borne on a stretcher of ice,
I kindle the fire of the wound. 
When history burns in my garments,
When blue nails sprout in my book,
When I shout during the day,
Who are you? Who’s thrusting you
Into my notebooks,
Into my virgin earth?
In my notebooks, in my virgin earth,
I glimpse two eyes of dust
And hear someone say,
“I am the wound that grows
In your narrow history.” 
3 
I named you cloud,
Wound, dove of departure,
I named you quill and book.
And here I am, starting a dialogue
Between myself and the drowned tongue
On the isles of exodus,
On the archipelago of the ancient fall.
And here I am, teaching the dialogue
To the wind and palms—
Wound, dove of departure. 
4 
Had I a harbor, had I a vessel
In the land of dreams and mirrors,
Had I the remains
Of a city, had I a city
In the land of children and weeping, 
I would forge them all for the wound
Into a spear-like song
That pierces trees and stones and sky,
A song as supple as water,
Unruly and dazed, like conquest. 
5 
World adorned with dreams and yearning,
Rain down on our deserts,
Rain down, but shake us, palms of the wound,
And break two branches off for us
From the trees that love the silence of the wound,
From the trees with arched lashes and hands
That keep vigil over the wound. 
World adorned with dreams and yearning,
World falling in my brow,
Drawn like the wound,
Come no closer—the wound is closer than you.
Don’t tempt me—the wound is more beautiful,
And the wound has passed by that enchantment
Cast by your eyes
In the last kingdoms,
Passed without leaving a sail to tempt it astray,
Without leaving it an island.
 
Translated from the Arabic


^^EOP^^

We must have known,
Even as we reached
Down to touch them
Where we'd found them
 
Shut-eyed and trembling
Under a straw bale
In the haymow, that
She would move them
 
That night under cover
Of darkness, and that
By finding them
We were making certain
 
We wouldn't see them again
Until we saw them
Crouching under the pickup
Like sullen teens, having gone
 
As wild by then as they'd gone
Still in her mouth that night
She made a decision
Any mother might make
 
Upon guessing the intentions
Of the state: to go and to
Go now, taking everything
You love between your teeth.


^^EOP^^

I find the heavens beautiful,
I find the earth so too,
the seas and the ground,
the furling of water and gas,
the bright distant points
of our isolation. I take comfort
in the swinging pendant traffic lights,
the slurry of wet raw flour.
I am programmed to this language,
and can only voice my rejection of it
in the same language.
This is the power of diaspora,
the difficulty in finding alternative.
Let us send messages to the half-existent.
To excuse oneself, to claim not knowing
the future, is inhuman. I am so worthless
that my body serves as brick,
conscripted to build up my prison
until it is time to lay my own body
down for the walls. It is mechanical,
snipping into the loop of every lace,
separating from every link
the cold wrapped bud. At first the skin
is thick and bright,
then darkly collapses.
Nothing keeps its shape,
nothing stands itself upright,
we keep sliding apart into smaller
and smaller components, and it is
in the air above us now,
we do not mingle with the outcome
of ideas any longer, the energy
that knows whether cruelty
is disinterested or rightful.
They are so happy
while we laugh at them,
their eyes enthused and shining
while we trick them
into hurting themselves.
 


^^EOP^^

“I’m interested in feminist oratory,” we think
Jess should say
“Specifically that.”
 
Yellow-breasted engine sounds on the
Joshua tree
Joshua tree mid-shimmy
 
I think every bird is mad
at me. Does that make me
an alcoholic?
 
Let’s take a break, after
the great San Bernardino sculpture party
 
sparkling toilet pieces lay tiled into
the pavilion,
silver flushers too.
 
TV piles. I am
uneasy. So what?
No match for the always sand and always
 
Air. I find a pair of leather pants
Hanging in a hut & touch them.
Definitely not leather.
 
I can see the sunscreen on your face
not rubbed in,
rivulets wet
 
the under-chin. Let’s get this next pitch
right, guys,
decades left of percolation.
 


^^EOP^^

There’s coffee and pie
with a widow from church.
Why do you sit
in the back pew? she asks.
I’m close enough, I say.
Can I sit back there with you?
I’ve always sat there, I tell her,
with my same two friends,
and their clicking oxygen pumps.
One sat next to me for years,
called herself my church girlfriend,
who metastasized, telling me she was
tired of waiting to die.
Now, there’s just my 88-year-old friend,
his pump echoing in the sanctuary,
and there’s that empty
space between us.
I’d like to invite the widow to sit there,
but I miss my dead friend’s laugh,
her loving stories about her husband,
and how we were always
glad to see one another.
I tell the widow all this.
What if I just sat there? she asks.
It’s a free country, I tell her,
and she smiles.


^^EOP^^

of waves dropped into froth     Jellyfish a jar
of innards half-buried in sand     Dead nature     What are
these things and who are they for?     This blue rug
is its own genre     And these painted apples
round out the essence of what can be made
into what can be eaten     Winter interest
3.9 APR     April come     She will not
swipe the sun into sky     Limits of credentialed
credit     “At least you’re not the janitor’s
azaleas of the everyday dustpan”     There’s
the problem     It’s like a concussive
grenade at the end of the mine     Mind the
income gap     Let’s activate the fact that
every word means go back to the back of the line
because that is where the front leads     Years
of the postmodern translated by the annuity
of spring     Hello     My name
is the first person I     I am indebted     I am
indented     I insist on remaining
unidentified
 


^^EOP^^

You and me, of course, and the animals
we feed and then slaughter. The boxelder
bug with its dot of red, yeast in the air
making bread and wine, bacteria
in yogurt, carrots, the apple tree,
each white blossom. And rock, which lives
so slowly it’s hard to imagine it
as sand then glass. A sea called dead is one that
will not mirror us. We think as human
beings we deserve every last thing. Say
the element copper. Incandescence
glowing bright and soft like Venus.
Ductile as a shewolf’s eyes pigmented red
or green, exposed to acid in the air.
Copper primes your liver, its mines leach lead
and arsenic. Smelting is to melting
the way smite is to mite. A violence
of extraction. What’s lost when a language
dies? When its tropes oppose our own?
In the at-risk language Aymara
the past stretches out in front, the future
lags behind. Imagine being led
by knowing, imagine the end as clear.


^^EOP^^

like when I can’t sleep I say to myself
the the the the
the 
the
the—
each article drenched to the bone in the 
belief it attends something solid,
fond belief, always being
cut in on—the 
the
the
the the the the the the 
does the trick if I can stick with it
not get swept into narrative, that shock brigade
all tell, if by shock they mean hit 
the the the the the the the the
papers say asylum is temporary
now, true, what’s not that’s able to 
maintain its potency, you wake up
from a spell in that genre of safety, relative
safety, what saved you 
making as if the story were widely shared
until you saw them as-if otherwise and then
what saved you was seeing their look, saying 
resemblance too may be at any time revoked so
must be made the most
of, 
seeing it then, seizing
the minute dismounting with the foot
trained as a dancer to keep you traveling because 
they’d slept and, refreshed, moved the the the the
papers expired, it’s their turn now
to really live


^^EOP^^

end- and be-any, make ends hour, at the end on my haze, elf’s well
that ends well, at a fair end, an end as itself, any good must come to
an end, tie is loose ends, end on the line, defanging on the end, end
as sight, coming to a man end, end as took, hour a terrible end, to
end on the ticks, team end, on the semiotics end, light at the end of
the tunnel, choking both ends, does the end justify the bound,
short end on the brand, know which end is is, now-end, toss-end,
you haven’t heard the end on it, follow me to the ends.


^^EOP^^

A tool for piercing holes. Particularly in leather. A simple metal shaft. A knob of wood for handle, polished by its fit in the sinewy cradle of a leather-worker’s  palm. Likely the tool with which Louis Braille blinded himself as a child in France. An accident in his father’s saddle-making shop in the early years of the nineteenth century. Braille later invented a system of raised dots as a means of reading and writing for the blind. We don’t know much. Whether he was in the shop with his father or snuck in alone. Whether it was damp and rainy or whether the sun shone and brought to life the floating dust that always hung in the workshop air. Maybe it was just a little poke in the eye. A small tool, a small slip of the hand, a small injury. How a little fumble ends in blindness. It was decades before general anesthetic or antiseptics. Perhaps the doctor they rushed him to believed in the value of “laudable pus” in a wound. I don’t want to picture it. As a child, playing in his father’s saddle-making shop, did Louis Braille already know the names of the parts of a saddle—cantle, pommel, stirrup, tree? Did he know the smell and feel of each grade of leather? Of all the tools—punch and pincers, gouge and groover, chisel and awl—he chose awl. Likely the last thing he saw, a shine of metal galloping toward his eye. Is it accident that my tool for pressing hand-punched Braille is so much like a blunt, very small awl?


^^EOP^^

There is no delusion that she wants her.
Is marriage like owning a very expensive art piece? 
Your spouse the painting?
You the crooked frame that won’t fit? 
Is this how desire is born?
From having less or from wanting more? 
She wakes up calling her name.
She wakes up knowing that she doesn’t want less. 
From House of Cards she learned a new rule: “I love that
woman. I love her more than sharks love blood.” 
Or something along that line. She may have misquoted.
It came out of the pre-disgraced Kevin Spacey’s mouth. 
Her God doesn’t exercise telepathy or residence.
Hands, eyes, mouths, authenticity.
It’s a city without mirrors.
Because touch, in itself, is symmetry. 
—  
She held the woman’s face in her mind’s eye &
realized that they would never be lovers &
as soon as she let her go, mosses grew all over
the geography of her hands and the woman’s face. 
Is this because it’s a debt that must be paid for
not believing in somebody?
In herself? 
She felt the desire of desire as if it was a binchōtan
charcoal and its ash. 
Masakichi Yakitori
and the Pyramid Club. 
—  
On Easter Sunday, she sang a Christmas carol of Lao Tzu.
Lao Tzu, where is your power to persuade a tree from falling
asleep on itself? 
Does night dream of actresses sleeping on leaves?
Where is the human figure in this? 
Your Saturday is a memory without a body.
A pair of lungs that knew too much about your mother’s rape
tells you to leave reality through a threshold of a dream. 
You knew how to be authentic. How to get rid of people.
How desertion works in the wilderness.
You exclude sound from your thesis.
It’s a way for you to desert poetry without being too poetic. 
—  
There were thistles inside of your mother’s vaginal canal.
She wasn’t violated in the wilderness. He has dragged her there to
say that it was okay to want pins and needles. She wasn’t numbed
after all. Her body didn’t pretend to be a God. Just a whimpered
Lao Tzu. 
In a remote mountain, the men are smoking pipes and their vapors
smell like evergreen. 
To punctuate their desire she says: God is being difficult. But he is
not. 
I have to tell the world that I am sad and have been forgotten. Is
there a way home from not being homeless? Is there a way to swim
in an Indian reservation without being caught? 
Listen: the isotope was just a trope.
There are ways to move smoothly in and out of insincerity. 
We grow to learn how to brush melted butter
onto doughs shaped like the cavalry.
They arrive galloping on the baking
sheets without yeast in their armors. 
—  
Every Tuesday we acquire clues from the shape
of your mother’s scream.
When it was hoarse, it had the shape of a small bonsai tree. 
Your cat licks you and licks you. 
You know it’s not 300 bc.
Desire comes and goes while leaving lies to clothe themselves. 
Her anger is a troublesome candidate of sadness—
lights itself on fire.
From time to time, the cunt of that fire grows ember by ember. 
Once in a while, a house made of screams floats down a black river
on the planet Pluto.
Its chimney is not designed to ventilate silence or resilience.
It’s designed to allow screams to escape without suffocating
everyone inside it. 
Once in a while the rain arrives to suppress the anger of the
scream. 
When anger soaks like wet grasses on the house’s floorboard, the
ants come out to showcase their military might. 
They resurrected the screams from their wet ash and carry them
on their powerful backs.
The aftermath of a rape is portable and transmutable.
A possible somatic experience for the ants, but may not be for the
human or the inhuman.


^^EOP^^




^^EOP^^




                                            Is it alive?
                                                                                         —neither a head,
legs nor arms!
...................
                                                                  ... torpid against
the flange of the supporting girder         .         ?
                                          an inhuman shapelessness,
knees hugged tight up into the belly
            Egg-shaped!
—William Carlos Williams, 1950 visit to El Paso, from “Desert Music”



Yes, I am a body of rags lying
here on the bridge waiting for 
a hot rain to wash me open,
dissolve me off the bridge 
because this border is closed.
I rot on the boundary line 
and can’t enter Juarez,
pennies thrown at me 
when a drunk El Pasoan
returns in the darkness 
and sees my shape that
makes him hurry across. 
No head, decades ago they threw
it in the river without my screams. 
My arms were the first to go
when I couldn’t climb the wall. 
I can never leave this bridge.
I live on the pure line that divides 
countries and grabs my hunger
from sliding into Mexico with 
my outstretched hands.
I still have my knees. 
I used to be sold in Juarez and
smuggled into El Paso, the egg 
that floated down the Rio Grande
to break hundreds of miles away 
before being thrown back.
I stay on the bridge and can’t move. 
Do not cross to El Paso without wiping
your shoes of me, one foot on US 
concrete, the other scraping away
at my Mexican rags. 
When I struggle against the wire fence,
I make sure I salute two flags.


^^EOP^^

Before any of it, a goat appeared
in a piebald sweater, beardless
and tethered at the collar
on half a tennis court of land
up a rutted lane above the road. 
Doubtless a horse once clip-clopped there
before a trap, a whip, a tweed of farmer
with bushels and crates
of cabbages, parsnips, blue duck eggs
to pay the country doctor. 
Not now, and not then,
we drive home between the fields.
She is radioactive, or lately was,
and sleeps on the doses of nitrogen mustard
a country doctor has called for. 
Little goat forgive me. I shouldn’t do this.
All you do is munch your poxy plain of grass,
your kingdom for a caper.
If at night you sing your tired chin to sleep,
it’s not a metaphor, it’s a tragedy. 
Instead, let’s say a ship arrived one day.
Let’s say its decks were delicate, polished oak.
Let’s say happy impossible winds steered it.
Let’s say the captain, sweeping his spyglass
over the hills, after all this time, found us.


^^EOP^^

The blood of language moves through the word cell from monk’s cell to prison cell to biological cell. I don’t know why a Braille cell is called a cell. I don’t know how many blood cells Louis Braille lost when the awl he was  playing with as a small child slipped and injured his eye.

Red blood cells live some hundred days before they are worn out by their silent hustle—looping and looping, pounded through the heart’s chambered cathedral, rushing out to the farthest reaches of the body with the good news of oxygen, squeezing single file along capillaries, like anxious deer probing their tracks through the woods. Rushing, silent, looping the circuits of the body. Again, again, again. Load iron. Dump iron. Load dump squeeze hustle.

Red blood cells pushed through the capillaries that pushed through my  retinas. They broke loose to run a green swarm in the corral of my eye. But that is history. Today cells still push through the capillaries fenced off by my calloused fingerprint. This one that I run over the Braille cell, the pattern of bumps.

—

A red blood cell is measured in microns. A solitary prison cell is measured in feet. Six feet by nine feet or less. I don’t know what the unit of measure is for how living in solitary changes a person. We know that living in a confined space, without access to the long view or landscape, changes the eye. The eye, for lack of practice, loses its ability to make out what lies in the distance. I don’t have a unit of measure for what this does to the heart.

—

A Braille cell is measured in spaces in a grid—two across by three down—that can be filled with a raised dot or bump. Different combinations of dots represent different letters, punctuation, symbols, shorthand.

—

The oldest cell I find in the dictionary is the monastic cell, a place for contemplation. From the concealed place where wine was stored. As in cellar. I find Braille contemplative. I touch my index finger to a bumpy piece of paper. My hand advances slowly left to right, the touch receptors in my finger triggered by the uneven contact of paper and skin. Messages run along nerves, finger-to-brain, brain-to-finger. Cognition sizzles. Mind notices this feels different than the pathway of sound in ear to auditory processing. Listening pulls me out into the world in an infinity of directions. Touching my reading educates me on my exact location in the world, feet in shoes, weight of foot on ground, weight of bones and flesh in chair.


^^EOP^^

I hate how I can’t keep this tremor inside, this mute
matter of being made extant, this shiver in being, in
no not-being, this wild flying up from the inner surge 
and this crack in the apparatus espied around
the corner from my particular warble, this
quiver of dissolution in the pool of no single thing, 
this break in the entity of the single, of not
a mistake in being made, this suffering of trying
to contain the infinite in language, this refusal 
inextricable from its mass; this love, love of
love, this being only in your presence, this inability
not to err, rather the constitution of my broken image 
caressed by this, this permission to submerge, this bigger
and bigger being, tremor of infinite allowances, this telos
of cataloging that which can never be disappeared.


^^EOP^^

What did they desire, the dead who had returned?
The sons who had inherited their estates
pretended not to know them. The iron gates
were welded shut, but soon the dead had learned 
to hire lawyers practiced in the laws
that bound the afterlife to lesser gods.
The angels thundered on like piston rods,
denying their gold wings to either cause. 
The city streetlamps flared like learnèd ghosts.
The moon turned red. Beneath a scrim of clouds,
Spanish moss draped the myrtle trees like shrouds—
in politics the guests became the hosts. 
Those days made angels of the better sort.
The cases languished in a lower court.


^^EOP^^

Monostich: a long sentence
Sternum: a little chest
Heart: upside down 
Location of the unconscious:
Empty window seat 
Horizon: gone at night
Thought: given
Prison: a perversion 
—  
Our earth can’t live without holy rites.
You can see this from the sky. 
Lots of hills to climb up and down.
A straight ravine between. 
Snow figures engraved in stones.
Show streaks of sun gone but
The white rocks shrink and grow
Grave at sunset.   
Turn to the right
And you will fall to the left. 
One figure wears a beard
Down to his chest 
But Eros hates coverings.
And prefers to be caught naked 
With his bow and arrow. 
Embellishes
But clears the way for pathos. 
—  
From above I covet a mountain beneath my feet. 
Shrines made of dung and branches,
With berries for eyes and burlap hung with holly.
They were curled in shadows on roads
Leading to every stop we made from the Trig 
To Top Withens to Liverpool.
The white and purple mountains.
Stood over the Brontës and clusters
Of black thistles’ script. 
I remember a church (a cave supported
By old bicycle parts to keep it up)
Was bound by a broken bell and a box
Containing snapshots and trinkets.   
“We will get through this!” 
—  
Why mercy? 
Having mercy on someone is easier than forgiving them. 
That one there? 
A man limited by logic, he imprisoned the people whose thinking was infinite. 
And her, the serious one? 
Stars without light hold the others up. 
I lost you for a moment. 
Mid-sentence is darker so you can’t decipher it.
Look up. 
Oyster, shell pink, sky inside. Our prison. 
What would you tell the judge? 
The difference between a man who shoots others and then himself and one who shoots others and runs away. 
You will tell her that decisions are only guesses.
“Resentment is a weak form of suicide.” 
That’s why suicide is hard to choose even when you’re dying.
“I wish they would shoot themselves before they shot the others.” 
—  
We’ve evolved (arrived) just in time for the obsolete. 
The center that runs along the sides of the tarmac
Is a camp without a name.
A holding station. 
A glass of narcotics, a warm blanket, steam for suffocation,
For each passenger of any class. 
“Did you know a rendition is an interpretation, an
explanation of something not clear?” 
“It’s also persecution and surrender,
Translation and the handing over
Of prisoners to countries
Where detention is.”
Pass through customs in silence.
The red strings of radiation
Will only burn your bed-skins.
Do not joke or rhyme with bomb. 
“If you have a passport, bless it.” 
—  
Now the wing is whitening, its patches quiver
on the steel and fragment into petals that are either living or not.
In grade one I watched the lights of cars passing on the bedroom wall
for surely they were messages flying at the speed of light.
And aren’t they still?   
In the sky there are few signs of progress.
Tongues wag and sailors pull their beards.
Some have pictures of naked women, some have boys. 
It’s fractal, a science student whispers to nobody special. 
—  
There is a wonderful kidnapped hunted raped and betrayed girl
In fairy tales. She has a name, but the vowels and subjects
Around can’t be switched to fit. 
She wants to escape but letters won’t let her. 
She never thinks about darkness or dying because they’re natural
And don’t require thought. 
She carries her darkness everywhere.
What is not natural 
Is being here an utter stranger.
And flight being no metaphor. 
—  
What if the outcome of an act burst into color.
All that fruit skin dimpled from the touch of branches.
The oranges falling when the creatures below were hungry. 
Each wink of an eyelid presaged a long look at a winter
That would come eons later. 
What if you stood when I entered. 
What if you think of time as a long and everlasting plain,
You can pass across it any which way you turn.
And walk around the pond with your father again. 
—  
I had a garden of my own
For twenty-one years.
Seven trees times three
Planted for the first children. 
Oh its land was a meadow
And our little house, a grape arbor
And a Wampanoag
Grave in a grove of elms. 
Then a tree like an elephant
Bucked in a storm.
And its trunk broke into
A wrinkled little stump. 
Roots don’t give up. 
And stones only breathe once a year. 
Many people passed through.
We could have watered more
Or flowered a path
For the visitors. After all 
Love meant life and its shadow.
Children played and grew.
I too grew old for no reason.
Love stood at a distance. 
One day the snow will camouflage
The huddling April buds
Before a cherry-picker
Damns all but one, the littlest. 
—  
At least I know when the wild geese
Fly from Sepiessa.
They herd the future
As it approaches the bench. 
Night ... the playground
At Town Hall is creaking
And tribal members
Now numbered 
In the twos are too early for sun-up.  
We almost sit together
But our feet of shadows
Show failed land deals.
Steps lowered and slimy 
On a slip into the lagoon.
Ghoulish are the ghosts
Of time past: ancestors
With our same names. 
—   Pensées sauvages: wild pansies, like violets, have the shape of thoughts, savage thoughts, colored thoughts, sprung from a stem. 
Purple and yellow. Five petals. 
Once Cupid shot an arrow dipped in the ink of a pansy into the eyelid of a sleeping child. 
From then on the child saw cirrus colors at dawn, dawn
being where iridescence grows flowers.


^^EOP^^

So how will it end?
You want it straight?

^^EOP^^

With “Waltzing Matilda,” funnel web spiders, and echidnas out of the way, you move on to the villanelle. The alien learns quickly, and soon the rhyme scheme and refrain are being applied to whatever it encounters: moonlight filling a green bucket by the door, a dog’s tooth in furniture, the sound of a nail gun. You go to bed and dream of planets disappearing like balls in a perfect snooker clearance. In the morning you find the walls papered with villanelles, each one signed by what appears to be a bar code. When you scan one with your phone, the screen lights up with footage of a satellite flyby through the heliosphere, trailing the sound of whale song, children crying, sustained applause, and Blind Willie Johnson’s “Dark Was the Night, Cold Was the Ground.”


^^EOP^^

I fear dispersal but the resounding really sounds may be full of echo
or echolocation for the next round 
Eye rowed in the guest book of God my many sacred tongues
body and bow 
Fingers spell now all the spaces I open
You now verse now open oh pen 
Cacti quiver for a century
In the desert I swam myself earthword to know 
No time on earth and no breath no dearth
Hollowed out into architecture eternal 
Who argues with rhyme or snow
Who knows the space in your here 
The space in the storm so finely bowed
The space in snow no one nears


^^EOP^^

With my ear to the door
of my cell. And my want
like a comb in my hair. 
Like a veil where there is no
veil. With a ring in my ear.
A ring in the hole in my ear. 
I rap at the door of my will
and the door of my want
as to will them away. My 
want like a veil on the floor.
I appear at the door of my
will with a veil in my hand 
and a comb in my hair.
My want like a hole that
I bore in the floor. 
Where my will is more
feeling than veil, and my veil
is more want for a veil 
than a veil. I wear the comb
of my fear in my hair.
My veil is as thin as my want, 
and my want is as thin
as a hair. When I curl up my
want in the curl of my hair. 
When I curl up on the floor
of the cell of my want.
I bear my fear in my cells 
like I’m bearing a ring.
Like I’m curled up inside
of the ring in my ear. 
I rap at my want for a door
where there is no door.
A will where there is no will. 
At my want for unveiling.
My will to unveil it. The curve
of my will and my ear 
to the door. With the curl
of my ear to the door. Not
the door but my fear of the door.


^^EOP^^

Before you sink away
into the morphinesweet unreality of the everyday
we would like to say something
about those spasms and fasciculations of yours
as well as that bump on your back 
For years you have no doubt been googling every freckle
Just recently
you were at the doctor’s with a patch of dry skin on your leg
Diagnosis: too much shower gel
But on hearing the word chondrosarcoma
you went home and immediately unplugged your router
Do you know where your priorities lie? 
Do you know what life has to offer
or did those endless therapy sessions
and that eight-week mindfulness course
simply teach you how to tolerate suffering
that every signal in your body
can be temporarily expelled
to the rhythm of some breathing exercise? Let the pain be To be free is to be free of need
Wrong
To be free is to need some fresh air
and to be able to get up and go outside 
Don’t say we didn’t warn you
Translated from the Dutch


^^EOP^^

How do I compare the costs
Of leaving one system
Of cooperation
For another
System of cooperation?
How do I loosen the tongue
Enough to inhabit
The temple incognito?
What are the people to me
Until I condense my hesitations
And drink in stillness with
The rest of us, slightly drunk
But pacing moderately
Around the dew, dropped
To the knees at a tepid hour?
Cooperation is free, or is it
So? A refugee has no terms
Of comparison. Who really is
Aggrieved is a real fugitive
To freedom. The only enemies
Of freedom are border agents
And those dozing on one side
Of the other. The border condition
Realizes the personality.
That is why it has to be
Negotiated again in public
Houses. I tried to be loved
And everyone else failed me.
The dew is a corrosive.
It’s only obvious once
The horizon tempers
The topography again.
And this is so only when
Earthlight can be confined
By the foreground.
Allegorists are not agents
Now so much as internet vernaculars
We all get our chance to innovate.
Nations cannot be explained
Otherwise. Someone, we,
Made up the whole thing.
I want us to think we were
Liars then but are dying to
Finally grow up, no longer
Following fictions. But
Perfectly flush corroborating
Rehearsals.
The students can always
Have the data
They deserve.
What is oligarchy?
They call it up
And it clicks.
(Hear the disconsolate
fizz of epiphany
pitched out of library windows
and welfare field office exits.)
Everything can be
Said to have
Occurred. But do
They describe themselves
As belated or latent?
The reveal is just a mild
Turning in
Any case.
The air in winter
Is best for your device.
Cordon it around your
Device’s appetite.
Or there will be
A disaster
For the recollection,
Proof by perdurable
Association. (Check
the custom, or costume,
that to learn is
a bargain first fixed
in the recognition of ignorance
for which the learned refuse
to serve as models.)
Students delay excitement
Just long enough
And then they know.
You are a student
By profession.
If you insist
You deserve
A livelihood
You will be
Persecuted
For this
And that is
What has become
Of forensics.
That is the
Rootless fact.
Its reason is
Untraceable, so
Its stolid justice proffers
Souls for history’s
Paltry set of names
Of strangers. To
Assimilate novelty
Is then to obtain inventory.
What will you do
With it all?
Won’t you enjoy
The leverage it provides
So as to insist
On more?
It is not data
But esteem.
That is the remaining
Root system,
That nothing will
Have to be
Enough.


^^EOP^^

A sparrow weaves over the derelict terrace
the psychics used to meet in 
toward the snow-garnished mountains!
They brought their lozenges of grief here, 
held each other’s pallid hands and summoned
reeds of kindness into their voices! 
The men down tools, take lunch, smoke
in a row, dangle their legs from the wall! 
They’re kids mostly; a xylophone
of hard hats tuneless in the rain! 
The half-built apartment block is waiting
and they will never live there! 
I knew a boy who wanted to be a pilot
so much that he became one! 
Farewell, years of simulated taxiing
on the world’s fantastic runways! 
O night flights over the patchwork of Europe!
O unscheduled layover! O seat belt sign! 
I knew a man who hiked into the mountains!
His name was early morning light! 
His name was sunset in Libra!
Between the Scots pine and the ash 
he found the branch with his name on it
and stepped off it into the air!


^^EOP^^

The herons were no longer safe in the sky. They flew with prayer,
then fell to us. We hid them from the cats. What to do with prayer? 
Decades after the civil war, we enter the sniper’s hole, sew
the sandbags, read words for his boyfriend on the wall, true with prayer. 
Write my name & invite me to a wedding. I want a parade
of cars with flashers on, each blinking red, two times two with prayer. 
Dear Eurydice, what good a heart that can’t resist looking back?
Foolish, music-laden Orpheus. Almost saved you with prayer. 
In the museum of memory, the missing accumulate.
They shoot out of the tiles like grass blades, damp & new with prayer. 
I found a photo in a library book: lovers holding hands.
I felt chosen, then lost it. & I didn’t pursue with prayer. 
When I interviewed God, I said I moved the plants toward the light,
forgot the water. Is love a lack, always imbued with prayer? 
Tarot cards, make me beautiful. Abundance me, O Three of Cups,
spin luck O Wheel of Fortune, I’m through, I’m through, I’m through with prayer.


^^EOP^^




For Kazim



Sunrise ocher marks
the river’s forehead, 
wet dhotis betray supplicants
bare as opaque windows, 
their secrets. It’s no secret,
my petals wreath 
my crown in marigold, a glow
I’ve nursed into nova 
when I cracked, from drought,
my pericarp, thirsty for God. 
I have always been
a honey man, 
coat of a langur, pilgrim-
body of fruit- 
offering cast onto the tongue
of deity I prayed would move 
in me. No sweetmeat
to sugar the idol 
carved of me. The devout
fill brass kettles, 
fill God with God,
to offer running water to Sun, 
as mantras insist
from the temples; 
the adhan’s pollen drifts—
yes, God is great. 
Along the ghats
umbrellas bloom in red, 
I breathe into nostrils of marble: The name of God is Truth— 
vendors hawk neem branches
to scour mouths in bitter.


^^EOP^^

It’s so flat here you can see everything. It’s not romantic. Nobody can slip in or out in secret, and who among us has pumped the last worry through her heart?

Collapsing into shade, I wish for more sons, endless daughters: a higher ratio of my people to other people. Why not want what I want; since we used all the air conditioning it’s become impossible to think things through.

Can you believe your ears? All the electric music in the world has been turned into handbells. I wish I had a cushion for my knees instead of gloves to keep the handbells pure. We can get used to anything. That doesn’t mean we should.

I went to a wedding where everything was outrageous but trying to act  modest by including very goofy elements, such as people in bear costumes and gold nuggets descending from the ceiling, only to be jerked back up out of reach when people tried to grab them.

Long ago, a matrimonial family collected a few eggs from each household in the village to contribute to the wedding cake. A pig for the dinner: a gift from a rich great-uncle. Shortly after, there was a period of department store gift services and electro-synth harps for hire.

But now we pick dandelions to make wine, and pluck chickens to make fine the groom’s cloak. He wants large brown wings; he wants wolf pelt for his loins. He wants he wants he wants. There is no end to that.

The bride is someone who has only ever served. No use asking someone who’s once had a true taste of freedom, whose eyes widened and whose pelvis thrust up unbidden. Better she be someone who might never know what she lost.

It is as it ever was. How many centuries have brides been made and used in this way?

How few centuries have let women be girls first, swirling as long as they wanted into their sweetness and sharpening to ripeness, only becoming women once full heavy love was their desire inside and out. Maybe one. Maybe not quite one full century.


^^EOP^^

There is no act of forgiveness,
only the redeeming light on
the shoulders dancing in
tall weeds, cigarettes gone
and the girls slapping free. 
The tortilla cart burns against
the wall because Jesus called
my brother who was acquired
by whistling gangs of men
under the hanging arch. 
There can be no night without
the wind on shoulders exhausted
by games and messages my brother
lost between the darkness and
the bridge into Juarez, Mexico, 
where no crows caw because
the buildings are torn and
flashlights are narrow in
their beaming stumble,
my thoughts the last ones
on this side of the river, 
my sudden happiness hidden
in celestial light without being
appalled at what I see, my ears
to the ground listening to weeds
overrun by boys who can’t spell
and are waiting for me without
knowing pilgrims are on the border. 
Whatever kills them spares me
the journey to beg for purity
among unspoken Spanish
everyone fears in their greed.
The group doesn’t know it is
what the river stones teach,
though I can’t speak of them 
because faith is prehistoric and
my brother is pursued by dust
storms that erase his footprints
across the back roads where he
loses his language of need.


^^EOP^^

because we know distance too well
because the blood bank didn’t have enough blood for nana & her new knee
because I see your car a car like yours parked across the street from my apartment
because the same night awaits us all
because arizona & the drought & I was seven when it started
because nana used to sleep with a belt tied around her waist so tight to wake like an hourglass
because I wait on you
because I want to know the antonym to every word
because we speak to each other in our sleep
because I do my best thinking in the shower so I take long showers
because you kiss the parts of my body I hate most
because you can love someone & not remember their birthday
because sometimes I want the wind & it is impossible
because from the airplane I can see both oceans & where they meet


^^EOP^^

If you go to bed hungry, your soul will get up and steal cold rice from the pot.
Stop playing with fire before the moon rises or you’ll pee in your sleep. 
Sweeping the floor after dark sweeps wealth and good fortune out the door.
Fork dropped: a gentleman will visit. Spoon: a bashful lady. 
Bathing after you’ve cooked over a hot stove makes the veins swell.
For safe passage to the guest who leaves mid-meal: turn your plate. 
The adage goes: coffee stunts growth. Twelve grapes on New Year’s: the opposite.
Advice from the learned: hide a book under your pillow. Never step on. Never drop. 
Every rice grain that remains on your plate you’ll meet again on the footpath
to heaven. You’ll have to stoop to pick each one of them up.


^^EOP^^




For Alexander Moysaenko



The black heart of the moon’s visible
through the trees from here. 
Where are you? 
I’m alone on the road
with a dead phone. 
The birds are flapping overhead
but there’s not much light to be guided by. 
If any horizon becomes visible enough to follow. 
Forget the rain’s smear,
the chafe of fabric at the calf. 
The money ran out. The diners are stuffed
and back for more. 
Each terrible thing I said to the child
will get repeated hopefully as a joke. 
And like language, these gestures, or a certain way of nodding
one’s head, it all eases in with less than a breath. 
Forget the song’s words, the order of the band’s set tonight. 
The black moon’s heart’s
got that sinister bent
and I want to get
touched at by the snakes. 
One of the students in my class
used to go bear hunting with his two uncles. 
They played recordings of distressed animals
to lure in tentative animals to kill. 
This practice is illegal in many places.
Because it’s so very effective. 
I split open the apple
and hand the good half to a child on the bus
nestled in under the arm of her sleeping mother. 
Love from here is a long way to go. 
Get on your bike and ride
through the lights.


^^EOP^^

   i want ! to be friends ! with katya ! i want
  to dress ! how i want to dress ! like a gale !      full of glitter ! and back alleys ! a seagull
laugh ! to shake our being ! whose secret lies !
  perhaps ! in kicking legs upwards in delight !
       painted ! an omnivorous harpy ! goofy !
  loving our friends ! lighting up around them !
  what a man ! unstoppable ! they’ll say, why !
 they’re the perfect woman ! (now that’s me !)
    judy jetson ! enraged ! with a penis ! and
obsessed with Contact too ! in every situation !
       a little Jodie Foster ! o dear role model for my role model ! find meaning ! play parts !
  everything real ! happens ! behind the eyes !
 all those things we cannot prove ! like love !
  like the world ! is just ! what we make of it   
 


^^EOP^^




Translation: “I won’t forget.”



my father: sideburns down the length of his face my age now & ripe my age now & alive his husky voice’s crackle like the night’s wind through corn fields of bell-bottoms fields of pomade my mother’s overlarge sunglasses crowded on her face crowded in the only english movie theater that plays amitabh bachchan my mother watching the blown-out screen the smoke spilling from light how he is able to be in all places at once all the places she can’t be the man on the screen a kind of god maybe a kind of god maybe my grief at all places at once replaying their every story a kind of god maybe my father’s nazar his long look his luck-laced lungs breathing my mom’s hands in the theater as they whisper next to my father’s the almost touch blood electric my father watching her his sideways glance on her thick eyelashes so long it’s as if she never blinks my father’s stomach blinks & blinks and a thousand amitabh bachchans blink his insides his heart pumps main na bhoolunga on beat main na bhoolunga in chorus main na bhoolunga the theater singing my mother’s ghost fingers on his palm & maybe this is what falling in love is like: a more handsome man jumbling the intestines a more handsome man belting the song to the woman with the long eyelashes in the theater & you—afraid to blink in case she disappears in case it was smoke this whole time.


^^EOP^^

Canary-yellow dice
aren’t what you think, 
seller said in their shop
where they sold
    all things
      canary— 
            whistles,
    sweets, frills, perfumes, with hints
     of cherry chance, 
a throw of canary.  
Much hinges
on
    canary, 
Canary said
       in
        their
    shop where they sold sunny
vanes
on canary die. 
    Forgive me for
showing
        myself a composed canary, live
or not.


^^EOP^^

my mother
asking how
to open a tab
on her laptop,
to email a photo,
calling to ask— can you change
the lightbulb
at the top of the stairs?

^^EOP^^

In the other world we use other words, painting
them with water on the desert’s sidewalk under • unwaver
ing / the / sky’s gaze, meant to be eaten up immediate
ly by our nearest star: we know we’re brief, a flash
of the magnesium bulb’s Lichtenberg lace or
in the hardpan land we inhabit, unwilling / it’s /
to unloosen • Edenic ancestry to us, to unearth / un
couth / the • treasure which lies (we believe) like an ocean
of luminous fish with their wayfinder’s lanterned
faces beneath us, sufficiently gilded to wake the dead
 ’s memory of what they no longer own: a form
for the nation-state to take, to write its penal colony’s
penalties upon, or hold, same as we hold our own
souls, which wager against us as soon as they’re able.


^^EOP^^

“It took the herd six hours,”
the Blue Planet voiceover explains,
orcas pushing a blue whale calf
under. Keet, our son points
at the screen, naming them all
one whale, from the greek kētos,
water-monster, “The seas bathed
in calf’s blood.” More, our son
asks, More okean, watches the red
beneath them spreading, More ocean.
“Killer whales,” the voice reminds,
the blue calf’s heart bigger
than all three of ours, its blood could fill
our son’s bathtub for weeks. The orcas
only eat the head, let the rest sink
to the ocean floor, but no, the voice
points out how body born six thousand pounds
lands on the skeleton of a full grown blue,
“Nothing gets wasted in the water.” Look, our son staring, Look,
learning how the deep devours,
blubber separates from bone,
even bone won’t survive long,
eaten by water worms and salt.
Spicy, our son calls any intense
flavor, tears in his mouth, but no,
not over this, the calf’s
blood or its bones, the orcas
swimming through reddened salt,
but over desire, he wants
what he cannot have
or doesn’t want what he is
given, a calf’s heart
in the teeth of a hungrier mammal,
because what else is worth
that much salt?
 


^^EOP^^

& no it’s not a landscape painting
I’m talking about a prospect wherein 
vision gets unhooked from the sockets. & no it’s not
a love song about blindness or the way 
she moves. rather it is standing
in the midst of nothing & the wind passing 
since seeing was always a curse, the boundary
between things floating 
up to foil how anyone might touch
or travel. unless we can find a non- 
delineated dance proliferating otherwise
in the unhasty unfolding of we’re already there 
à la Hegel re: Kant, & not like
that Caspar David Friedrich painting either 
(some solitary man-figure surveying
what was already his so it becomes his again) 
but instead unvisioning the world, not like
Heidegger, obviously, not the thing at hand 
but like the hand repeating a motion
forever, writing her beloved like this is politics  this is the end of all endings
& the wind


^^EOP^^

by this point you must be hungry
for God not the real thing only
flecks of gold paint the marble bust
of a half-bull half-man 
today I took a visit to the only
museum and every last gallery was
packed with snow I mean this
literally the whole place 
frozen I didn’t stay long
I was worried about melting
the art I touched my eyes lightly
to each flake and when I left 
the museum I believed a bit more
in God the strangest thing was
I never shivered I knew love
the whole time


^^EOP^^

I’ve never seen pigeons argue
I only see them soar
I don’t know if a pigeon is naïve or worldly
I just know it has no past to make it toil through life 
Maybe they’re the tongues of the air
Lazily expressing cars’ sighs
Maybe they’re lined up on the roof
Vying to perform snow’s wedding 
One day I stick my head out the window
And realize their nation is the act of soaring
Soaring makes my silence meaningless
Thank god, they’ve taught me how to talk about nations! 
Standing under a flock of pigeons, I think oh People aren’t even worth one flower blooming toward them Translated from the Chinese


^^EOP^^

Exodus is a traffic jam,
and traffic jams are dangerous. 
Ahead of us, armed with sticks and rakes,
a child’s brigade does battle 
on this doomed track hourly blown to dust.
To occupy themselves, they race a tank. 
Dust is faster. Tattered surveillance blimps
yank against steel tethers over the saltlick plain. 
The road goes boom again. The flimsy means
by which we try to distance war 
don’t matter anymore. Disguise your car,
your hair, take to the air, stare down 
on the terrible mirror of the ground
where those who didn’t qualify 
for tickets to the sky
wave goodbye, goodbye.


^^EOP^^

Fucked art thou, with luck, o reader within the palace within the palette within the impatience within, who tilts his letters into the light of the mind’s muttering unto itself, releasing their sounds to the whirlpool fierce of an ear to draw creations in—
Who brings forth a kiss of circumference, the glyphs hooked and loosened and linking, as though they were dancing through moths of minutes and months like wind—out of a god whose name is Gone ...
Fukkit and lukky art thou in the wind moving marjoram into the mint, the fuzz and down of the former grazing the raised ribs of the other, the essences borne—
Pheromones suddenly wafting, your eye catching the gradient greens and vein-like patterns, the gray stubble of sage’s tongue, thick oregano’s glister and whorl, stalks of thyme spiking the air on a kitchen porch or Sikinos slope with its lavender flower, lit up, still, in June;
The blue film of night’s end rolling into white near dawn, the light by which you know a friend, the ancients explain, from six feet off—or, a wolf from a dog;
The glow of morning bougainvillea, its papery bracts in a breeze like prayer, its bezeled ruby beginnings morphing into pinks- and magentas-to-come, cream-tipped corollas on perfect display, style and stigma sheathing the anther;
Then creeping Christians’ dusky luster, in the shade at noon;
Almonds swelling jade drupes into the sinking summer, encoding spring’s initial explosion;
Pomegranate’s garnet, pendant, containing—against the green of its arch and stretch—six hundred seeds dark with light, glinting in its skin;
Fucked, art thou, and lucky, who translates it into the day as blessed—
So blessèd as in blasted art thou, in a way, in whom this knowing is strengthened in bringing you down to the cords of arthritic knees,  wrestling the gust of a given moment’s giving—like vapor—and  strangely grateful;
Blessèd art thou whose petitions are curses, whose fuck touches the  innermost chamber, waking the king and queen in their slumber;
Blessèd the consonants funneling vowels,
In Scripture’s offering—a dove’s neck wrung, cakes unleavened and  mingled with oil;
Blessèd the spirit’s meniscus within a letter typed or scrawled, as  not-quite-deciphered codes of soul—
A pupil’s reaching through a sentence, slipping and reaching again, and again, a teacher tracing the shape of her thinking;
Blessèd even the stink and politic rot of the day’s pronouncements on high, Liver of the blaspheming Jew, gall of goat, and slips of yew—
in action as Evil: the concrete Lego-like bunker and tower, bunker and tower, barbwired cabbage and vines, shadows gliding as crows fly across the road to the holy of hills and prefab huts, from which goat-like thugs emerge, watching and then descending through a glowering slope- stepping prance, tribal fringes trailing—their dance sick with a stiffened faith, wicking and blotching their map of state, like a cancered scan,  eating away at its language and letters, as Gone yields goon, or gun, or bone, where lips meet and part in the “b” of all that’s brutal and also insidious, pointed to and taken on, in the maybe pointless battle—
Evoking the hundred blessings the rabbis say need to be uttered daily, reading the number—me’ah (hundred)—into the word for what, or mah: “What does Becoming your God ask of you?” (Deuteronomy, 10:12);
And blessèd is never quite knowing, exactly, what those blessings should be.


^^EOP^^

In order to see the world’s evils clearly
They redden their eyes on the branch
Until they believe the warm wind’s praise
In order to become waves in our blood
They offer their lives to the wine cellar 
In my glass, the blood of their youth
Tries to send waves through my heart
It’s a jockey riding my bloodstream
Loosening age’s reins— 
I used dirty words I don’t normally use
Nearly scaring awake my dead relatives
I fell fast asleep with my arms around love
And, waking, couldn’t find my lover 
I fit right in at a banquet in the city
And finally realize, love is wine’s tax
High taxes make wine noble 
A crate of red wine
Is a crate of Van Goghs—do you believe that?
A crate of red grapes
Is a crate of nipples—do you believe that?
Translated from the Chinese 


^^EOP^^

This disease has come back With frills and furbelows.  You must give your whole life to poetry Only a few survive if that— 
Poems I mean, paper crumpled Shades of another water— 
Far springs are what you long for, Listening for the slow drip of chemicals 
Through a hole in your chest.  If you were torn from me I could not bear what the earth had to offer.

^^EOP^^

What happened when he grabbed me at the root?
I stopped. It all stopped: spirals fought to win
My spiral life (from an unspiraled root— 
From thick cigar stubbed in my young tongue’s root—
(Heart beating uncle lifetimes through my skin)).
What happened, when he grabbed me at the root 
Where women come to starve, our ready root?
My broken body (one more), broken in?
My spiral life from an unspiraled root- 
Fed pomegranate? (in the basement: root-
Husked hell of seed as if seed could have been
What happened.) When he grabbed me at the root, 
Did ancestors throw chains down through our root
To rot and winnow, with their pain and sin,
My spiral life? From an unspiraled root? 
Oh sisters, keen our sisters! Till the root
Of loving! burns! (but not! from! foreign kin!)
WHAT happened (when) (he) (grabbed) me at the root?
Our spiral life! From an unspiraled root!


^^EOP^^

Grain by grain, salt’s frozen tears
Help me count history’s disasters
I can’t blame salt for telling food You’re full of wounds 
Salt misses the freedom of the ocean
Remembering waves, salt jumps into a soup
But it finds there only my reflected face
It hides by making itself too soft to chew 
Sometimes, salt follows a cold sweat
Waking me from a nightmare
Dreamed blood tastes like salt
As if in human failure lay the silence of God 
Having swum in the ocean
Salt considers soup a shallow pond
For salt, every meal is a jail 
One day, an extra salty flavor
Makes me cough and cough
It feels like cold fish bones scraping my throat
Maybe it’s salt telling me I’m going to prison in your body
Don’t ever forget who I am!

^^EOP^^

A crow perches inside me. 
Actually, it is a whale. It is hard to tell
by touch alone. Nothing I own ever looks
me properly in the eye. Sometimes 
a loud caw at dusk feels
like the largest mammal on Earth. 
A deep breath out the blowhole 
into my stomach. One second it swims
and the next it is a small extension
of a tree. This is a kind of beginning— 
a finger puppet show. The light
dancing around my hands. 
Me dancing alone on a stem. 
A persimmon blooms.
A boy learns a song and plants it
in an orchard. Inside of me 
the large creatures change their shapes
to fit. A blackbird. An organ. 
Animals with no names. I send them off
into the world daily. Little sadness
takes flight. Love is a brave child. 
These things take the shape
of their containers. 
I don’t have to do anything to hold them.


^^EOP^^

The soldiers are afraid
of the camera. Are you shooting the souk?
The photographer says No no, just her.
I say Just me, just me.
My black dress, a little above the knee, helps.
A girl learns to spectacle enough.
The soldier nods, lowers his head.
The crew remind me to say  Not from here, to say Half-half,
to speak English, mostly. Everyone is always kinder to strangers.
The city will devour its children,
unless she doesn’t recognize them. 
And so I, of this city,
I who stand on stages and name this city,
deny this city in the heart of the city,
deny this city at the old gate of the city.
I say Bonjour, I say Thank you, I undo
my accent and put on the colonizer’s tongue.
When you say hometown, what do you mean? 
The crew comment on the quality
of the light through the tin roofs,
they say Pretend no one is looking.
But the guy with the espresso and cigarette is looking,
and the teenager who sells batteries is looking,
and the man with the shisha is looking, and the woman
in the clothes shop, his wife perhaps, is looking.
The photographer says Beautiful, says Try
to keep your shoulders even.

^^EOP^^

I was walking through a vast darkness
in a dress studded with diamonds, the cloth
under them like chain mail—metallic,
form fitting like the sea to its horizon. I could
hear waves breaking on the shore and far off
concertina music drifting over the dunes. What
was I doing in high heels in sand in a diamond-studded 
dress that had to be stolen? Fear washed
through me, as if one of those waves had
risen up and, against all the rules of waves,
splashed me from the shoulders
down. I was wet with diamonds and fear.
A small boat held offshore with its cold
yellow light pointing a long watery finger at me 
while the stolen feeling of the dress sparkled
my location out into the universe. Thief! Thief!
came an interplanetary cry, causing me to
gaze up into the star-brilliant firmament,
for it wasn’t just a sky anymore. It had
taken on biblical stature. How had I
gotten into this dress, these unruly 
waves, this queasy feeling I would be
found out? Time to run! my heart said,
pumping away under its brocade
of diamonds. Strange vacancies had
accumulated after all my sleep-plundered
nights. Thief! came the cry again, as if
I should recognize myself. And I did. 
I flung those high heels into the depths,
took up my newfound identity, and without
the least remorse, began to run those diamonds
right out of this world.


^^EOP^^

I am thinking that
to make thinking new again
is torch-lit work, subterranean 
and exalted. Antarctica, Goethe,
Methuselah. Seven hills of Rome.
An advertisement for a summer farming gig 
on a homestead in Alaska puzzles me:
imagine harvesting kale through days
of unrepentant 24-hour sunlight, 
covered in mosquitoes. How do you do
the things in the dark when there is no dark?
I want now to tell you abt my love 
for my whip, for killing the engine and sitting
in the garage. This is also an ancient
practice.


^^EOP^^

Thinking.
Wondering if
my trot to Paris
to suffer you
wasn’t all wrong.
My amour fou 
precise as a shark
collecting scents
miles off,
exact as a saint
cowed before
invisible wings 
rustling
abstract sheets?
Your eyes
green, and red
your hair,
iconic in this 
television universe
of one man
let nothing on,
no “real” Twitter feed
surrendering candid
portraits of what 
you believe,
what you love.
And I sit, subtracted,
before my love.
Wondering.
Subjected 
as I was
to plural echoes nth parts sensual, nth parts trust,
and to hear there
a call 
to illegitimate Paris
where I fit
right in,
Jacques Brel songbook,
ukulele, bread
and wine, simulacral  maudit bohemian
pelted by Polanski-ish
rain, but happy
away from Los Angeles
where you fit in,
being able, in one city, 
to drive for hours
and never leave home.
My choked voice grumbled
“de chrysanthèmes ...”
(Brel song) as
I sought the streets 
of Apollinaire’s “Zone”
on Google maps
(which I paid dearly
for)
still hearing the
angel 
even as
you were angry with me
who nearly destroyed
your apartment’s electricity
plugging in some idiotic
gadget of mine 
and leaving it smoking
drunk on uke, bread and wine.
Hard not to think
this symbolic
or a great way to pep
up an episode 
of Friends, or an ancient
Merchant Ivory film.
If I were Anne Carson
you’d be translation
and I
an impotent scholar 
before the Greek,
drawn by love
to the undecided
omnivorous Word
that paints travelogue,
that shields Earth, 
begging
this word side with me
when I touch down in Paris,
that it’s you who’d
ground this polysemous
text 
with a kiss, or touch
puppyish, unambiguous.
Oh, that Anne
Carson, such a genius.
She makes
me think. 
I’ve never been
so wrong, and in
the wrong place,
a foreigner, foreigned
in my own goddamned
country 
by double negation
fitting right
in (as I’ve
said) and you
a Mediterranean accent
amidst the stones 
of French abstraction,
pride, often cruelty, noirs désirs
circling like bats
who’ve read too much Saint-Just
and mistaken it for Sade. 
(That sounds quite important.
I’m afraid it’s not.)
It rained. I wrote
a pining song
in a hotel room
refusing your offer 
to stay with you
and your boyfriend
(quelle horreur)
who spoke no French
while I
conducted vertiginous conversations 
with a curator
at the Musée Gustave Moreau
pinning my hopes
on words like “Gautier” (Théophile)
“Mallarmé” and “Rimbaud”
(who didn’t come up 
of course),
and marred the language
even further with the help
of Google translate
in my letters to you
in the guise of, who? 
it wasn’t Baudelaire
(I can’t remember who,
maybe Marat,
and you, Charlotte Corday).
I liked the pining song,
in the end, 
it’s Morrissey-esque, funny
but grim, slippery
and only incomplete
without (or with) you.
Here I do not
go again, 
merely think
flat-footed
on my horizon
(scratching
my itchy head, I
think I have dandruff) 
while you
sleep
in a Westwood Airbnb
lyrically, so
I am drawn
shark-angelly 
down Hollywood Blvd.
on the 302
to an American-style aperitivo
with sliders instead
of funicular olives 
again with you
talking,
and I gazing deep
into your colors,
reading your Tweets
but never commenting. 
Such lovely olives.
It’s a beautiful evening.


^^EOP^^




For Juan Felipe Herrera



In the town of frijoles,
men eat their meals without
washing their hands, wanting
to bless their mothers’ food
with soil from the fields. 
In the town of frijoles,
boys beat on hollow pots,
the last wiping of their sides
with a piece of tortilla as
holy a moment as taking
the wafer in church. 
In the town of frijoles,
women undress to keep
their babies warm, stories
whispered into bald heads
revealed as poems decades
later, when it is early. 
In the town of frijoles,
old men cry for their
fathers and mothers,
tombstone ranches dotting
the night moon where
the pinto aromas extend
beyond the bowl of the sun.


^^EOP^^




^^EOP^^

So I entered suffering. A room with dazzling walls, starched drapes, a bed with the coverlet turned down just so. Shirred bed skirts. The pillowcase crisp, bearing the marks of the iron. A low wrought iron table with a pitcher and its glass of water. Curtain half cinched.

Was anyone else ever here? Not a trace of a prior occupant. No candy wrapper. No smudge on the high-gloss sheen. Yet I marvel at the labor that must have gone into all those preparations: someone lifting the mattress, twice, as you must, and adding the final touches; smoothing away all traces of a final touch, filling the glass precisely, so the camber of water fits like a seal over the rim.

A radio on the nightstand. It lights up, and there’s the very voice in my mind, arguing with itself, trying to convince itself that it suffers. Why so many hypnotic cadences, so many rhetorical flourishes—anaphora, chiasmus, parataxis—such subtle case logic, Rogerian argument, appeals to so many arbiters: God, reason, justice, twilight?

Search from station to station, and the white noise in between. On fm, am, and shortwave, the same rapt monologue. That marshaling of precedent, scientific data, illustrations from the history of medicine, the Upanishads, the Vedas, the sutras and suras, the Sermon on the Mount. But what is  suffering? Is it true that it requires my consent?

In a shaft of evening, the trillion worlds collide.

The rose in the vase grows whiter in darkness.


^^EOP^^

I rocked in a chair of charred Grand Dragon’s bones,
legs silent as molasses drooling from a cloud of linen. 
My fat white maid in her potholder hat
did not watch me watch her sons 
molt like dandelions in la-di-da noon
standing squarely on the blacks of their own shadows as they willed. 
She crushed lemons in her bear claw fists
and pushed a sugar dust around the pitcher. 
The mister started in on the mare,
phantasm of a centaur where it splinters. 
Three latticed glasses harmonized on the platter: 
my quiet kindness to the albess
for where I sent her daughter. 
It was Saturday. There was salt in his seams
and the slip between my knees slumped with heat 
and sheets jedidiah-teething the clothesline already.
Followed hours full of our trying to be full of each other 
and sunlight yearning like egg white through
the cracked curtains 
and the usual evidence of bluegrass his shoulders shed
beneath my nails, the rooms in me he could not enter 
branching annexes: my elderberry privacies.
Out of the yard’s farthest hem, darkness 
from the world’s first days braided into the tobacco 
and I could only imagine tomorrow
if I expected to be slaughtered in my sleep.


^^EOP^^

All my life I’ve asked my master
Why I am unable to choose
This sweet man or fancy shoes
Over this stranger, more difficult lover
And these expensive but practical loafers 
And why I am unable to author
A book exhibiting my full potential
And have focused instead on inconsequential
Letters to strange and difficult lovers
Who by my letters were never changed. 
I certainly haven’t been constrained
By terrible parents or trauma or poverty
And even if I had it wouldn’t explain
My propensity for misery
Anymore than it would my
Propensity for joy. 
Maybe I’m just a procrastinator
As life is a procrastination of death
And each breath just a procrastination of breath
And friends a procrastination of work
And work a procrastination of love
And love a procrastination I’m just not above.


^^EOP^^

Grab lunch
Polish your silver
Try a new flavor of yogurt
Burn in a lake of fire
Smoke some weed
Overeat 
Finally understand some things
Talk to Steve
Cry out breathlessly
Pay the electric bill
Go to the aquarium in the mall
Worry over the shape and color of your moles 
Sell out the people you used to call friends
Learn how to bake bread
Feed the ducks at the lake by the highway
Exaggerate your earnings
Get elected
Mull things over 
Attend a livestock auction
Pull down the statues of people who tortured your ancestors
Seek employment
Knit
Regret mostly everything
Paint the windows shut 
Pull down the statues of your ancestors
Get down on your knees
Read Kierkegaard
Pick the kids up from Montessori
Lose your appetite
Linger 
Imagine that hell is only an abstraction
DVR Homeland
Take another free breath mint
Cry out endlessly
Blame those closest to you
Love even the barest light pissing through the trees 


^^EOP^^

I will donate my head
I will uncover the seams
I will acknowledge my dust
           as silver elixir
to be fed to the masses 
I’ve never been more dead than now
more a product of misspent music
         halted at the border
                     flicking seeds sent
through a blister in the wall 
I plant movements
that carry all the king’s men
through a crack in the planet
where monkeys sink into
a song their fathers grew
           on filaments of language
& certain birds
are mad to hunt a spectrum
          of only one meaning
where handmade clouds sound    
free from ligament
                      released beyond bounds
offering steam to relax gem 
I can float here combing my hair into waterfall
I am a human fly
wings slick with telepathic goo
an archive of earth piled on my back 
This is theater ...
so please assume the role of curtain
I am the director of this fuzz
a tardy imago: the result of clandestine flare
When we returned to your house
we noticed that it wasn’t there
so we built a human pyramid
without flesh
without internal radar or private song
           a formation known to drain the color of black suns
and toward this stone we lean
where birds are higher
than sapphire mammatus
where we speak of things mouth-less, bare


^^EOP^^

The commentator's rabbiting on and on
about how it's so easy for Roger, resentment
thick as butter still in a box. Yet word
from those who've done their homework
is how the man loves to train—how much
he relishes putting in the hours
just as magicians shuffle card after card,
countless to mere humans
but carefully all accounted for.
At hearing "luck" again, I stop
until my hands relax their clutch
on the cone from which a dozen more
peonies are to materialize. I make it look easy
to grow a garden on top of a sheet
of fondant, and that's how it should appear:
as natural and as meant-to-be
as the spin of a ball from the sweetest spot
of a racquet whisked through the air like a wand.


^^EOP^^

The stone dolls, found in an Egyptian tomb,
are eyeless, armless, heavy for a child 
to hold. Not like the dolls that lined the room
my sister and I shared, their bodies light 
and made for being bent, their eyelids mobile,
hair that tangled with our own. "At night," 
our father winked at us, "they come to life."
We never pressed our cheeks against cold stone 
as pharoah's daughters did. The doctor's knife
could not have caught my sister more off-guard 
or left me less alone; I had my dolls.
Though, soon, they lay on tables in the yard 
with price tags. Even then they looked alive,
survivors with no sickness to survive.


^^EOP^^

Somewhere recently
I lost my short-term memory.
It was there and then it moved
like the flash of a red fox
along a line fence.
 
My short-term memory
has no address but here
no time but now.
It is a straight-man, waiting to speak
to fill in empty space
with name, date, trivia, punch line.
And then it fails to show.
 
It is lost, hiding somewhere out back
a dried ragweed stalk on the Kansas Prairie
holding the shadow of its life
against a January wind.
 
How am I to go on?
I wake up a hundred times a day.
Who am I waiting for
what am I looking for
why do I have this empty cup
on the porch or in the yard?
I greet my neighbor, who smiles.
I turn a slow, lazy Susan
in my mind, looking for
some clue, anything to break the spell
of being lost in plain sight.


^^EOP^^

Even now it idles outside the houses
where we failed to get better at piano lessons,
visits the parking lot of the ballet school
 
where my sister and I stood awkwardly
at the back. My mother's van was orange
with a door we slid open to reveal
beheaded plastic dragons and bunches
 
of black, half-eaten bananas; it was where
her sketchbooks tarried among
abandoned coffee cups and
 
science projects. She meant to go places
in it: camp in its back seat
and cook on its stove while
 
painting the coast of Nova Scotia,
or capturing the cold beauty of the Blue Ridge
mountains at dawn. Instead, she waited
behind its wheel while we scraped violins,
 
made digestive sounds
with trumpets, danced badly at recitals
where grandmothers recorded us
 
with unsteady cameras. Sometimes, now,
I look out a window and believe I see it,
see her, waiting for me beside a curb,
 
under a tree, and I think I could open the door,
clear off a seat, look at the drawing in her lap,
which she began, but never seemed to finish.


^^EOP^^

When they entered the house, which was a very large house
the way a cloud is large, the pages of their story
seemed like cracks in the earth, a man's shirt, or a woman's
blouse, and the stranger in the house told them to make
themselves at home in the house that was not their house,
and told them to write down the three most important gifts
in each of their lives, and then continued to explain how
there were three doors in the house and at each door they must
forfeit one of these gifts, and how the real story always begins
at the third door, where each of them will pause and begin
to crawl, leaving the field of time, where now you pause,
touching the door of this page, wiping away each word, waiting to enter.
 


^^EOP^^

I sit with my thermos of coffee on the mall:
a mile-long promenade, arcades of elms
flanking a generous aliquot of benches.
 
But at this early hour it starts to dawn:
I am the only one without a dog.
So, a witness to an ancient symbiosis,
as it's evolved within a modern city:
 
The dogs, I note, are smaller, the owners
less ferocious. The former sniff then poop,
the latter, like potty-training parents, pat their heads,
gather it in plastic doggy-bags.
 
It's no longer for the hunt or for protection;
both species have adapted to survive
hard loneliness inside a small apartment.
 


^^EOP^^

The toy
become the aesthetic archetype 
As if
some patient peasant God
had rubbed and rubbed
the Alpha and Omega
of Form
into a lump of metal 
A naked orientation
unwinged unplumed
the ultimate rhythm
has lopped the extremities
of crest and claw
from
the nucleus of flight 
The absolute act
of art
conformed
to continent sculpture
—bare as the brow of Osiris—
this breast of revelation 
an incandescent curve
licked by chromatic flames
in labyrinths of reflections 
This gong
of polished hyperaesthesia
shrills with brass
as the aggressive light
strikes
its significance
The immaculate
conception
of the inaudible bird
occurs
in gorgeous reticence


^^EOP^^

Little tapers leaning lighted diagonally
Stuck in coffin tables of the Café du Néant
Leaning to the breath of baited bodies
Like young poplars fringing the Loire
 
Eyes that are full of love
And eyes that are full of kohl
Projecting light across the fulsome ambiente
Trailing the rest of the animal behind them
Telling of tales without words
And lies of no consequence
One way or another
 
The young lovers hermetically buttoned up in black
To black cravat
To the blue powder edge dusting the yellow throat
What color could have been your bodies
When last you put them away
 
Nostalgic youth
Holding your mistress's pricked finger
In the indifferent flame of the taper
Synthetic symbol of LIFE
In this factitious chamber of DEATH
The woman
As usual
Is smiling as bravely
As it is given to her to be brave
 
While the brandy cherries
In winking glasses
Are decomposing
Harmoniously
With the flesh of spectators
And at a given spot
There is one
Who
Having the concentric lighting focussed precisely upon her
Prophetically blossoms in perfect putrefaction
Yet there are cabs outside the door.
 


^^EOP^^

The Normal Monster
sings in the Green Sahara
 
The voice and offal
of the image of God
 
make Celtic noises
in these lyrical hells
 
Hurricanes
of reasoned musics
reap the uncensored earth
 
The loquent consciousness
of living things
pours in torrential languages
 
The elderly colloquists
the Spirit and the Flesh
are out of tongue
 
The Spirit
is impaled upon the phallus
 
Phoenix
of Irish fires
lighten the Occident
 
with Ireland's wings
flap pandemoniums
of Olympian prose
 
and satinize
the imperial Rose
of Gaelic perfumes —
England
the sadistic mother
embraces Erin
 
Master
of meteoric idiom
present
 
The word made flesh
and feeding upon itself
with erudite fangs
The sanguine
introspection of the womb
 
Don Juan
of Judea
upon a pilgrimage
to the Libido
 
The press
purring
its lullabies to sanity
 
Christ capitalized
scourging
incontrite usurers of destiny
in hole and corner temples
 
And hang
The soul's advertisements
outside the ecclesiast's Zoo
 
A gravid day
spawns
gutteral gargoyles
upon the Tower of Babel
 
Empyrean emporium
where the
rejector-recreator
Joyce
flashes the giant reflector
on the sub rosa
 


^^EOP^^

I
 
Spawn of fantasies
Sifting the appraisable
Pig Cupid his rosy snout
Rooting erotic garbage
"Once upon a time"
Pulls a weed white star-topped
Among wild oats sown in mucous membrane
I would an eye in a Bengal light
Eternity in a sky-rocket
Constellations in an ocean
Whose rivers run no fresher
Than a trickle of saliva
 
These are suspect places
 
I must live in my lantern
Trimming subliminal flicker
Virginal to the bellows
Of experience
Colored glass.
 
 
 
II
 
At your mercy
Our Universe
Is only
A colorless onion
You derobe
Sheath by sheath
Remaining
A disheartening odour
About your nervy hands
 
 
 
III
 
Night
Heavy with shut-flower's nightmares
---------------------------------------------
Noon
Curled to the solitaire
Core of the
Sun
 
 
 
IV
 
Evolution fall foul of
Sexual equality
Prettily miscalculate
Similitude
 
Unnatural selection
Breed such sons and daughters
As shall jibber at each other
Uninterpretable cryptonyms
Under the moon
 
Give them some way of braying brassily
For caressive calling
Or to homophonous hiccoughs
Transpose the laugh
Let them suppose that tears
Are snowdrops or molasses
Or anything
Than human insufficiences
Begging dorsal vertebrae
 
Let meeting be the turning
To the antipodean
And Form a blur
Anything
Than to seduce them
To the one
As simple satisfaction
For the other
 
 
 
V
 
Shuttle-cock and battle-door
A little pink-love
And feathers are strewn
 
 
 
VI
 
Let Joy go solace-winged
To flutter whom she may concern
 
 
 
VII
 
Once in a mezzanino
The starry ceiling
Vaulted an unimaginable family
Bird-like abortions
With human throats
And Wisdom's eyes
Who wore lamp-shade red dresses
And woolen hair
 
One bore a baby
In a padded porte-enfant
Tied with a sarsenet ribbon
To her goose's wings
 
But for the abominable shadows
I would have lived
Among their fearful furniture
To teach them to tell me their secrets
Before I guessed
-- Sweeping the brood clean out
 
 
 
VIII
 
Midnight empties the street
--- --- --- To the left a boy
--- One wing has been washed in rain
The other will never be clean any more ---
Pulling door-bells to remind
Those that are snug
To the right a haloed ascetic
Threading houses
Probes wounds for souls
--- The poor can't wash in hot water ---
And I don't know which turning to take ---
 
 
 
IX
 
We might have coupled
In the bed-ridden monopoly of a moment
Or broken flesh with one another
At the profane communion table
Where wine is spill't on promiscuous lips
 
We might have given birth to a butterfly
With the daily-news
Printed in blood on its wings
 
 
 
X
 
In some
Prenatal plagiarism
Foetal buffoons
Caught tricks
--- --- --- --- ---
From archetypal pantomime
Stringing emotions
Looped aloft
--- --- --- ---
For the blind eyes
That Nature knows us with
And most of Nature is green
--- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- ---
 
 
 
XI
 
Green things grow
Salads
For the cerebral
Forager's revival
And flowered flummery
Upon bossed bellies
Of mountains
Rolling in the sun
 
 
 
XII
 
Shedding our petty pruderies
From slit eyes
 
We sidle up
To Nature
--- --- --- that irate pornographist
 
 
 
XIII
 
The wind stuffs the scum of the white street
Into my lungs and my nostrils
Exhilarated birds
Prolonging flight into the night
Never reaching --- --- --- --- ------ --- ---


^^EOP^^

I love you, rotten,
Delicious rottenness.
 
I love to suck you out from your skins
So brown and soft and coming suave,
So morbid, as the Italians say.
 
What a rare, powerful, reminiscent flavour
Comes out of your falling through the stages of decay:
Stream within stream.
 
Something of the same flavour as Syracusan muscat wine
Or vulgar Marsala.
 
Though even the word Marsala will smack of preciosity
Soon in the pussy-foot West.
 
What is it?
What is it, in the grape turning raisin,
In the medlar, in the sorb-apple,
Wineskins of brown morbidity,
Autumnal excrementa;
What is it that reminds us of white gods?
 
Gods nude as blanched nut-kernels,
Strangely, half-sinisterly flesh-fragrant
As if with sweat,
And drenched with mystery.
 
Sorb-apples, medlars with dead crowns.
I say, wonderful are the hellish experiences,
Orphic, delicate
Dionysos of the Underworld.
 
A kiss, and a vivid spasm of farewell, a moment’s orgasm of rupture,
Then along the damp road alone, till the next turning.
And there, a new partner, a new parting, a new unfusing into twain,
A new gasp of further isolation,
A new intoxication of loneliness, among decaying, frost-cold leaves.
 
Going down the strange lanes of hell, more and more intensely alone,
The fibres of the heart parting one after the other
And yet the soul continuing, naked-footed, ever more vividly embodied
Like a flame blown whiter and whiter
In a deeper and deeper darkness,
Ever more exquisite, distilled in separation.
 
So, in the strange retorts of medlars and sorb-apples
The distilled essence of hell.
The exquisite odour of leave-taking. Jamque vale!
Orpheus, and the winding, leaf-clogged, silent lanes of hell.
 
Each soul departing with its own isolation.
Strangest of all strange companions,
And best.
 
Medlars, sorb-apples
More than sweet
Flux of autumn
Sucked out of your empty bladders
And sipped down, perhaps, with a sip of Marsala
So that the rambling, sky-dropped grape can add its music to yours,
Orphic farewell, and farewell, and farewell
And the ego sum of Dionysos
The sono io of perfect drunkenness
Intoxication of final loneliness.
                                                                                  San Gervasio
 


^^EOP^^

Would you like to throw a stone at me?
Here, take all that’s left of my peach.
 
Blood-red, deep:
Heaven knows how it came to pass.
Somebody’s pound of flesh rendered up.
 
Wrinkled with secrets
And hard with the intention to keep them.
 
Why, from silvery peach-bloom,
From that shallow-silvery wine-glass on a short stem
This rolling, dropping, heavy globule?
 
I am thinking, of course, of the peach before I ate it.
 
Why so velvety, why so voluptuous heavy?
Why hanging with such inordinate weight?
Why so indented?
 
Why the groove?
Why the lovely, bivalve roundnesses?
Why the ripple down the sphere?
Why the suggestion of incision?
 
Why was not my peach round and finished like a billiard ball?
It would have been if man had made it.
Though I’ve eaten it now.
 
But it wasn’t round and finished like a billiard ball;
And because I say so, you would like to throw something at me.
 
Here, you can have my peach stone.
                                                                                  San Gervasio
 


^^EOP^^

You tell me I am wrong.
Who are you, who is anybody to tell me I am wrong?
I am not wrong.
 
In Syracuse, rock left bare by the viciousness of Greek women,
No doubt you have forgotten the pomegranate trees in flower,
Oh so red, and such a lot of them.
 
Whereas at Venice,
Abhorrent, green, slippery city
Whose Doges were old, and had ancient eyes,
In the dense foliage of the inner garden
Pomegranates like bright green stone,
And barbed, barbed with a crown.
Oh, crown of spiked green metal
Actually growing!
 
Now, in Tuscany,
Pomegranates to warm your hands at;
And crowns, kingly, generous, tilting crowns
Over the left eyebrow.
 
And, if you dare, the fissure!
 
Do you mean to tell me you will see no fissure?
Do you prefer to look on the plain side?
 
For all that, the setting suns are open.
The end cracks open with the beginning:
Rosy, tender, glittering within the fissure.
 
Do you mean to tell me there should be no fissure?
No glittering, compact drops of dawn?
Do you mean it is wrong, the gold-filmed skin, integument,
            shown ruptured?
 
For my part, I prefer my heart to be broken.
It is so lovely, dawn-kaleidoscopic within the crack.
 
                                                                          San Gervasio in Tuscany
 


^^EOP^^

Who gave us flowers? Heaven? The white God?
 
Nonsense!
Up out of hell,
From Hades;
Infernal Dis!
  Jesus the god of flowers—?
Not he. Or sun-bright Apollo, him so musical?
Him neither.
  Who then? Say who.
Say it—and it is Pluto,
Dis
The dark one
Proserpine’s master.
  Who contradicts—?
 
When she broke forth from below,
Flowers came, hell-hounds on her heels.
Dis, the dark, the jealous god, the husband,
Flower-sumptuous-blooded.
  Go then, he said.
And in Sicily, on the meadows of Enna,
She thought she had left him;
But opened around her purple anemones, 
Caverns,
Little hells of color, caves of darkness,
Hell, risen in pursuit of her; royal, sumptuous
Pit-falls.
 
All at her feet
Hell opening;
At her white ankles
Hell rearing its husband-splendid, serpent heads,
Hell-purple, to get at her— Why did he let her go?
So he could track her down again, white victim.
 
Ah mastery!
Hell’s husband-blossoms
Out on earth again.
 
Look out, Persephone!
You, Madame Ceres, mind yourself, the enemy is upon you.
About your feet spontaneous aconite,
Hell-glamorous, and purple husband-tyranny
Enveloping your late-enfranchised plains.
 
You thought your daughter had escaped?
No more stockings to darn for the flower-roots, down in hell?
But ah my dear!
 
Aha, the stripe-cheeked whelps, whippet-slim crocuses, At ’em, boys, at ’em! Ho golden-spaniel, sweet alert narcissus, Smell ’em, smell ’em out!
Those two enfranchised women.
 
Somebody is coming! Oho there!
 
Dark blue anemones!
Hell is up!
Hell on earth, and Dis within the depths!
  Run, Persephone, he is after you already.
  Why did he let her go?
To track her down;
All the sport of summer and spring, and flowers snapping
               at her ankles and catching her by the hair!
Poor Persephone and her rights for women.
  Husband-snared hell-queen, It is spring.
 
It is spring,
And pomp of husband-strategy on earth.
  Ceres, kiss your girl, you think you’ve got her back. The bit of husband-tilth she is, Persephone!
 
Poor mothers-in-law!
They are always sold.
 
It is spring.
 
                                                                                                     Taormina
 


^^EOP^^

When he pushed his bush of black hair off his brow:
When she lifted her mop from her eyes, and screwed it
            in a knob behind
            —O act of fearful temerity!
When they felt their foreheads bare, naked to heaven,
            their eyes revealed:
When they left the light of heaven brandished like a knife at
            their defenceless eyes
And the sea like a blade at their face,
Mediterranean savages:
When they came out, face-revealed, under heaven, from
            the shaggy undergrowth of their own hair
For the first time,
They saw tiny rose cyclamens between their toes, growing
Where the slow toads sat brooding on the past.
 
Slow toads, and cyclamen leaves
Stickily glistening with eternal shadow
Keeping to earth.
Cyclamen leaves
Toad-filmy, earth-iridescent
Beautiful
Frost-filigreed
Spumed with mud
Snail-nacreous
Low down.
 
The shaking aspect of the sea
And man’s defenceless bare face
And cyclamens putting their ears back.
 
Long, pensive, slim-muzzled greyhound buds
Dreamy, not yet present,
Drawn out of earth
At his toes.
 
Dawn-rose
Sub-delighted, stone engendered
Cyclamens, young cyclamens
Arching
Waking, pricking their ears
Like delicate very-young greyhound bitches
Half-yawning at the open, inexperienced
Vistas of day,
Folding back their soundless petalled ears.
 
Greyhound bitches
Bending their rosy muzzles pensive down,
And breathing soft, unwilling to wake to the new day
Yet sub-delighted.
 
Ah Mediterranean morning, when our world began!
Far-off Mediterranean mornings,
Pelasgic faces uncovered
And unbudding cyclamens.
 
The hare suddenly goes uphill
Laying back her long ears with unwinking bliss.
 
And up the pallid, sea-blenched Mediterranean stone-slopes
Rose cyclamen, ecstatic fore-runner!
Cyclamens, ruddy-muzzled cyclamens
In little bunches like bunches of wild hares
Muzzles together, ears-aprick
 
Whispering witchcraft
Like women at a well, the dawn-fountain.
 
Greece, and the world’s morning
While all the Parthenon marbles still fostered the roots of the cyclamen.
Violets
Pagan, rosy-muzzled violets
Autumnal
Dawn-pink,
Dawn-pale
Among squat toad-leaves sprinkling the unborn
Erechtheion marbles.
 
                                                                                                     Taormina 
 


^^EOP^^

Man of absolute physical equilibrium
You stand so straight on your legs
Every plank or clod you plant your feet on
Becomes roots for those limbs
 
Among the men you accrete to yourself
You are more heavy
And more light
Force being most equitably disposed
Is easiest to lift from the ground
So at the same time
Your movements
Unassailable
Savor of the airy-fairy of the ballet
The essence of a Mademoiselle Genée
Winks in the to-and-fro of your cuff-links
 
Your projectile nose
Has meddled in the more serious business
Of the battle-field
With the same incautious aloofness
Of intense occupation
That it snuffles the trail of the female
And the comfortable
Passing odors of love
 
Your genius
So much less in your brain
 
Than in your body
Reinforcing the hitherto negligible
 
Qualities
Of life
Deals so exclusively with
The vital
That it is equally happy expressing itself
Through the activity of pushing
THINGS
In the opposite direction
To that which they are lethargically willing to go
As in the amative language
Of the eyes
 
Fundamentally unreliable
You leave others their initial strength
Concentrating
On stretching the theoretic elastic of your conceptions
Till the extent is adequate
To the hooking on
Of any — or all
Forms of creative idiosyncrasy
While the occasional snap
Of actual production
Stings the face of the public.
 


^^EOP^^

A snake came to my water-trough
On a hot, hot day, and I in pyjamas for the heat,
To drink there.
 
In the deep, strange-scented shade of the great dark carob tree
I came down the steps with my pitcher
And must wait, must stand and wait, for there he was at the trough
            before me.
 
He reached down from a fissure in the earth-wall in the gloom
And trailed his yellow-brown slackness soft-bellied down, over
            the edge of the stone trough
And rested his throat upon the stone bottom,
And where the water had dripped from the tap, in a small clearness,
He sipped with his straight mouth,
Softly drank through his straight gums, into his slack long body,
Silently.
 
Someone was before me at my water-trough,
And I, like a second-comer, waiting.
 
He lifted his head from his drinking, as cattle do,
And looked at me vaguely, as drinking cattle do,
And flickered his two-forked tongue from his lips, and mused
             a moment,
And stooped and drank a little more,
Being earth-brown, earth-golden from the burning bowels
            of the earth
On the day of Sicilian July, with Etna smoking.
 
The voice of my education said to me
He must be killed,
For in Sicily the black, black snakes are innocent, the gold
            are venomous.
 
And voices in me said, If you were a man
You would take a stick and break him now, and finish him off.
 
But must I confess how I liked him,
How glad I was he had come like a guest in quiet, to drink
            at my water-trough
And depart peaceful, pacified, and thankless,
Into the burning bowels of this earth?
 
Was it cowardice, that I dared not kill him?
Was it perversity, that I longed to talk to him?
Was it humility, to feel so honoured?
I felt so honoured.
 
And yet those voices: If you were not afraid, you would kill him!
 
And truly I was afraid, I was most afraid,
But even so, honoured still more
That he should seek my hospitality
From out the dark door of the secret earth.
 
He drank enough
And lifted his head, dreamily, as one who has drunken,
And flickered his tongue like a forked night on the air, so black,
Seeming to lick his lips,
And looked around like a god, unseeing, into the air,
And slowly turned his head,
And slowly, very slowly, as if thrice adream,
Proceeded to draw his slow length curving round
And climb again the broken bank of my wall-face.
 
And as he put his head into that dreadful hole,
And as he slowly drew up, snake-easing his shoulders,
            and entered farther,
A sort of horror, a sort of protest against his withdrawing into
            that horrid black hole,
Deliberately going into the blackness, and slowly drawing
            himself after,
Overcame me now his back was turned.
 
I looked round, I put down my pitcher,
I picked up a clumsy log
And threw it at the water-trough with a clatter.
 
I think it did not hit him,
But suddenly that part of him that was left behind convulsed
            in an undignified haste,
Writhed like lightning, and was gone
Into the black hole, the earth-lipped fissure in the wall-front,
At which, in the intense still noon, I stared with fascination.
 
And immediately I regretted it.
I thought how paltry, how vulgar, what a mean act!
I despised myself and the voices of my accursed human education.
 
And I thought of the albatross,
And I wished he would come back, my snake.
 
For he seemed to me again like a king,
Like a king in exile, uncrowned in the underworld,
Now due to be crowned again.
 
And so, I missed my chance with one of the lords
Of life.
And I have something to expiate:
A pettiness.
 
                                                                                                     Taormina
 
 


^^EOP^^

Cyclones
of ecstatic dust
and ashes whirl
crusaders
from hallucinatory citadels
of shattered glass
into evacuate craters
 
A flock of dreams
browse on Necropolis
 
From the shores
of oval oceans
in the oxidized Orient
 
Onyx-eyed Odalisques
and ornithologists
observe the flight
of Eros obsolete
 
And "Immortality"
mildews
in the museums of the moon


^^EOP^^

It’s like touching without touching,
except when there is, also, touching. 
We pull the bowstrings back
and parallel together,
aiming a handsbreadth higher
than we believe we intend,
and let the glove move where we draw the wire, 
scared that the machinery
will misinterpret us,
that we may not stop trembling, that we may lose
our belief in ourselves
before anything is released, or shared, or sent. 
And yet we trust the notch to know
the whereabouts of the bow,
and trust the tail or fletching
of each salvo to astonish
the target as soon as it gets there, to make its point
within its nest of Os and Os and Os. 
Our belts and buckles try to keep the secrets
we have begun to decide
that, later, we want to expose. 
There is the rest of our group, and there is the river,
and that is called the kisser, the stabilizer
on your shoulder. Do what I do. You have time.
Put your hand over my hand. That feels nice. 
No longer too young
to participate in this activity, we have become
the elevated counselors
of the air, which will not take
anything but our most forceful advice.


^^EOP^^

I know something about godforsaken places.
Walking on the beach alone, far from the Dead Sea,
I thought I saw a horseshoe crab crawling slowly—
it was a Gideon Society, black Bible cover.
Another time, washed up on a Montauk dune,
I found a Chianti wine bottle
with a letter in it. I read to myself
a child’s handwriting: “Hello,
let’s make friends. Please call,” she gave her phone number.
I held the bottle a week before calling, then asked
for Mary Jane, in my best Portuguese accent, I am Pessoa. I’m calling from Por-tu-gal.
I’ll be your friend.

^^EOP^^

             every part
             down to gristle   
             where meat attaches
             to bone—leaves hollow 
                          having pushed the world away, we call it back through language 
                                                                                                                               love thyself
              thy sternum tight like a cage 
                                                                        W., R. & T. drop acid and go to a
                                                                            bar inside a grocery store 
                                                                                   I absorb this information neutrally 
                                                                                           move toward the scary  
                          We slipped
               into the crowd escaping. We were first in line to escape. We were trying to fit inside coolers or buckets, get lifted out. 
                                                                            They mandate
                                                                            show us a video
                                                                            try to prepare us
                                                                            (we are teachers)
                                                                            to respond first. 
                                                                            I know I must not be the only 
                Saw it coming and didn’t say anything—why?  
                You should always strive to emit positive vibrations to others, earth, and self.    
                                                    sun-filled 
mouth breathing
woodpecker
in our bed  
                                                                            and I think he is those things   
last                                living form
on earth    
                                                                                      (Hard to write a poem and let it fail)   
What kind of life to not be engaged with desire up to the very end. Isn’t that what dying is—to no longer be in proximity to want? 
                                                                                     I wrote, trees and non-binary (it was a typo)  
                                                                                             & source of positive vibration. 
                                                                                                     hear flower say no
                                                                                                     accept and do not pick it
                                                                                                     bringing back the dead 
First it was the leg bone. Then dark wet owl pellets, fur and bone, tiny skull with bone so fragile it flaked into bone ... dust—bone, soaked
in bleach, bone on the back porch, bone of water, bone of light, good boy bone, bone I asked permission for, may I always be ready to
hear no:        I offer bone as offering, I shake bone around to anyone good who may be listening.   
             What’s mine is yours even if it’s only bone dust.
                                               We live openhearted and without fear.  
         In the triple-X fantasies,
I’m the puppy. I bring back the dead
          a sign of—what?
Surrender? Having, out in the wilderness,
         thought of you?   
Invoke your
proximate sanctuary, string antidotes together like beads. 
             cat piss—rancher—rearview spider—wasp nest
             dead dad blanket for the coldest nights—mountain pass—
             antelope—taking a shit under a rainbow in a field of ponies, in Oregon           (how that actually happened)     
I know your secret
I too have dropped entire         days into my thigh
Nights and galaxies, termites     of testosterone week after
week slow as money even slower when it               crystallizes. I think you are
            beautiful                                                         in me
                                             small shocks I did not know I’d                    bottom for, 
                                             which is not a secret.      Sometimes I imagine shapes behind
                                             my head pouring me into wood chips: me alive, me proximate
                                             to want, useful as a body for some animal part unashamed by its own rage. 
                                             Why your pouch fit my jaw like that, why you only smell like that after lightning?
                                             Way it sometimes hurts how bad—desire to be bred.
                                             I close a motionless fist, forget to call you by your other name—
                                                       small pink flag waving in the wind.


^^EOP^^

Whose branch this is I think you know.
By how my (question-marks as) claws inscritch the bark.
How my worry-work along this bough
runs back and forth (and copper-keen) and evermore;
I got mocked and nicked No-Fly Bird  
not for nothing.  
Not for nothing have I picked this oak.
Though not thicktrunk-ancient as some angel-oak,
it’s sure the highest of our high so suits my lack.
—Charred wings won’t lift; I’ve got no glide
nor span to speak of. Ain’t this my beat : my usual limb.
Ain’t this pecking (carking) pulse  
my far and wide.


^^EOP^^

Magic rain magic mist magic dew magic hail
Magic darkness magic sea magic waves magic
River magic fountain magic well magic spring
That bursts forth when a magic spear pierces
Rock magic oak tree magic ash magic lime tree
Magic bough magic yew magic hawthorn magic
Tree to make you young again magic tree to
Prevent hunger magic thorn magic ivy magic
Fern magic blossom, mistletoe and mandrake
Magic wild grasses magic wheat magic breath
Magic blood magic feather magic dung magic
Piss magic mantle magic trousers magic veil
Magic hat magic chain magic sword magic
Shield magic hearth magic bench magic door
Magic cry of a deer or cry of a magic deer;
Seven as a magic number magic the human
Head for divination magic also the head of
A dog, magic too vessels that burst in the fire
To uncover disobedience magic the river
That rises to drown liars magic the stone
That causes silence magic the deep lake
That causes forgetfulness magic the hazelnut
That makes a lover foolish magic the stone
That banishes sorrow magic the charm bought
Cheaply in the form of small poetry books,
Or nine the magic number and the magic
Number seven again and the magic twelve also
And green as that magic color violet as magic
Red as magic black as magic white as magic
Purple also as a magic hue and also red again;
Magic also the felling of two oak trees in a wood
And the magic wand used by the Druids to
Find your beloved carried away by fairies—
And, when all else fails, magic the new-fangled
Blessings of Christians swarming into our oak
Wood now, making even the disappeared speak.


^^EOP^^

Damn, son      he      grunted holding  his    falling      jeans    and      sprinting  sideways   in    high    hay      and
concatenation      He  didn’t      even   want       to   chase      the       favor      he   hadn’t     planned    to   live   forever   he
didn’t    know    he    had    a      fever      thought      it      was     a    true    love   shopping   spree      thought      the cotton
needle    was      a      vaccine      thought      the      Visine      was       tiny      water       and        the     eye       a    reliable
bank       in    the   space     between       seeing        and       being     seen           and     plenty     quenched      and      hesitant
and      addicted      to     fickle    sonance     and    espionage      fake  Prada     real     caught     up      ketchup packets
spilling   from   his   pockets      Dexter    Gordon      flickering      in     his    locket     on      grin       on      roar        on
dimples     and     porridge       this     is     your     typical      roll     out      strategy     pretend      to    shift    into    helpless
chaos     and    laugh           when     they      fall      for       it       such      tall      grass      in       Ole    Miss       such    that
mystery   of    the  body     of     the    boy     of      the      ball               is     leaping      violently         into      pinstripes— 
He      was      isolated      yes      but    he   never     made     us     nervous       he    was  never    convicted         he      never
took      the      backpack             he never  made   it  to Rikers      he      never      did   come   back


^^EOP^^

Who cares about the redbud tree, its flowers
half-black, half-pink, from winter’s April freeze;
who cares who lives halfway or dies too soon,
the blue jay’s baby squirming on bare ground,
the agonies of blood, the frigid breeze
shaking the fragile sense of April showers;
who cares who craves the heated pools of June,
the lake of boaters buzzing by or drowned.
Two vultures meet me at my open door,
scanning for carrion, the stink of spasms,
the sky-gods pecking rotting flesh for food;
who cares if this strange order ends in good,
or if the chickadee lands in the chasms
of endless carelessness forevermore.


^^EOP^^

                    
                    
                    1. they were a kind of solution

Say one Spaceman, when she lands, will touch
down in a human sentence, speaking Dutch,
a dialect of Mentalese. Her torch-

songs (loosely rendered from the Arcturan): “Baby
Let’s Get Square with Pi,” or, “You’re the Apple
of My Eye,” or “Boola Theta Babel

Bye-Bye.” It might make sense. This is a heady
thought. The traditional verse, viz. “Who’s Your Daddy,”
as sung in The War of the Worlds, and signaled Mayday,

mayday—a little like Beethoven’s 4th in digital
redaction—may underpin what limbic Dutch
must once upon a time have bloomed beneath the sagittal
crest of Homo—

Who? What? This news just in!—the starry
sky is empty. Spacemen are out. Sorry.


2. exo-statisticians change minds, cite insufficiency of planetary bodies of right type

What, no aliens? Or, with greater dignity,
life elsewhere in the universe? That window’s
shut, we learn. Astronomers, indignant

desert birds, eyes screwed to the long cinder-
scuttles of their telescopes, will voice some doubt,
one hopes! This is too lonely. Heliocentric

humility’s a habit hard to shake. Endowed
with what we’ve called “intelligence,” or “powerful
intelligence,” like-minded creatures, each an end-

point in a home-world’s evolutionary raffle,
well, just must across the vasty deeps of space
and time yearn forth to find each other with awful

big radios. That’s how the Book of Revelations
we knew used to read, rephrased so, pi be praised.


3. binary

My friend the geometer, when asked if pi
were in the sky or in the skull, replied

pi’s the pontification of a ratio.
Bisected, so, the circle: pi. To show

that in a well-formed sentence, well, that’s human, sure.
All language is. So ever since that fateful shore

of Lake Turkana where tongue forked, where first
flaking syntax split the atom into force

and mass, thing and verb, the copula
has groped to reanneal it: this opulence

is equal to the sum of those simplicities ...
So here’s the mystery: across the placid

surface of the water a salt of stars
once scattered, hissing. Caliban stammered Are

stars. Then, Look, look up at the stars!


4. prose obtrusions concerning the keats equation

Hold it there.

Would you say truth’s a property of sentences, but beauty’s not?

So that mysterious predictive gift of mathematics is precisely that of  sentences like I predict the sun will rise tomorrow?—isn’t that the leap that left the chimpanzees behind?—and adding time of sunrise just adds  increment to the precision?

So that Platonic realm where Mathematics must exist to be discovered by Ramanujan or Hardy or Arcturans tucked in anywhere in time or space is just that space where earlier equations live, like love’s a rose or tears are rain, which Hardy’s and Ramanujan’s respective ancestors discovered independently?

That if in England two men feed a horse, the horse stays thin, the axiom would hold as well for two Tibetan yaks or fat Jurassic stegosaurs (assuming less that that’s what the Arcturans use to carry mail than that, like us, they pinch their pence)—

That that’s the realm where poems and equations likewise lie unspoken,  quietly awaiting their discovery?

And so those famous instances where mathematics efflorescing on some blackboard purely for the play of it turn out to have a shocking congruence with patterns in the world is just exactly like the case where poetry is news before the news it stays?

That hadn’t the acclaimed predictive potency of mathematics best be cast as a reminder of forgotten shock—the shock our shaggy kind must once have felt, framing for the first time well-formed sentences about the world that was, and then about the world about to be, and so extended human sensibility  and thrust it forth as backward through the night of time?

Yes, if diffidently.


5. postscriptum

The aliens are back, incidentally. Astral
systems dropping planets like nuts in May. Exo-
biology leaps again into likelihood. A straw
poll proves the numbers may be multiplex.

No small relief for this slow versifier,
who, peering through this poem’s decades-long zoom-
lens has seen what changes?—sapphire
heaven bleached of all biology?—shazam!—

and then revivified, less abruptly,
with a thought. In the same blink of the clock
the pupil of a black hole was seen to matter,
some dinosaurs grew feathers, and (this one for Ripley’s)
Pluto got demoted from a planet to a rock.
Also my family died. Also I had a daughter.
                

^^EOP^^

Just like  Jesus     I   am   a time   machine     I   go   away  I   come   back     they won’t   let   me   watch    things   die
and     the  spy   in   the   spine     a   hearse   of  sense  and  rumors     a bundle      of   all   that’s    possible    in     a body
tied  to   its      back    with   the  babble    of    hypocrites        and    dirty   rivers          if    you    fall   asleep    in yellow
and    awake      in     a  bed   of   cotton  wool   with    a  star   of   nails   where     your   heart   should   go     and   the
cosmetics     of     wartime     blood  lipping wax     in    a   factory     basement    attached   to  a   slab   of   maple      you
do   not  have   to  love  that man      to  slice   his lips      and   scream        what   divination  turned  into   demon   by
ignoring    you    alone    can    remember     and      revert     to    God     I   give    the   woven   whisper   of   a kid   to
her    first   brown   doll    mounted     to     a   branch     of     song       she    sings       reasons     that   we   fear      our feelings—   To   the  dice   in   the  tree    she  is   singing    as   the   torches   come   up  throbbing    and    grinning
a crimson  minnow   in   her   last est  lap


^^EOP^^

Father Lear the king so shaped his bairns
with the wand’s upper hand
the fire’s swanny wing
smooth tippet of the spider 
In the very kingdom of herbs and servants
he shaped them
from peace vessels of the animals
from toil of the flesh
from milk horses and the birds of sighed mercy
and the tongue undone 
He shaped his bairns
in night’s long harm and in day’s bright psalter
in the seven courts of the north
and with the mild birch of the paternoster 
From his ploughing fields and his sweat
his toothèd heart and his waxing wit
Father Lear the king shaped his bairns
for good or ill           this he did


^^EOP^^

It broke the dog’s leg
when you were reversing for me          on the slope at home.  Racing green it sits for scrap now 
on the tow truck. 
Majestic as a king
on his lectica the ratchets click the blue straps tighten  before the final journey  out the gates 
through which it once  first drove 
purchased from our savings  when we were told we were having twins. 
Ground-in chocolate, mud, crumbs
infant seats all straps and buckles  the roof rack bars were your horizontal 
handles when you’d stand and, like the Hulk, begin to shake 
us when you’d come to say goodbye. 
And the strapped-in children would shout as if they were about to be tipped 
out, and when you stopped, their laughter turned to Do it again! Go on, do it again!  I once knew a woman who drove a convertible: 
metallic navy, white leather interior, gloss veneer
fabric, reclining roof.  A thing of  vehicular beauty. 
When she sold it she never wrote a poem.

^^EOP^^

6. 
A rabbit hides in the wheel arch on a flight to hawaii
and arrives alive a poem stops a tank long enough
for a picture to be taken I myself have become more
fearful of heights the question is then what happens
the eye of jupiter is growing smaller but also colder 
7. 
The movie is better than the book
which is better than the experience
silver is better than gold (it doesn’t infect piercings)
a fake masterpiece is better than a real one because at least it’s affordable
permadeath in virtual warfare is better than actual death in actual warfare
imitation is better because it’s sincere
whereas innovation seeks to impress
and anyway is never what it says it is
the second time is better than the first, as you well know!
the remake is self-conscious and therefore more morally alert
this sentiment is better than the other times it has been expressed
because in the past it was expressed more forcefully and now it can relax
even thinking that Salinger meant David Copperfield the 1980s magician
who made real cars and buildings disappear
is better than knowing he meant Dickens
but only because others have thought this before you
and written about their mistake with winning modesty
or honesty or both
a cat hunting a bird is better now
because of cartoons
just as the cat that lives next door
is a better cat because it is not your cat anymore
a rhyme is better the more times it has been used
cliché is better than truth
truth is just something that hasn’t become a cliché yet
but inevitably will
(then you can put it in your pocket
and no one can put the truth in their pocket)
and any king or queen or president or prime minister
is better than all previous kings or queens or presidents or prime ministers
any poem is better than all the poems that precede it
that say essentially the same thing
which means new is better than old
but only if it looks or sounds or otherwise seems somehow old
being in a simulation is better than being in reality
watching the simulated stars set to ambient music created by a gifted  recording artist
is better than watching real stars set to dismal sounds from real life
derivative beauty is better than any other kind
(here we are surrounded by all this derivative beauty—imagine!)
however the audience will still say “nah”
however many times you say
the cover version is better than the original
but the cover version is always better than the original
I know that the cover version is always better than the original
and the reason I know the cover version is always better than the original
is that I’ve never heard the original 
41. 
You’re not the capital’s purveyor of inclement art
traversing the pale river with a glass of equally pale sulphur
on a trip in search of black ice cream
or whatever it is the russians are buying
nor an idle dealer who sports a crown of vegetables
in your self-deprecating portrait
(a little fancy commissioned
not to be indiscreet but
in the fantasy
at “some” expense)
not even the owner in your wildest dreams of a kept viper
but more a kind of overlarge boy who somehow drags out a salary
on the halved lunches of interns
hoarse from smoking
not thy powerful talk
you stay in the shop to keep in the shade that’s all
you are not the best urban poet
but this gallery has a heartless master on six figures
who likes to say he’s all mouth and isn’t
and even asks after your finances
the bastard
and why look up from your phone
at your desk at reception
when it seems you’re the only one the satire on the walls this month has seen
(it can’t cut both ways, can it?)
and nobody has ever penetrated the depths of the mercedes that waits
like a black moon
or a scoop of something poisoned
melting on the curb outside
ignored by wardens as if they can’t perceive the gleaming anomaly
so great is it
and you with your “I always had a good nose for it”
you with your aquiline sophistication and games of insolence
their verve dulling let’s be fair in these conditions
and your brochures
your spelling
just enough bait 
55. 
If you want to know my wishes briefly Mark,
famous host, bright ornament, OK then, pronto—
I ask to be the master of a great rural cultivator
of the soil, a small tribe used to the easiness of dirt.
I do. And to worship the cold painted rocks at dawn
with an unfit “hello.” And later when the presents
are in stockings crowded by the chimney breast,
to remember the lead-haired fisherman I was then,
waiting a year for the prize of a red honey jar,
at a sagging table eating my eggs among ashes—
whoever does not love this does not love this life!
I hope that you live, and the city, amid duties. 
57. 
What kind of life is called a healthy life...?
I don’t ask that it’s too easy or too hard.
I’d like something in between the two ... 
At the same time I don’t want to know,
even if it is my call ... I know you know
I don’t wish to shave my head again
or work the funerals ... the center of attention ... 
At the same time I don’t want to be bored!
Underneath the veil ... in gloves and pearls ... 
W/r/t life ... that’s my prerogative ... bitches ...  
61. 
Love’s syllables scroll.
Tag them, Verona.
May is a happy man.
Consider pressed his tiny region.
Place the stars or less.
Fragrant hues applaud the Nile.
One tree sounds.
Love, the two unique dogs.
He speaks fluent hearts.
A dog can enjoy his humorous letter.
No one has bought cilantro, my arse.
Your lie, my boast.
I will not keep silent in the lawsuit, Bilbo. 
63. 
In general I hate discussing my poetry
so I always ask questions
there’s a kind of writer/artist though
and you meet them all the time now
who only talks about their “practice”
without anyone caring or asking
(it isn’t connected to success)
and shows no flicker of interest
in anything anyone else does
if the choice is between talking about me
when I don’t want to talk about me
or talking about you
when you only want to talk about you
then let’s talk about me
by the way if you don’t know
this type of artist you probably are it sorry


^^EOP^^

Had it had good tang to it or even a cell’s cell of succulence 
he’d have squirreled the day away 
to paw and 
tongue.


^^EOP^^

Too busy peddling my fire and trying to keep the mouths fed
and packing up belongings of the recent dead right now to access
your luxurious philosophy, though one looks forward to a time 
when the universe permits, I said to my electric correspondent
who came at me puffed pink in thoughtfulness when what I needed
then as now was a quiet high enough to envision a half-gallon 
brick of all-natural vanilla ice cream softening on the hot hood
of an idling cop car: the earliest rivulets, a slow loss of strict
rectangularity, then the wild gliding around on the beautiful bleak 
enamel paint job as its sweet fragrance fills the air like a gift
from Madagascar I can breathe. Rapt Cortés transported cuttings
of vanilla across the Atlantic during his plunder of the Aztecs; 
the Aztecs themselves fell captive to its magic after vanquishing
its first cultivators the Totonacs, who paid their conquerors tributes
of baskets stacked to heaven with cured vanilla pods like long 
sentences of salutiferous essence. This is one of those instances
history likes to push your face into to try to stir your appetite
for cruelty a little, or at least make you covet the perks of it: I too 
want vanilla in quantity. I want it all around me, like a fortress
of mellow dangles. It will move with me as I move and it will ward
hateful people off. For centuries Europeans tried to cultivate it 
outside its native Mexico and failed. They could get the vine
to flower, but in the absence of ancestral pollinators, specifically
hummingbirds and a stingless bee, the flowers dropped off podless. 
Meanwhile, Edmond Albius—born into slavery on an island
east of Madagascar known then as Bourbon, lush French colony
and home to roses, one active volcano, one dormant, and one 
arena-like caldera that holds the record for most rainfall shed
in one location by a single tropical cyclone ever, namely Hyacinthe—
knew enough from orchids at age twelve in 1841 to think to lift 
with a bamboo splint the flap of the rostellum dividing the pollen-
heavy male anther from the female stigma in order to rub the pollen
on the stigma’s eager wand. Within weeks the pods had begun 
to form and lengthen into joyous beanlike squiggles laden with
tiny seeds like secrets of the universe as Albius at the shore and under
bright southern stars breathed out I hope in a kind of enlargement 
akin to liberty from time, so that on that occasion he might feel
briefly as if his own, even as his method of vanilla pollination
belonged first to his master, then Madagascar, and then the world, 
with nearly all vanilla produced today as Albius taught us, including
the kind in Breyers since 1866, fourteen years before Albius died
unrecognized, in poverty, in misery to be exact, while everyone white 
around him grew rich with vanilla, adding it to candy, Coca-Cola,
Chanel No. 5, and even in effigy to the air freshener dangling
down in my Uber, its waves whispering Albius, Albius, but inaudibly.


^^EOP^^


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


^^EOP^^

fine parchment     face
suddenly     chantilly
lace    his torso     a doily
perforated     twinkling
with sweet     patient   fungus
shiny maggot-
milled    one old gold trinket    slipped
between two ribs
his legs  folded  and cold 
he   too   was somebody’s
honeybunch    and heartleap
his jaw an ox-bone
his eyes full     of lake
his burring voice    booming  out
bold songs     like john bro-own’s    body
da-da da-da  da  da    da

^^EOP^^




[ Johnny Pep, P.O.W. ]



When they flang me down that hole I clawed for home—  
When they sealed the seam with clay : sucked roots and ore—  
When my gut would grind would groan of lack I ’voked some meat—  
When I was blindered underground I seen our creek—  
When stench would stain the mind the mind would branch—  
When I got stripped & roped to stand for sleep I reined my hoss—  
When cane-straps flogged us cross the field we’d call a tune—  
( When rows of welts ( still ) grave the mind the mind will climb. )

^^EOP^^

                    
                    
                    A man I loved  kept a  folded square
of    masking   tape   in   his   pocket    
He  did   this      / only   for   a   year    
His    masking    tape   was     bright
orange and fraying    As evidence  /
coroners   had   used   it   to   attach
to   his    father’s    calf     the     rope
his   father’d   used       /   This  man
planted    the   tape     in   our   yard
when   the    year   was    done   and
from  it  grew  thirteen  beams      /
From   these   beams    rafters   grew    
Ropes uncurled   from  these  rafters
and fathers  hanged  from the ropes    
/      Over    the    fathers     a     roof
blossomed        like         a       shield
and against it a ladder leaned  / The
ladder            was            so         tall
the  man   I    loved    said    it  must
have  ended in  heaven     And down    
/  from the ladder an angel  scurried
while    we    slept       In  its   mouth
it  carried   torn   strips     / of    tape    
The    angel     pressed      this    tape
on the  calves  of  the  man  I   loved
like   bandages       /  Each  morning
I removed the tape     I  was   careful
not to wake him     Each morning  /
he’d    walk    through   the    garden
of   swaying   fathers      He’d   kneel
beside  our rosemary bush     / He’d
rub its leaves in his hands  He’d ball
his hands in his hair to scent it   He
wanted           /   just      to       keep
his earthliness with him      / In hell
this is the only prerequisite
                

^^EOP^^

Where there’s blood, there are birds. 
After the war, many of the men’s faces are missing parts: an eye, a nose, a mouth. 
One doctor uses a man’s own rib to construct a new jaw. 
They call him the-man-who-fixes-faces. 
A body might stay whole in the trench, but who can resist looking up, sometimes, at the birds? 
You get out alive, maybe, but your face wears forever the look of what’s lost. 
The-man-who-fixes-faces might give you something like a face. 
Now all you see are faces turning away. 
A bullet wounds in a straight line, but shrapnel is feathery: it picks up dirt. 
The birds, it’s easy to forget, are filthy; a little bird in the blood can kill you. 
A square within a circle, the golden ratio, symmetry, they say, makes a face beautiful. 
Birds have two eyes, two legs, and two wings, but the soldier’s face is half here, half in the air. 
Mirrors can be psychologically damaging to birds. 
Birds are territorial. 
Birds keep going back to the fountain to check on that one bird beneath the water. 
In the park near the hospital, the-man-who-fixes-faces paints some of the benches blue. 
The blue benches are for the men whose faces are unrecognizable. 
I’ve seen a bird attack a window. 
If you don’t want to see a man healing, look up at the sky. 
Why is the sky blue? 
Symmetry: a line drawn from the sun through the zenith to the “anti-sun.” 
Like shrapnel, light scatters.


^^EOP^^




[ Tetsu schools her son ]



Bloomed no intention not no notion  of  a child but out you came. 
What some got natural mothery  know-to-do unborn in me. 
I been brought from cross the water far—  every bone a alien never not. 
(No soil no roots yall clinch so hard  for home gon’ be my home.) 
My flint mama was no lamp to me  nor well my name she gave means iron. 
Long nights back home we boiled our sea  for salt to sell the salt. 
On me mongst moss and spruce the uncles  and the sofu took their turns. 
Time and tide I’d had to burn  to (cauldron) boil the sea and eat the salt. 
Himself  who was your seed he called me  Steel when he would call me liked my sharp. 
Yes once you heard him down the  telephone (some breaths) the line broke off—


^^EOP^^

I gave up the pencil, the walk in woods, the fog
     at dawn, a keyhole I lost an eye to. 
And the habit of early, of acorn into oak—
      bent   tangled   choked because of ache or greed,
      or lousy light deemed it so. 
So what. Give up that so what. 
O fellow addicts of the arch and the tragic, give up
     the thousand-pound if and when too.
     Give up whatever made the bed or unmade it. 
Give up the know thing that shatters into other things
     and takes the remember fork in the road. 
The remember isn’t a road. 
At noon, the fog has no memory of fog, the trees I walked
      or wanted to. Like the pencil never recalls its least
      little mark, the dash loved, the comma which can’t, 
cannot dig down what its own brief nothing
      means on the page. I don’t understand death either. 
By afternoon, the brain is box, is breath let go, a kind of
    mood music agog, half emptied by the usual
    who am I, who are you, who’s anyone. 
Truth is, I listen all night for morning, all day
      for night in the trees draped like a sound I never quite
        
get how it goes. There’s a phantom self, nerved-up
      as any arm or leg. 
Of  course I was. Of course I stared from the yard,
      my mother at the window 
rinsing knife and spoon and the middle of her life. 
In drawing class, all eyes fix on the figure gone
       imaginary, thinning to paper. Not the wind or a cry
       how the hand makes, our bent to it— 
              pause and rush, rush and pause— 
small animals heard only at dark, spooked in the leaves.


^^EOP^^

Aba says in a blizzard, fill the bathtub.
With firewood. Aba says a leaky roof 
is a blessing. Provided
the bucket. To melt 
snow. With fire. We gather.
All the trees in Queens. Shake 
& shiver. My axe
cannot approximate. 
My axe is a plastic bottle. Filled with club 
soda. I wonder
when it unfreezes, 
will it explode. Aba says: Light
of my eyes, 
where are you getting your science. 
I no longer know. I used to believe
in string theory. But the field 
breaks. Too many. Rules. 
& you can’t quantify nor quantum
even a drop of rain—everything’s just 
too damn big. For models that would prove. The rules. Tried & still
not true. The roof is always leaking. The bathtub is a mass 
grave of trees. Aba says go outside
before it’s too late. But I have. I’ve seen. 
In a public bathroom I hide
with many other women 
from a storm. The leaky roof
fills with cinders & once more. 
A dead bird. One of us screams.
They all scream. When I pick him 
up off the slimy floor. Pick
the maggots from his body. 
Soon. I have the bathroom. To myself.
In public. I have an entire sanctuary. 
Of sorts. To mourn. When I bring the dead
home. Aba tears at his clothes & covers 
the mirrors. Won’t let me burn
the body. Says even birds died 
in the Shoah’s desperate, hungry hands.
Days before the bodies were turned 
to ash. Perhaps this bird too descends
from a lone survivor. We cry for 
his mother. We cry for my grandmother.
Free up the bathtub & flood our home. 
With rainwater. Float
a burning, empty pyre. 
I say: Aba, this isn’t what we do
either. Aba says: It’s too late 
to go outside. Which I do. I try.
I dig & dig. 
For dirt, defying
my father. 
I lose
the feeling 
in my hands. In snow
that doesn’t quite stick 
to the ground. Night falls
& his body stays warm 
under my layers
drenched. From 
sleet & sweat.
I won’t give 
in. Birds gather around me. Dark lights
against blue cement. They wait it out. 
They stay perfectly still.
Right out in the open.


^^EOP^^




What can you see elsewhere that you cannot see here? ... Had you never gone out and listened to idle talk, you would the better have remained perfectly at peace.
—Thomas à Kempis, The Imitation of Christ



The Queen of Sheba packed fenugreek,
turmeric, milled cardamom, desiccated
coconut, sweet almond oil, figs, fat
amber dates, green lemons, and mint,
onto a dozen knobbly camels. Let’s see,
Poetaster, how your sinuses like these!

^^EOP^^

I must be the heavy globe
of hydrangea, always bowing
by summer’s end. Must be salt,
like sadness at a burning city,
an ethical disobedience. I must be
a violet thorn of fire. These days
I don’t taste good, but I must
be singing and boneless, a lily.
I must beg for it, eyes flashing
silver as a fish. Must be a rosary
of listening. This is how I know
to love. I must hide under desks
when the forecast reads: leaves red
as meat, sleeping lions, chandelier
of bone, moon smooth as a worry
stone. I must want my life and fear
the thin justice of grass. Clouds
hunt, wound the rising tide. I must
be paradised. On my knees again.


^^EOP^^

One of the first I learned was the trinity, three persons in one
God: father, son, and holy spirit, née ghost. Then I started writing
JMJ on all my homework and tests, for good luck, but also because 
My ballpoint’s blue ink looked pretty beside the paper’s purple
Ink, like the inside of a clamshell when I teared up or squinted
From the smell. Sometimes the sheets were wet and curled like 
Petals reeking of gin, which is why it was called spirit duplication,
After the nonflammable alcohol used in the process. Jesus, Mary,
And Joseph, is what the three initials meant. I’d draw a cross from 
The descending caret of the M and think of Mary, the mother,
And of the other Mary, not, weeping at the limp feet of the crucified
Jesus. Where was Joseph, I wondered, but never asked. We seemed 
To pity him a little, for reasons I couldn’t name, like my father,
Who was both my father and a son, and soon to be the son of
His father’s ghost. When my grandmother was dying, she asked 
Her only child, my mother, to go with her. Mom waited decades
To obey, but she finally went. Together in one grave now, they are
Two Marys, maybe with the Jesus of their most solitary prayers, 
Petals littering their one stone’s four corners. Being motherless,
Like being childless, is both good and bad, I think,
And it is a third thing, too, that is neither of these.
 


^^EOP^^

I do kind gestures. Remove my appendix.
I put my ear to a flat shell and—nothing.
I play the lottery ironically. Get married.
Have a smear test. I put my ear to the beak
of a dead bird—nothing. I grow wisdom
teeth. Jog. I pick up a toddler’s telephone,
Hello?—No answer. I change a light bulb
on my own. Organize a large party. Hire
a clown. Attend a four-day stonewalling
course. Have a baby. Stop eating Coco Pops.
I put my ear right up to the slack and gaping
bonnet of a daffodil—. Get divorced. Floss.
Describe a younger person’s music taste as
“just noise.” Enjoy perusing a garden center.
Sit in a pub without drinking. I stand at the
lip of a pouting valley—speak to me!
My echo plagiarizes. I land a real love plus
two real cats. I never meet the talking bird
again. Or the yawning hole. The panther
of purple wisps who prowls inside the air.
I change nappies. Donate my eggs. Learn
a profound lesson about sacrifice. Brunch.
No singing floorboards. No vents leaking
scentless instructions. My mission is over.
The world has zipped up her second mouth.


^^EOP^^

The story tells us Sisyphus is being punished.
Over and over he has to push that boulder 
up and up. The mountain and God glaring.
And you, you have 
your avalanche of moods.
Pills the size of stars to nearly quell 
cascade and tumult.
And still you step 
gravity amplified by incline, each hazard
in the way of the boulder a reminder 
it should be easier. There should be
a hot fudge sundae at the top. A long nap in the shade. 
The story forgot to tell us, though, Sisyphus thrived. 
He learned to guide his wrists
and shoulder girdles safely to protect himself. 
And later he worked to safeguard every insect
from here to the crest. Considers this his calling. 
Even as the sun and the weight of time bears down.
Your strength is kingly.


^^EOP^^




After Cai Guo-Qiang



Quick, before the sun
rises, get up one more
time, my grandmother.
The artist won’t mind
if you borrow
his sky ladder.
Place your foot
on the bottom rung
and keep climbing,
even though
you’re a skeleton
with a broken neck
from falling downstairs
on Guy Fawkes night.
The ladder is wrapped
in gunpowder, and he’s
lit the touchpaper.
Your bones are ascending
firecrackers.
You’re half a kilometer
high now, halfway
to the universe,
my joy-gardener.
I hope you find a
garden with rich black
soil for your black
roses, hybrids like you—
half white half Indian,
half woman half flower,
their roots twined
through your skull,
you who were transplanted
among the pale roses
of a British family.
Your skin now a mix
of photons and soot.
What do you find up there?
Is there a hothouse?
Are there alien hands
with deft brushes
pollinating stars?
Remember how
your tomatoes kept
yielding more planets?
Are there constellations
of exotic fruit now
you’ve reached the top?
Have you gone back
enough in space-time
to when you were alive?
The ladder is charred,
the hot air balloon
that held it up
is about to collapse.
The explosions are over.
Cai showers his head
with champagne, as his
100-year-old granny
watches on her cell phone. Did you see it? He asks, did you hear the whoosh,
the rat-tat-tat
at the starry door?
You can go back
to sleep now

^^EOP^^

... who spoke late
echolalic, then in similes,
by the lake,
where the sticks were her
long mosquitoes, her lava
pyramid brown rice. Got a crush on a suffix,
giggled, blushed,
at every -tion. And there were
many, in conversation,
flirting with her.
Pre-dejection.
Pseudoabstraction. As she grew into
orchestration, a white
sport coat and a pink
carnation, crenellation,
inhalation—
had I known
too much lamentation? I, who have lived
isolation, seen sun
as lion,
its mane’s
diffusion; offered her
a turnip moon,
close-shaven.
Parental anomaly,
weird shared ions.
A word-prescription.
A nerve-ending infatuation. I’m blessed
she’s the termination of me,
last blood relation.
Daughter, if you follow land
to its suffix, there’s ocean,
which I know your toes,
bare, still-growing, slim,
will never shun.


^^EOP^^

One figure is female, the other is male.

Both are contained.

One figure is mythical, the other historical.

To the extent that one can be said to have existed at all, they occupy different millennia, different continents.

But, to the extent that one can be said to have existed at all, both figures are considered Asian—one from Colchis, one from Korea.

To mention the Asianness of the figures creates a “racial marker” in the poem.

This means that the poem can no longer pass as a white poem, that different people can be expected to read the poem, that they can be expected to read the poem in different ways.

To mention the Asianness of the figures is also to mention, by implication, the Asianness of the poet.

Revealing a racial marker in a poem is like revealing a gun in a story or like revealing a nipple in a dance.

After such a revelation, the poem is about race, the story is about the gun, the dance is about the body of the dancer—it is no longer considered a dance at all and is subject to regulation.

Topics that have this gravitational quality of aboutness are known as “hot button” topics, such as race, violence, or sex.

“Hot button” is a marketing term, coined by Walter Kiechel III, in a September 1978 issue of Fortune magazine.

The term evokes laboratory animals and refers to consumer desires that need to be slaked.

The term “hot button” suggests not only the slaking of such desires but also a shock or punishment for having acted on those desires, a deterrent to further actions pursuing such desires, and by extension, a deterrent to desire itself.

Violence and sex are examples of desires and can be satisfied, punished, and deterred.

Race is not usually considered an example of desire.

Both the female and the male figures are able to articulate their desires with an unusual degree of candor and specificity.

Both are responsible for many sexual deaths.

The male figure says, “When anger grips me, I cannot contain myself. Only after I kill something—a person, perhaps an animal, even a chicken—can I calm down.... I am sad that Your Majesty does not love me and terrified when you criticize me. All this turns to anger.” “Your Majesty,” here, refers to the king, his father.

The female figure is never directly quoted, but Pseudo-Apollodorus writes that she casts a spell upon the king her husband so that when he has sex with another woman, he ejaculates wild creatures into the woman’s vagina, thereby killing her. Although the punishment is enacted on the body of the woman, this punishment is meant to deter the king from slaking his desires.

Both figures, royal themselves, are angry at the king, but neither attempts to kill the king—which would be political. Instead they displace this anger onto other unnamed deaths, which are considered sexual but not political.

Both figures have spouses known for strategy, for self-preservation in  politically tumultuous times, times of many unnamed deaths.

Both figures are counterfoils to their strategizing spouses, figures of excessive  desire, requiring containment.

Both containers are wooden.

Both containers are camouflaged with a soft, yielding substance—one with grass, one with fur.

Both containers are ingenious solutions to seemingly intractable problems.

One problem is political. One problem is sexual.

They are both the same problem.

They have the same solution.

The male figure waits in the container for death to come. He waits for eight days. His son will live. This ensures the succession, the frictionless transfer of power.

The female figure waits in the container for the generation of a life. We do not know how long she waits. Her son will die, after waiting in his own wooden container. This ensures the succession, the frictionless transfer of power.

There are many artistic representations of both containers.

The male figure’s container is blockish, unadorned, a household object of standard size and quotidian function. Tourists climb into it and pose for photos, post them online. The cramped position of their bodies generates a combination of horror and glee. This, in turn, creates discomfort, the recognition that horror and glee should not be combined, that such a combination is taboo.

The female figure’s container is customized, lushly contoured. Its contours are excessively articulated to the same degree that her desire is excessively articulated. Artists depict the container in cutaway view, revealing the female figure within, awaiting the wild creature. The abject position of the female figure—on all fours, pressing her genitalia back against the hollow cow’s genitalia—generates a combination of lust and revenge. This, in turn, creates discomfort—the recognition that lust and revenge should not be combined, that wild creatures and female figures should not be combined, that these combinations are taboo.

Hot button topics are taboo because they generate discomfort.

The male figure slakes his violent desires and is punished. The male figure also functions as a hot button, a means whereby the violent desires of tourists  are slaked, while generating discomfort in these tourists.

The female figure slakes her sexual desires and is punished. The female  figure also functions as a hot button, a means whereby the sexual desires of artists are slaked, while generating discomfort in these artists.

The tourist can climb into the rice chest. The tourist can pose for a photo in the rice chest. Then the tourist can climb out of the rice chest and walk away.

The artist can look into the hollow cow. The artist can render the contours of the hollow cow, the contours of the female figure. Then the artist can walk away.

Both containers allow the tourist and artist to touch the hot button, the taboo.

The desire and the discomfort remain contained.

Both containers allow the tourist and the artist to walk away.

The male and female figures remain contained.

Neither container—the rice chest, the hollow cow—appears to have any necessary connection to race.

To mention race where it is not necessary to mention race is taboo.

I have not mentioned the race of the tourist or the artist.

The tourist and the artist are allowed to pass for white.

The tourist and the artist are not contained.

I have already mentioned the race of the poet.

But to the extent that the poet is not contained, the poet is allowed to pass for white.

I have already mentioned the race of the male and female figures.

The male and female figures are contained.

The rice chest and the hollow cow are containers.

The rice chest and the hollow cow are not the only containers in this poem.

Colchis and Korea are containers in this poem.

Asianness is a container in this poem.

Race is a container in this poem.

Each of these containers contains desire and its satisfaction.

Each of these containers contains discomfort and deterrence.

Each of these containers contains a hot button, a taboo.

The tourist and the artist can enter each of these containers.

The tourist and the artist can touch the hot button and walk away.

Each of these containers separates the slaking of desire from the punishment of desire.

Each of these containers is an ingenious solution to a seemingly intractable problem.

They are the same problem.

They have the same solution.

Each of these containers ensures the frictionless transfer of power.

Each of these containers holds a male or female figure.

The name of the male figure can be translated as “Think of me in sadness.”

The name of the female figure can be translated as “I shine for all of you.”


^^EOP^^

I hold two fingers to my head,
trigger my thumb, I say pow.
I slice my throat with a single stroke,
pull an invisible blade
vertically along my vein.
Remember the deaths we did together?
Twiddling oven knobs in the air
then thrusting our chins to inhale?
I loved you so much
during that experimental play
when you slowly leant forward to nick
your femoral artery then quietly
bled out in your seat until curtain call,
blood only we saw.
As well as death, we’d mime marriage.
I’d slide on a spectral ring
and you’d shiver at the thrill
of my thumb and fingertip
sealing the deal for a second till
the thought melted back into your skin.
I am proficient at beginnings,
the Air Year: the anniversary prior to paper
for which ephemeral gifts are traditional.
Only after our rings became solid
silver did they truly disappear.
Now the house is a mime scene.
Mime blood all over the floor,
trodden into carpet fibers,
shirts, bras, dried to an airy crust
under my nails. I slit
my neck at the traffic lights,
pow on the train, I suspend
my non-knife above my head,
“see what you’re making me do.”
Red whirls rise from the cuts.
All these huge thoughts come to
nothing. My shadow is
the chalk outline of a woman
who did not jump.


^^EOP^^

On this night
             I remember Nachshon
             who was not Moses who
                         walked into the Red Sea
                         and called for God
                                                  to meet him there
On this night
             I am only a body and you
                                                  are only a body
On this night
                         nothing is hidden
                         only the afikomen
On this night
                         God was here and I
                                                            I knew it


^^EOP^^

my mouth hurts / i’m still dreaming / of hamburgers / of childhood / of the delicate clacking / of baby teeth / it’s foreign / even when i hold / myself /  i keep tonguing my toothache / ripping the grass from the dirt / and trying to tie the blades in knots / again / the irritation / the bottle full of milk / that will always spill / or spoil / sometimes i’m a lover / of my own dysfunction / sometimes / i list out all the sharp spots / try to floss them out / mop the spill with paper towel / mail you a postcard / from my mouth / inscribe it with a paradox / is being full / of cavities / the same as being empty / or just another iteration / of the holy body


^^EOP^^

The fools nearly killed me trying to make me one of them:
a loaded word of  bond with dress codes and penal codes,
postured allegiant to the culture as with the flying of flags
from knots tied on the back of  head wraps worn hoods over. 
I can’t gunpoint when the life of this alter ego began though
the possibility can’t be dismissed it began at gunpoint in a way,
with an icy pressure against the temple, the mind splitting into two
tracks while a circus of peers clowned. Going back far too long
now, the camera has blurred my edges in the suggestion of motion
even if  I stood as still as the air does before shit really hits the fan. 
I truly went ass-first into fronting indifference, forbade my happy
teeth from public reveal lest they pop the balloon of my perfectly
round face, baby-angled, already read as kind or innocent or soft
from the jump when I wanted respect on my name and women on
my lap like it was said I should. And, shamefully, I did. Several
sistas come to mind here and this doesn’t make me feel good;
a tender touch in the moonlight goes only so far for a shadow. 
I had to break it down for myself that being down represented
the fear of having fear. I still shake when the wind blows,
scary as ever, thespian as always in all ways toward the ghost
of a threat or disrespect passed through me then through me,
through a thin skin then through the skin. So, to compensate—
a mask, what Dunbar’s bars beat home way back when about
standing in the presence of the pale folks, only that idea flipped
upside down, what’d be a forced smile slicing the face open like
some summertime melon instead setting scowl folds into smooth
forehead, brown eyes set at the mouth’s corners, fixing it in the
position of silence like rusty nails. If carrying nothing else,
I learned to bring this exact look to the danger because being me
to the fullest would be a liability, provide a sharper image for the
hidden cameras to home in on; yes, just that fast—a certified blue,
strolling up to the screen door with a heavy hand for knocking and
his true hand resting so sweetly on his gun. My gun, I should say,
since in this case the cop is also me, like that little angel or devil
used as sitcom trope. Just imagine the person coming for you
being  you every time: don’t trip, you’d say, unless into the fight.


^^EOP^^




We shelter an angel whom we never cease to offend. We ought to be the guardians of that angel.
—Jean Cocteau



A scherzo of thumbnail butterflies, white ones,
Covers the hillside. God is more
Adorable than music. Nevertheless,
On a given morning, as the wind drops,
Music pries Heaven apart from itself,
Like flowers beneath the wings unfolded on them. 
Every breeze is self-registering.
This morning, I walked deeper into the hill,
Free of the sun. Midway up the tallest trees,
One leaf alone would stir while all the leaves
On the very same branch remained stock-still.
Apart from itself, Heaven signaled to me. 
William Blake was no romantic. He was,
Beyond the arsons of levity and his toe,
The final bulwark of the baroque.
He was the last to oppose, “almost
Successfully,” rebirth on all the wrong terms.
He saw the leaf alone where no light was. 
Infinite variation plays against
A steadfast variety. The butterfly
Knows the difference in its wings, even
As the flower she alights upon darkens
Beneath her weight. The sun goes deeper
Into the hill. Root systems and riot shine. 
Did you think for a moment Earth
Was aware of itself? Never. Its adoration
Persists altogether elsewhere from
The very beginning, beginning again
Just at that moment one leaf all alone
Spins into the baroque, a scherzo of one note. 
The hillside is covered with little doors,
And the wind rises out of them, returning,
When the music is spent, with all the news
Of the unaware, unreflecting, nearly perfect
Hours blindly about the business of perfection.
Hence the tiny eyes on a butterfly’s wing. 
Rebirth is an idiot. Isolated
Each into its own eternity,
Like every pain, birth continues out of mind
Deeper into the hill. Earth riots
With levity. Darkness swims into light.
Flowers begin to imagine the life of flowers. 
Heaven signals to me, pouring down shade
Out of the canopy of trees, prying
The sunlight apart from itself. Darkness
And light are the same thing. Music moves
Effortlessly between the two, made of nothing
But wings, wings with eyes, no end in sight.


^^EOP^^

 the unknown has hold of me and its grip is strong as honey on the underside of a spoon   
 
the unknown i mean is not the usual one the future the tomorrow of survival         
 
but the past and what happened in the name of the name after mine and in the name of the name before mine     
 
i do not know enough to speak i do not know enough to remain silent        
 
there is a fear that holds me and it sounds like wind it sounds like katydids in catalpa        
 
ah the tall grass of the days before i knew there was a before me    
 
where do i live if there’s no home remaining
 
where do i live if the home i helped build can never be mine and the one i was born into never was         
 


^^EOP^^

Part of suffering is the useless urge to announce that you’re suffering.
 
There is no other way to say it: I’m suffering. Just to say “I suffer”
helps.
 
I read somewhere, “we become lyrical when we suffer.”
 
Happiness is suffering for the right reasons.
 
First-order suffering is second-order happiness.
 
You have to suffer for beauty? Because you have to suffer.
 
We pride ourselves on a high quality of suffering.
 
Turgenev was born in 1818 in the Province of Orel, and suffered
during his childhood from a tyrannical mother.
 
In the past their suffering was less absurd.
 
The problem is, everything’s worse. Like, paper or plastic? We’re all
still going to die suffering.
 
I value being alone with my thoughts, but it’s weird to say, “This
thing that makes us suffer less, we have to stop doing it.”
 
Isn’t it kind of the point of culture to assuage our feeling needless
and alone?
 
How does one suffer “gladly,” exactly?
 
At least the rich get to suffer in comfort.
 
It makes the life feel longer. Live to suffer another day.
 
One’s past suffering can be a great source of comfort. A torturous
luxury. Velvet upholstery.
 
Suffering is happiness, after forty minutes of desolate shuffling. The
point is, life is suffering.
 
About suffering, no one is ever wrong.
 


^^EOP^^

I pass a woman on the beach.
We both wear graying hair,
feel sand between our toes,
hear surf, and see blue sky.
I came with a smile.
She came to get one. 
No.  I'm wrong. 
She sits on a boulder
by a cairn of stacked rocks.
Hands over her heart,
she stares out to sea.
Today's my turn to hold the joy,
hers the sorrow.


^^EOP^^




what is at first a bodily impression turns out to be a condition of knowing
—Judith Butler



    in the airport terminal I sit down in a row of chairs without looking at the man in the chair beside me… my chair is adjacent to a narrow formica table where I set the coffee and muffin I’ve bought… I’m tempted to look at the man sitting on the other side of the formica table but I do not want to take a chance and meet his eyes… a familiar animosity must be what warns me off… warnings that I realize are chewable I’m learning are better swallowed… I watch how this man expresses affront toward me without interrupting his focus on his cell phone… the formica table between us isn’t wide enough for him to have the distance from me he requires… this next  sensation has nothing to do with what he knows… though I react as if it could… his disgust is my own as I lie on my side my knees to my chest… in a bed I am a child with my mother her body moving… her body wrapped too close around me… nothing about this should surprise me… nothing is the space between one breath and the next… even if the space is decades long…


^^EOP^^

magnolias & forsythia blossom
from yr Sugar Hill/ Ray Drummond
plays nasty riffs & i imagine
alla the Palm Cafe turns out
when you glow at dusk on
Convent Avenue/ slidin easily by
the just-for-us propositions Gylan Kain
fashioned at every other Harlem corner/
we usedta leave deluxe issues of
love potions/ remedies even insinuations
danglin from Baptist steeples/ Methodist steps
jump back/ jump up/ beatin down/ flyin
yng wenches whose skirts still
tease solos over to the Savoy/
 
        (you cd make yrself irresistible/ be my
            Willis Avenue Bridge/ floatin/ Rican wet
               su lengua dulce/ over an East River of
                 gardenias/ remember the minor sixth)
you hummed to me while I was
reachin for the/ ceilin/ where our
folks was carryin on before Michelangelo
or Lionel Richie/ some where round there
where you brush up gainst baobabs/ well
                 (you know where my beauty marks are/ all
over
HARLEM)
we sing like flowers/ i see
round brown honies giggle at us/ the
silly/ niggahness of yr quick light
kisses/ cómo fresh/ mi chabalo negro/ mi propio Tito
Puente/
       my own rhythm section/ that petal
   opening every time yr lips/ let
love/ cada vez / yr lips
let love fall/ all
over
Sugar Hill
        


^^EOP^^




(for gail, tracie & viola)



whatever shall i do with my dead
my tombs & mausoleums
these potted plants tended by strangers
over yr eyes        closed
maybe dreaming      dead/ loved
so particularly       i dont know
what to do with you
 
shall i see you dancin/
hold yr child askin/       what’s mammy like
should i sleep with yr husband
who sees yr childself in my memories
yr mother       will she bosom talk me to death with you
pretend she has been no mother
our smokey robinson fantasies set aside
recollections comin to no good end
 
grandma/ grandma
must i ride with yr daughters to sit
in the cemetery on sunny days/ weedin
yr womb/ wdnt it be better if i stayed
in my kitchen/ makin gumbo/ codfish cakes
watchin edge of nite/
rubbin me hands of my apron/ hummin
his eye is on the sparrow
yr photograph at 25 is on my wall
awready you had given yr woman over/
no one wd know you/ only mama is remembered
when waz there more
i shall not lie fondling a dead man’s love
bakin apples for a locket jammed with hair from
a head no longer arrogant
but what shall i do
with my dead/ loved so particularly
leavin me/ specifically
 
some never stop breathin
wantin kisses
some disappear/ slammin the door
bangin the phone
one went off in a VW bus/ another
stole my sleep
 
i sit here drinking memories
entertainin ghosts/ longin for arms
no longer warm/ too enchanted
to tend the pulse pushin me on
to go off from you/ my dead & loved ones
 
when i meet a someone/ i must know
i place you round me like a court of holy seers
if this stranger is to have a space in my life
she must pull yr spirits to her own
for i wander regularly in moments of the dead
if you wd have me speak
you must learn the tongue of my dead & loved ones
i have been left behind
a survivor
holdin out for more
 


^^EOP^^

it hasnt always been this way
ellington was not a street
robeson no mere memory
du bois walked up my father’s stairs
hummed some tune over me
sleeping in the company of men
who changed the world
 
it wasnt always like this
why ray barretto used to be a side-man
& dizzy’s hair was not always grey
i remember            i was there
i listened in the company of men
politics as necessary as collards
music even in our dreams
 
our house was filled with all kinda folks
our windows were not cement or steel
our doors opened like our daddy’s arms
held us safe & loved
children growing in the company of men
old southern men & young slick ones
sonny til was not a boy
the clovers no rag-tag orphans
our crooners/ we belonged to a whole world
nkrumah was no foreigner
virgil aikens was not the only fighter
 
it hasnt always been this way
ellington was not a street
 


^^EOP^^




(for david)



these kisses are clandestine
no one can see them
i hold them in my hand
shd i be discovered/
i stick them in my hair & my head gets hot
so i haveta excuse myself
 
under no circumstances
can the legs that slip over my hips
leave tellin marks/ scents
of love/ this wd be unpardonable
so i am all the time
rubbin my arms/ exposing myself
to river mists/ to mask the sweetness
you leave me swillin in
 
i cant allow you to look at me
how you do so i am naked & wantin
to be explored like a honeysuckle patch
when you look at me how you do so
i am all lips & thigh/
my cover is blown & the kisses
run free/ only to hover sulkin over
yr cheek/ while i pretend
they are not mine
cuz its happenin/ but you dont know abt it
 
this kisses they take a slow blues walk
back to me
in the palm of my hand
they spread out/ scratch kick curse & punch
til my skin cries/
kisses raisin hell/ in my fists/
they fly out mad & eager
they’ll fly out mad & eager
if you look at me how you do so i am naked
& wantin/ if you look at me how you do so
i am all lips & thigh/
they gonna fly out mad & eager
they fly out & climb on you
the kisses/ they
flyin
if you look at me
how you do so
 


^^EOP^^

      st. louis/ such a colored town/ a whiskey
black space of history & neighborhood/ forever ours/
      to lawrenceville/ where the only road open
to me/ waz cleared by colonial slaves/ whose children never
moved/ never seems like/ mended the torments of the Depression
the stains of demented spittle/ dropped from lips of crystal women/
still makin independence flags/
      from st. louis/ on a halloween’s eve to the veiled prophet/
usurpin the mystery of mardi gras/ made it mine tho the queen
waz always fair/ that parade/ of pagan floats & tambourines/
commemoratin me/ unlike the lonely walks wit liberal trick or
treaters/ back to my front door/ bag half empty/
      my face enuf to scare anyone i passed/ a colored kid/
whatta gas                      1) here                        a tree                       wonderin the horizon                       dipped in blues &                       untended bones                       usedta hugs drawls                       rhythm & decency                       here a tree                       waitin to be hanged
 
       sumner high school/ squat & pale on the corner/ like
our vision/ waz to be vague/ our memory
of the war/ that made us free to be forgotten
becomin paler/ a linear movement from south carolina
to missouri/ freedman/ landin in jackie wilson’s yelp/ daughters of
the manumitted swimmin in tina turner’s grinds/ this is chuck
berry’s town/ disavowin misega-nation/ in any situation/ & they let
us be/ electric blues & bo diddley’s cant/ rockin pneumonia &
boogie-woogie flu/ the slop & short-fried heads/ running always to
the river
 
               / from chambersbourg/ lil italy/ i passed everyday
at the sweet shoppe/ & waz afraid/ the cops raided truants/
regularly/ after dark i wd not be seen/ wit any other colored/
sane/ lovin my life/
            in the 'bourg/ seriously expectin to be gnarled/
hey niggah/ over here/
             & behind the truck lay five hands claspin chains/
round the trees/ 4 more sucklin steel/
                                                                   hey niggah/ over here/
this is the borderline/
a territorial dispute/
 
                                                                   hey/ niggah/
over here/
               cars loaded wit families/ fellas from the factory/ one or two
practical nurses/ black/ become our trenches/ some dig into cement
wit elbows/ under engines/ do not be seen/ in yr hometown/ after
sunset we suck up our shadows/ 
              2) i will sit here
                   my shoulders brace an enormous oak                          dreams waddle in my lap                          round to miz bertha’s where lil richard                          gets his process                          runs backwards to the rosebushes/ a drunk man/ lyin                          down the block to the nuns in pink habits                          prayin in a pink chapel                          my dreams run to meet aunt marie                          my dreams draw blood from ol sores                                     these stains & scars are mine                                                 this is my space                                                          i am not movin
 
 


^^EOP^^

A bed sheet hung out to dry
became a screen for shadow animals.
But of all laundry days in the neighborhood
the windy ones were best,
the clothespins like little men riding
lines that tried to buck them off.
One at a time we ran down the aisles
between snapping sheets
that wanted to put us in our place.
Timing them, you faked and cut
like famous halfbacks. But if a sheet
tagged you it put you down, pinned
by the whiteness floating
against a sky washed by the bluing
our mothers added to the wash water.
Could anyone make it through those days
untouched? You waited for
your chance, then jumped up and finished
the course, rising if you fell again.
Later, let the sky darken suddenly
and we'd be sent out to empty the lines.
All up and down the block, kids
running with bed sheets in their arms,
running like firemen rescuing children.
All night those sheets lay draped
over furniture, as though we were leaving
and would not return for a long time.


^^EOP^^

my grandpa waz a doughboy from carolina
the other a garveyite from lakewood
i got talked to abt the race & achievement
bout color & propriety/
nobody spoke to me about the moon
 
daddy talked abt music & mama bout christians
my sisters/ we
always talked & talked
there waz never quiet
trees were status symbols
 
i’ve taken to fog/
the moon still surprisin me
 


^^EOP^^

In zero cold the engine's slow
to turn over, coughing
awake like my father sitting on the edge
of the bed staring at the blue linoleum floor,
coughing again, lifting his heavy body
into another day on the railroad section gang,
the icy wind through Lehigh Gap blasting
down on him as he raises the sledge hammer
and strains against the crowbar.
But now he's drinking coffee,
looking toward the dark window,
thinking of what?
Maybe watching Friday Night Fights
or ordering tomato seeds,
maybe the ghostly face in the window
staring back at him.


^^EOP^^




(for beverly)



when i write    i think of my friends
the people of my visions
but how cd i presume to think of men
who leave so little behind     i find them
in my wash cloth    in the dirty dishes
by my unmade bed
when i write i erase these dark halls
lone subway stops   the car followin
too closely    how cd i presume
to address my self
to men
they leave so little behind
& still i dont remember.
 
once a poet
delivered valentino
on a tie-dyed sheet w/
tequila passion
the sheik gallopin a desert for me
another sketched me
in the midst of bougainvillea
another saturated my basement with painted skeletons
long ago a poet
telephoned from ny
to have breakfast
in seattle
 
i’ve waded in hidden creeks
with the men i remember
the others had no sense of humor
 


^^EOP^^

Abandoned house roofless three walls
no floor a ruin if you think house—
 
to brown towhees a place to scratch
in the leaves for bugs and worms,
 
for the male to sing a territorial song
from what remains of the chimney—
 
an imagination problem like the time
friends said we must be very happy
 
in the beautiful house we built because
they couldn't see the ruins inside us.


^^EOP^^

The storm was headed in our direction—
big loom of gray like the absolute West
leaned over us. Reports of damage
in the neighboring counties—a silo unfurled
and took wing, a house trailer
twisted loose. On the Doppler screen
the storm looked alive, yellow and green
at the fringes, with a fierce red heart
trending to violet. Sirens swept over
to scare it away, like songbirds
grow strident, circle and bluff
at the sight of an owl.
When the rain came in sheets,
I regretted my sins. When lightning
cracked the red pine's half-rotted heart,
I wished the world more joy
in general. When the worst was over
and the grass lay flat, but alive,
and the sky was a waning bruise,
I thought of that silo, how it wasn't mine,
and all that grain cast back into the world's
wind, maybe some of it still flying.


^^EOP^^

Where in the world
does my mother go, eyes
shut so tight her lower lashes
curl in toward a view
that's hers alone?
Yesterday she told
me—after the rains, the winds came, and this morning
that's what they do.


^^EOP^^

First day of February,
and in the far corner of the yard
the Adirondack chair,
blown over by the wind at Christmas,
is still on its back,
the snow too deep for me
to traipse out and right it,
the ice too sheer
to risk slamming these old bones
to the ground.
In a hospital bed in her room
where her bed used to be,
and her husband,
my Aunt Millie keeps reaching up
for the far corner of the room,
whispering That is so interesting. I will go now.
In April
I will walk out
across the warming grass,
and right the chair
as if there had never been anything
to stop me in the first place,
listening for the buzz of hummingbirds
which reminds me of how fast
things are capable of moving.


^^EOP^^

       Thus, weary of life, in view of the great consummation which awaits us — tomorrow, we rush among our friends congratulating ourselves upon the joy soon to be. Thoughtless of evil we crush out the marrow of those about us with our heavy cars as we go happily from place to place. It seems that there is not time enough in which to speak the full of our exaltation. Only a day is left, one miserable day, before the world comes into its own. Let us hurry ! Why bother for this man or that ? In the offices of the great newspapers a mad joy reigns as they prepare the final extras. Rushing about, men bump each other into the whirring presses. How funny it seems. All thought of misery has left us. Why should we care ? Children laughingly fling themselves under the wheels of the street cars, airplanes crash gaily to the earth. Someone has written a poem.
 
       Oh life, bizarre fowl, what color are your wings ? Green, blue, red, yellow, purple, white, brown, orange, black, grey ? In the imagination, flying above the wreck of ten thousand million souls, I see you departing sadly for the land of plants and insects, already far out to sea. (Thank you, I know well what I am plagiarising) Your great wings flap as you disappear in the distance over the pre-Columbian acres of floating weed.
 
       The new cathedral overlooking the park, looked down from its towers today, with great eyes, and saw by the decorative lake a group of people staring curiously at the corpse of a suicide : Peaceful, dead young man, the money they have put into the stones has been spent to teach men of life’s austerity. You died and teach us the same lesson. You seem a cathedral, celebrant of the spring which shivers for me among the long black trees.


^^EOP^^

Before man came to blow it right
     The wind once blew itself untaught,
And did its loudest day and night
     In any rough place where it caught.
 
Man came to tell it what was wrong:
     It hadn’t found the place to blow;
It blew too hard—the aim was song.
     And listen—how it ought to go!
 
He took a little in his mouth,
     And held it long enough for north
To be converted into south,
     And then by measure blew it forth.
 
By measure. It was word and note,
     The wind the wind had meant to be—
A little through the lips and throat.
     The aim was song—the wind could see.
 


^^EOP^^

 I burned my life, that I might find
A passion wholly of the mind,
Thought divorced from eye and bone,
Ecstasy come to breath alone.
I broke my life, to seek relief
From the flawed light of love and grief.
 
With mounting beat the utter fire
Charred existence and desire.
It died low, ceased its sudden thresh.
I had found unmysterious flesh—
Not the mind’s avid substance—still
Passionate beyond the will.
 
 


^^EOP^^

All in green went my love riding
on a great horse of gold
into the silver dawn.
 
four lean hounds crouched low and smiling
the merry deer ran before.
 
Fleeter be they than dappled dreams
the swift sweet deer
the red rare deer.
 
Four red roebuck at a white water
the cruel bugle sang before.
 
Horn at hip went my love riding
riding the echo down
into the silver dawn.
 
four lean hounds crouched low and smiling
the level meadows ran before.
 
Softer be they than slippered sleep
the lean lithe deer
the fleet flown deer.
 
Four fleet does at a gold valley
the famished arrow sang before.
 
Bow at belt went my love riding
riding the mountain down
into the silver dawn.
 
four lean hounds crouched low and smiling
the sheer peaks ran before.
 
Paler be they than daunting death
the sleek slim deer
the tall tense deer.
 
Four tall stags at a green mountain
the lucky hunter sang before.
 
All in green went my love riding
on a great horse of gold
into the silver dawn.
 
four lean hounds crouched low and smiling
my heart fell dead before.
 


^^EOP^^

In the moonlight
I met Berserk,
In the moonlight
On the bushy plain.
 
Oh, sharp he was
As the sleepless!
 
And, “Why are you red
In this milky blue?”
I said.
“Why sun-colored,
As if awake
In the midst of sleep?”
 
“You that wander,”
So he said,
“On the bushy plain,
Forget so soon.
But I set my traps
In the midst of dreams.”
 
I knew from this
That the blue ground
Was full of blocks
And blocking steel.
I knew the dread
Of the bushy plain,
And the beauty
Of the moonlight
Falling there,
Falling
As sleep falls
In the innocent air.
 


^^EOP^^

Within this black hive to-night
There swarm a million bees;
Bees passing in and out the moon,
Bees escaping out the moon,
Bees returning through the moon,
Silver bees intently buzzing,
Silver honey dripping from the swarm of bees
Earth is a waxen cell of the world comb,
And I, a drone,
Lying on my back,
Lipping honey,
Getting drunk with that silver honey,
Wish that I might fly out past the moon
And curl forever in some far-off farmyard flower.
 


^^EOP^^

You have put your two hands upon me, and your mouth,
You have said my name as a prayer.
Here where trees are planted by the water
I have watched your eyes, cleansed from regret,
And your lips, closed over all that love cannot say,
 
         My mother remembers the agony of her womb
         And long years that seemed to promise more than this.
         She says, “You do not love me,
         You do not want me,
         You will go away.”
 
         In the country whereto I go
         I shall not see the face of my friend
         Nor her hair the color of sunburnt grasses;
         Together we shall not find
         The land on whose hills bends the new moon
         In air traversed of birds.
         
What have I thought of love?
I have said, “It is beauty and sorrow.”
I have thought that it would bring me lost delights, and splendor
As a wind out of old time. . .
 
But there is only the evening here,
And the sound of willows
Now and again dipping their long oval leaves in the water.
 


^^EOP^^

the bigness of cannon
is skilful,
 
but i have seen
death’s clever enormous voice
which hides in a fragility
of poppies. . . .
 
i say that sometimes
on these long talkative animals
are laid fists of huger silence.
 
I have seen all the silence
filled with vivid noiseless boys
 
at Roupy
i have seen
between barrages,
 
the night utter ripe unspeaking girls.
 


^^EOP^^

Before the unseen cock had called the time,
     Those workers left their beds and stumbled out
Into the street, where dust lay white as lime
     Under the last star that keeps bats about.
Then blinking still from bed, they trod the street,
     The doors closed up and down ;  the traveller heard
Doors opened, closed, then silence, then men’s feet
     Moving to toil, the men too drowsed for word.
The bean-field was a greyness as they passed,
     The darkness of the hedge was starred with flowers,
The moth, with wings like dead leaves, sucked his last,
     The triumphing cock cried out with all his powers ;
His fire of crying made the twilight quick,
Then clink, clink, clink, men’s trowels tapped the brick.
 
I saw the delicate man who built the tower
     Look from the turret at the ground below,
The granite column wavered like a flower,
     But stood in air whatever winds might blow.
Its roots were in the rock, its head stood proud,
     No earthly forest reared a head so high ;
Sometimes the eagle came there, sometimes cloud,
     It was man’s ultimate footstep to the sky.
And in that peak the builder kept his treasure,
     Books with the symbols of his art, the signs
Of knowledge in excitement, skill in pleasure,
     The edge that cut, the rule that kept the lines.
He who had seen his tower beneath the grass,
Rock in the earth, now smiled, because it was.
 
How many thousand men had done his will,  
     Men who had hands, or arms, or strength to spend,
Or cunning with machines, or art, or skill !
     All had obeyed him, working to this end.      
Hundreds in distant lands had given their share
     Of power, to deck it ;  on its every stone
Their oddity of pleasure was laid bare,
     Yet was the tower his offspring, his alone.
His inner eye had seen, his will had made it,
     All the opposing army of men’s minds
Had bowed, had turned, had striven as he bade it,
     Each to his purpose in their myriad kinds.
Now it was done, and in the peak he stood
Seeing his work, and smiled to find it good.
 
It had been stone, earth’s body, hidden deep,
     Lightless and shapeless, where it cooled and hardened.
Now it was as the banner on man’s keep
     Or as the Apple in Eden where God gardened.
Lilies of stone ran round it, and like fires
     The tongues of crockets shot from it and paused,
Horsemen who raced were carven on’t, the spires
     Were bright with gold ;  all this the builder caused.
And standing there, it seemed that all the hive
     Of human skill which now it had become,
Was stone no more, nor building, but alive,
     Trying to speak, this tower that was dumb,
 Trying to speak, nay, speaking, soul to soul
With powers who are, to raven or control
 


^^EOP^^

I came an errand one cloud-blowing evening
To a slab-built, black-paper-covered house
Of one room and one window and one door,
The only dwelling in a waste cut over
A hundred square miles round it in the mountains:
And that not dwelt in now by men or women.
(It never had been dwelt in, though, by women,
So what is this I make a sorrow of?)
I came as census-taker to the waste
To count the people in it and found none,
None in the hundred miles, none in the house,
Where I came last with some hope, but not much,
After hours’ overlooking from the cliffs
An emptiness flayed to the very stone.
I found no people that dared show themselves,
None not in hiding from the outward eye.
The time was autumn, but how anyone
Could tell the time of year when every tree
That could have dropped a leaf was down itself
And nothing but the stump of it was left
Now bringing out its rings in sugar of pitch;
And every tree up stood a rotting trunk
Without a single leaf to spend on autumn,
Or branch to whistle after what was spent.
Perhaps the wind the more without the help
Of breathing trees said something of the time
Of year or day the way it swung a door
Forever off the latch, as if rude men
Passed in and slammed it shut each one behind him
For the next one to open for himself.
I counted nine I had no right to count
(But this was dreamy unofficial counting)
Before I made the tenth across the threshold.
Where was my supper? Where was anyone’s?
No lamp was lit. Nothing was on the table.
The stove was cold—the stove was off the chimney—
And down by one side where it lacked a leg.
The people that had loudly passed the door
Were people to the ear but not the eye.
They were not on the table with their elbows.
They were not sleeping in the shelves of bunks.
I saw no men there and no bones of men there.
I armed myself against such bones as might be
With the pitch-blackened stub of an ax-handle
I picked up off the straw-dust covered floor.
Not bones, but the ill-fitted window rattled.
The door was still because I held it shut
While I thought what to do that could be done—
About the house—about the people not there.
This house in one year fallen to decay
Filled me with no less sorrow than the houses
Fallen to ruin in ten thousand years
Where Asia wedges Africa from Europe.
Nothing was left to do that I could see
Unless to find that there was no one there
And declare to the cliffs too far for echo,
“The place is desert, and let whoso lurks
In silence, if in this he is aggrieved,
Break silence now or be forever silent.
Let him say why it should not be declared so.”
The melancholy of having to count souls
Where they grow fewer and fewer every year
Is extreme where they shrink to none at all.
It must be I want life to go on living. 


^^EOP^^

 
                                 i          The World without Imagination 
Nota: man is the intelligence of his soil,
The sovereign ghost. As such, the Socrates
Of snails, musician of pears, principium
And lex. Sed quaeritur: is this same wig
Of things, this nincompated pedagogue,
Preceptor to the sea? Crispin at sea
Created, in his day, a touch of doubt.
An eye most apt in gelatines and jupes,
Berries of villages, a barber's eye,
An eye of land, of simple salad-beds,
Of honest quilts, the eye of Crispin, hung
On porpoises, instead of apricots,
And on silentious porpoises, whose snouts
Dibbled in waves that were mustachios,
Inscrutable hair in an inscrutable world. 
One eats one paté, even of salt, quotha.
It was not so much the lost terrestrial,
The snug hibernal from that sea and salt,
That century of wind in a single puff.
What counted was mythology of self,
Blotched out beyond unblotching. Crispin,
The lutanist of fleas, the knave, the thane,
The ribboned stick, the bellowing breeches, cloak
Of China, cap of Spain, imperative haw
Of hum, inquisitorial botanist,
And general lexicographer of mute
And maidenly greenhorns, now beheld himself,
A skinny sailor peering in the sea-glass.
What word split up in clickering syllables
And storming under multitudinous tones
Was name for this short-shanks in all that brunt?
Crispin was washed away by magnitude.
The whole of life that still remained in him
Dwindled to one sound strumming in his ear,
Ubiquitous concussion, slap and sigh,
Polyphony beyond his baton's thrust. 
Could Crispin stem verboseness in the sea,
The old age of a watery realist,
Triton, dissolved in shifting diaphanes
Of blue and green? A wordy, watery age
That whispered to the sun's compassion, made
A convocation, nightly, of the sea-stars,
And on the cropping foot-ways of the moon
Lay grovelling. Triton incomplicate with that
Which made him Triton, nothing left of him,
Except in faint, memorial gesturings,
That were like arms and shoulders in the waves,
Here, something in the rise and fall of wind
That seemed hallucinating horn, and here,
A sunken voice, both of remembering
And of forgetfulness, in alternate strain.
Just so an ancient Crispin was dissolved.
The valet in the tempest was annulled.
Bordeaux to Yucatan, Havana next,
And then to Carolina. Simple jaunt.
Crispin, merest minuscule in the gates,
Dejected his manner to the turbulence.
The salt hung on his spirit like a frost,
The dead brine melted in him like a dew
Of winter, until nothing of himself
Remained, except some starker, barer self
In a starker, barer world, in which the sun
Was not the sun because it never shone
With bland complaisance on pale parasols,
Beetled, in chapels, on the chaste bouquets.
Against his pipping sounds a trumpet cried
Celestial sneering boisterously. Crispin
Became an introspective voyager. 
Here was the veritable ding an sich, at last,
Crispin confronting it, a vocable thing,
But with a speech belched out of hoary darks
Noway resembling his, a visible thing,
And excepting negligible Triton, free
From the unavoidable shadow of himself
That lay elsewhere around him. Severance
Was clear. The last distortion of romance
Forsook the insatiable egotist. The sea
Severs not only lands but also selves.
Here was no help before reality.
Crispin beheld and Crispin was made new.
The imagination, here, could not evade,
In poems of plums, the strict austerity
Of one vast, subjugating, final tone.
The drenching of stale lives no more fell down.
What was this gaudy, gusty panoply?
Out of what swift destruction did it spring?
It was caparison of mind and cloud
And something given to make whole among
The ruses that were shattered by the large.
 
                                  ii Concerning the Thunderstorms of Yucatan 
In Yucatan, the Maya sonneteers
Of the Caribbean amphitheatre,
In spite of hawk and falcon, green toucan
And jay, still to the night-bird made their plea,
As if raspberry tanagers in palms,
High up in orange air, were barbarous.
But Crispin was too destitute to find
In any commonplace the sought-for aid.
He was a man made vivid by the sea,
A man come out of luminous traversing,
Much trumpeted, made desperately clear,
Fresh from discoveries of tidal skies,
To whom oracular rockings gave no rest.
Into a savage color he went on. 
How greatly had he grown in his demesne,
This auditor of insects! He that saw
The stride of vanishing autumn in a park
By way of decorous melancholy; he
That wrote his couplet yearly to the spring,
As dissertation of profound delight,
Stopping, on voyage, in a land of snakes,
Found his vicissitudes had much enlarged
His apprehension, made him intricate
In moody rucks, and difficult and strange
In all desires, his destitution's mark.
He was in this as other freemen are,
Sonorous nutshells rattling inwardly.
His violence was for aggrandizement
And not for stupor, such as music makes
For sleepers halfway waking. He perceived
That coolness for his heat came suddenly,
And only, in the fables that he scrawled
With his own quill, in its indigenous dew,
Of an aesthetic tough, diverse, untamed,
Incredible to prudes, the mint of dirt,
Green barbarism turning paradigm.
Crispin foresaw a curious promenade
Or, nobler, sensed an elemental fate,
And elemental potencies and pangs,
And beautiful barenesses as yet unseen,
Making the most of savagery of palms,
Of moonlight on the thick, cadaverous bloom
That yuccas breed, and of the panther's tread.
The fabulous and its intrinsic verse
Came like two spirits parlaying, adorned
In radiance from the Atlantic coign,
For Crispin and his quill to catechize.
But they came parlaying of such an earth,
So thick with sides and jagged lops of green,
So intertwined with serpent-kin encoiled
Among the purple tufts, the scarlet crowns,
Scenting the jungle in their refuges,
So streaked with yellow, blue and green and red
In beak and bud and fruity gobbet-skins,
That earth was like a jostling festival
Of seeds grown fat, too juicily opulent,
Expanding in the gold's maternal warmth.
So much for that. The affectionate emigrant found
A new reality in parrot-squawks.
Yet let that trifle pass. Now, as this odd
Discoverer walked through the harbor streets
Inspecting the cabildo, the façade
Of the cathedral, making notes, he heard
A rumbling, west of Mexico, it seemed,
Approaching like a gasconade of drums.
The white cabildo darkened, the façade,
As sullen as the sky, was swallowed up
In swift, successive shadows, dolefully.
The rumbling broadened as it fell. The wind,
Tempestuous clarion, with heavy cry,
Came bluntly thundering, more terrible
Than the revenge of music on bassoons.
Gesticulating lightning, mystical,
Made pallid flitter. Crispin, here, took flight.
An annotator has his scruples, too.
He knelt in the cathedral with the rest,
This connoisseur of elemental fate,
Aware of exquisite thought. The storm was one
Of many proclamations of the kind,
Proclaiming something harsher than he learned
From hearing signboards whimper in cold nights
Or seeing the midsummer artifice
Of heat upon his pane. This was the span
Of force, the quintessential fact, the note
Of Vulcan, that a valet seeks to own,
The thing that makes him envious in phrase. 
And while the torrent on the roof still droned
He felt the Andean breath. His mind was free
And more than free, elate, intent, profound
And studious of a self possessing him,
That was not in him in the crusty town
From which he sailed. Beyond him, westward, lay
The mountainous ridges, purple balustrades,
In which the thunder, lapsing in its clap,
Let down gigantic quavers of its voice,
For Crispin to vociferate again.                                   iii                  Approaching Carolina 
The book of moonlight is not written yet
Nor half begun, but, when it is, leave room
For Crispin, fagot in the lunar fire,
Who, in the hubbub of his pilgrimage
Through sweating changes, never could forget
That wakefulness or meditating sleep,
In which the sulky strophes willingly
Bore up, in time, the somnolent, deep songs.
Leave room, therefore, in that unwritten book
For the legendary moonlight that once burned
In Crispin's mind above a continent.
America was always north to him,
A northern west or western north, but north,
And thereby polar, polar-purple, chilled
And lank, rising and slumping from a sea
Of hardy foam, receding flatly, spread
In endless ledges, glittering, submerged
And cold in a boreal mistiness of the moon.
The spring came there in clinking pannicles
Of half-dissolving frost, the summer came,
If ever, whisked and wet, not ripening,
Before the winter's vacancy returned.
The myrtle, if the myrtle ever bloomed,
Was like a glacial pink upon the air.
The green palmettoes in crepuscular ice
Clipped frigidly blue-black meridians,
Morose chiaroscuro, gauntly drawn. 
How many poems he denied himself
In his observant progress, lesser things
Than the relentless contact he desired;
How many sea-masks he ignored; what sounds
He shut out from his tempering ear; what thoughts,
Like jades affecting the sequestered bride;
And what descants, he sent to banishment!
Perhaps the Arctic moonlight really gave
The liaison, the blissful liaison,
Between himself and his environment,
Which was, and is, chief motive, first delight,
For him, and not for him alone. It seemed
Elusive, faint, more mist than moon, perverse,
Wrong as a divagation to Peking,
To him that postulated as his theme
The vulgar, as his theme and hymn and flight,
A passionately niggling nightingale.
Moonlight was an evasion, or, if not,
A minor meeting, facile, delicate. 
Thus he conceived his voyaging to be
An up and down between two elements,
A fluctuating between sun and moon,
A sally into gold and crimson forms,
As on this voyage, out of goblinry,
And then retirement like a turning back
And sinking down to the indulgences
That in the moonlight have their habitude.
But let these backward lapses, if they would,
Grind their seductions on him, Crispin knew
It was a flourishing tropic he required
For his refreshment, an abundant zone,
Prickly and obdurate, dense, harmonious
Yet with a harmony not rarefied
Nor fined for the inhibited instruments
Of over-civil stops. And thus he tossed
Between a Carolina of old time,
A little juvenile, an ancient whim,
And the visible, circumspect presentment drawn
From what he saw across his vessel's prow. 
He came. The poetic hero without palms
Or jugglery, without regalia.
And as he came he saw that it was spring,
A time abhorrent to the nihilist
Or searcher for the fecund minimum.
The moonlight fiction disappeared. The spring,
Although contending featly in its veils,
Irised in dew and early fragrancies,
Was gemmy marionette to him that sought
A sinewy nakedness. A river bore
The vessel inward. Tilting up his nose,
He inhaled the rancid rosin, burly smells
Of dampened lumber, emanations blown
From warehouse doors, the gustiness of ropes,
Decays of sacks, and all the arrant stinks
That helped him round his rude aesthetic out.
He savored rankness like a sensualist.
He marked the marshy ground around the dock,
The crawling railroad spur, the rotten fence,
Curriculum for the marvellous sophomore.
It purified. It made him see how much
Of what he saw he never saw at all.
He gripped more closely the essential prose
As being, in a world so falsified,
The one integrity for him, the one
Discovery still possible to make,
To which all poems were incident, unless
That prose should wear a poem's guise at last.                               iv                The Idea of a Colony 
Nota: his soil is man's intelligence.
That's better. That's worth crossing seas to find.
Crispin in one laconic phrase laid bare
His cloudy drift and planned a colony.
Exit the mental moonlight, exit lex,
Rex and principium, exit the whole
Shebang. Exeunt omnes. Here was prose
More exquisite than any tumbling verse:
A still new continent in which to dwell.
What was the purpose of his pilgrimage,
Whatever shape it took in Crispin's mind,
If not, when all is said, to drive away
The shadow of his fellows from the skies,
And, from their stale intelligence released,
To make a new intelligence prevail?
Hence the reverberations in the words
Of his first central hymns, the celebrants
Of rankest trivia, tests of the strength
Of his aesthetic, his philosophy,
The more invidious, the more desired.
The florist asking aid from cabbages,
The rich man going bare, the paladin
Afraid, the blind man as astronomer,
The appointed power unwielded from disdain.
His western voyage ended and began.
The torment of fastidious thought grew slack,
Another, still more bellicose, came on.
He, therefore, wrote his prolegomena,
And, being full of the caprice, inscribed
Commingled souvenirs and prophecies.
He made a singular collation. Thus:
The natives of the rain are rainy men.
Although they paint effulgent, azure lakes,
And April hillsides wooded white and pink,
Their azure has a cloudy edge, their white
And pink, the water bright that dogwood bears.
And in their music showering sounds intone.
On what strange froth does the gross Indian dote,
What Eden sapling gum, what honeyed gore,
What pulpy dram distilled of innocence,
That streaking gold should speak in him
Or bask within his images and words?
If these rude instances impeach themselves
By force of rudeness, let the principle
Be plain. For application Crispin strove,
Abhorring Turk as Esquimau, the lute
As the marimba, the magnolia as rose. 
Upon these premises propounding, he
Projected a colony that should extend
To the dusk of a whistling south below the south.
A comprehensive island hemisphere.
The man in Georgia waking among pines
Should be pine-spokesman. The responsive man,
Planting his pristine cores in Florida,
Should prick thereof, not on the psaltery,
But on the banjo's categorical gut,
Tuck tuck, while the flamingos flapped his bays.
Sepulchral señors, bibbing pale mescal,
Oblivious to the Aztec almanacs,
Should make the intricate Sierra scan.
And dark Brazilians in their cafés,
Musing immaculate, pampean dits,
Should scrawl a vigilant anthology,
To be their latest, lucent paramour.
These are the broadest instances. Crispin,
Progenitor of such extensive scope,
Was not indifferent to smart detail.
The melon should have apposite ritual,
Performed in verd apparel, and the peach,
When its black branches came to bud, belle day,
Should have an incantation. And again,
When piled on salvers its aroma steeped
The summer, it should have a sacrament
And celebration. Shrewd novitiates
Should be the clerks of our experience. 
These bland excursions into time to come,
Related in romance to backward flights,
However prodigal, however proud,
Contained in their afflatus the reproach
That first drove Crispin to his wandering.
He could not be content with counterfeit,
With masquerade of thought, with hapless words
That must belie the racking masquerade,
With fictive flourishes that preordained
His passion's permit, hang of coat, degree
Of buttons, measure of his salt. Such trash
Might help the blind, not him, serenely sly.
It irked beyond his patience. Hence it was,
Preferring text to gloss, he humbly served
Grotesque apprenticeship to chance event,
A clown, perhaps, but an aspiring clown.
There is a monotonous babbling in our dreams
That makes them our dependent heirs, the heirs
Of dreamers buried in our sleep, and not
The oncoming fantasies of better birth.
The apprentice knew these dreamers. If he dreamed
Their dreams, he did it in a gingerly way.
All dreams are vexing. Let them be expunged.
But let the rabbit run, the cock declaim. 
Trinket pasticcio, flaunting skyey sheets,
With Crispin as the tiptoe cozener?
No, no: veracious page on page, exact.                                  v                  A Nice Shady Home 
Crispin as hermit, pure and capable,
Dwelt in the land. Perhaps if discontent
Had kept him still the pricking realist,
Choosing his element from droll confect
Of was and is and shall or ought to be,
Beyond Bordeaux, beyond Havana, far
Beyond carked Yucatan, he might have come
To colonize his polar planterdom
And jig his chits upon a cloudy knee.
But his emprize to that idea soon sped.
Crispin dwelt in the land and dwelling there
Slid from his continent by slow recess
To things within his actual eye, alert
To the difficulty of rebellious thought
When the sky is blue. The blue infected will.
It may be that the yarrow in his fields
Sealed pensive purple under its concern.
But day by day, now this thing and now that
Confined him, while it cosseted, condoned,
Little by little, as if the suzerain soil
Abashed him by carouse to humble yet
Attach. It seemed haphazard denouement.
He first, as realist, admitted that
Whoever hunts a matinal continent
May, after all, stop short before a plum
And be content and still be realist.
The words of things entangle and confuse.
The plum survives its poems. It may hang
In the sunshine placidly, colored by ground
Obliquities of those who pass beneath,
Harlequined and mazily dewed and mauved
In bloom. Yet it survives in its own form,
Beyond these changes, good, fat, guzzly fruit.
So Crispin hasped on the surviving form,
For him, of shall or ought to be in is. 
Was he to bray this in profoundest brass
Arointing his dreams with fugal requiems?
Was he to company vastest things defunct
With a blubber of tom-toms harrowing the sky?
Scrawl a tragedian's testament? Prolong
His active force in an inactive dirge,
Which, let the tall musicians call and call,
Should merely call him dead? Pronounce amen
Through choirs infolded to the outmost clouds?
Because he built a cabin who once planned
Loquacious columns by the ructive sea?
Because he turned to salad-beds again?
Jovial Crispin, in calamitous crape?
Should he lay by the personal and make
Of his own fate an instance of all fate?
What is one man among so many men?
What are so many men in such a world?
Can one man think one thing and think it long?
Can one man be one thing and be it long?
The very man despising honest quilts
Lies quilted to his poll in his despite.
For realists, what is is what should be.
And so it came, his cabin shuffled up,
His trees were planted, his duenna brought
Her prismy blonde and clapped her in his hands,
The curtains flittered and the door was closed.
Crispin, magister of a single room,
Latched up the night. So deep a sound fell down
It was as if the solitude concealed
And covered him and his congenial sleep.
So deep a sound fell down it grew to be
A long soothsaying silence down and down.
The crickets beat their tambours in the wind,
Marching a motionless march, custodians. 
In the presto of the morning, Crispin trod,
Each day, still curious, but in a round
Less prickly and much more condign than that
He once thought necessary. Like Candide,
Yeoman and grub, but with a fig in sight,
And cream for the fig and silver for the cream,
A blonde to tip the silver and to taste
The rapey gouts. Good star, how that to be
Annealed them in their cabin ribaldries!
Yet the quotidian saps philosophers
And men like Crispin like them in intent,
If not in will, to track the knaves of thought.
But the quotidian composed as his,
Of breakfast ribands, fruits laid in their leaves,
The tomtit and the cassia and the rose,
Although the rose was not the noble thorn
Of crinoline spread, but of a pining sweet,
Composed of evenings like cracked shutters flung
Upon the rumpling bottomness, and nights
In which those frail custodians watched,
Indifferent to the tepid summer cold,
While he poured out upon the lips of her
That lay beside him, the quotidian
Like this, saps like the sun, true fortuner.
For all it takes it gives a humped return
Exchequering from piebald fiscs unkeyed.                                 vi            And Daughters with Curls 
Portentous enunciation, syllable
To blessed syllable affined, and sound
Bubbling felicity in cantilene,
Prolific and tormenting tenderness
Of music, as it comes to unison,
Forgather and bell boldly Crispin's last
Deduction. Thrum, with a proud douceur
His grand pronunciamento and devise. 
The chits came for his jigging, bluet-eyed,
Hands without touch yet touching poignantly,
Leaving no room upon his cloudy knee,
Prophetic joint, for its diviner young.
The return to social nature, once begun,
Anabasis or slump, ascent or chute,
Involved him in midwifery so dense
His cabin counted as phylactery,
Then place of vexing palankeens, then haunt
Of children nibbling at the sugared void,
Infants yet eminently old, then dome
And halidom for the unbraided femes,
Green crammers of the green fruits of the world,
Bidders and biders for its ecstasies,
True daughters both of Crispin and his clay.
All this with many mulctings of the man,
Effective colonizer sharply stopped
In the door-yard by his own capacious bloom.
But that this bloom grown riper, showing nibs
Of its eventual roundness, puerile tints
Of spiced and weathery rouges, should complex
The stopper to indulgent fatalist
Was unforeseen. First Crispin smiled upon
His goldenest demoiselle, inhabitant,
She seemed, of a country of the capuchins,
So delicately blushed, so humbly eyed,
Attentive to a coronal of things
Secret and singular. Second, upon
A second similar counterpart, a maid
Most sisterly to the first, not yet awake
Excepting to the motherly footstep, but
Marvelling sometimes at the shaken sleep.
Then third, a thing still flaxen in the light,
A creeper under jaunty leaves. And fourth,
Mere blusteriness that gewgaws jollified,
All din and gobble, blasphemously pink.
A few years more and the vermeil capuchin
Gave to the cabin, lordlier than it was,
The dulcet omen fit for such a house.
The second sister dallying was shy
To fetch the one full-pinioned one himself
Out of her botches, hot embosomer.
The third one gaping at the orioles
Lettered herself demurely as became
A pearly poetess, peaked for rhapsody.
The fourth, pent now, a digit curious.
Four daughters in a world too intricate
In the beginning, four blithe instruments
Of differing struts, four voices several
In couch, four more personæ, intimate
As buffo, yet divers, four mirrors blue
That should be silver, four accustomed seeds
Hinting incredible hues, four self-same lights
That spread chromatics in hilarious dark,
Four questioners and four sure answerers. 
Crispin concocted doctrine from the rout.
The world, a turnip once so readily plucked,
Sacked up and carried overseas, daubed out
Of its ancient purple, pruned to the fertile main,
And sown again by the stiffest realist,
Came reproduced in purple, family font,
The same insoluble lump. The fatalist
Stepped in and dropped the chuckling down his craw,
Without grace or grumble. Score this anecdote
Invented for its pith, not doctrinal
In form though in design, as Crispin willed,
Disguised pronunciamento, summary,
Autumn's compendium, strident in itself
But muted, mused, and perfectly revolved
In those portentous accents, syllables,
And sounds of music coming to accord
Upon his law, like their inherent sphere,
Seraphic proclamations of the pure
Delivered with a deluging onwardness.
Or if the music sticks, if the anecdote
Is false, if Crispin is a profitless
Philosopher, beginning with green brag,
Concluding fadedly, if as a man
Prone to distemper he abates in taste,
Fickle and fumbling, variable, obscure,
Glozing his life with after-shining flicks,
Illuminating, from a fancy gorged
By apparition, plain and common things,
Sequestering the fluster from the year,
Making gulped potions from obstreperous drops,
And so distorting, proving what he proves
Is nothing, what can all this matter since
The relation comes, benignly, to its end? 
So may the relation of each man be clipped.


^^EOP^^

Life contracts and death is expected,
As in a season of autumn.
The soldier falls.
 
He does not become a three-days personage,
Imposing his separation,
Calling for pomp.
 
Death is absolute and without memorial,
As in a season of autumn,
When the wind stops,
 
When the wind stops and, over the heavens,
The clouds go, nevertheless,
In their direction.
 


^^EOP^^

Euclid alone has looked on Beauty bare.
Let all who prate of Beauty hold their peace,
And lay them prone upon the earth and cease
To ponder on themselves, the while they stare
At nothing, intricately drawn nowhere
In shapes of shifting lineage; let geese
Gabble and hiss, but heroes seek release
From dusty bondage into luminous air.
O blinding hour, O holy, terrible day,
When first the shaft into his vision shone
Of light anatomized! Euclid alone
Has looked on Beauty bare. Fortunate they
Who, though once only and then but far away,
Have heard her massive sandal set on stone.


^^EOP^^

                                    I
You may have all things from me, save my breath,
The slight life in my throat will not give pause
For your love, nor your loss, nor any cause.
Shall I be made a panderer to death,
Dig the green ground for darkness underneath,
Let the dust serve me, covering all that was
With all that will be? Better, from time’s claws,
The hardened face under the subtle wreath.
 
Cooler than stones in wells, sweeter, more kind
Than hot, perfidious words, my breathing moves
Close to my plunging blood.    Be strong, and hang
Unriven mist over my breast and mind,
My breath! We shall forget the heart that loves,
Though in my body beat its blade, and its fang.
 
                                    II
I erred, when I thought loneliness the wide
Scent of mown grass over forsaken fields,
Or any shadow isolation yields.
Loneliness was the heart within your side.
Your thought, beyond my touch, was tilted air
Ringed with as many borders as the wind.
How could I judge you gentle or unkind
When all bright flying space was in your care?
 
Now that I leave you, I shall be made lonely
By simple empty days, never that chill
Resonant heart to strike between my arms
Again, as though distraught for distance,­–only
Levels of evening, now, behind a hill,
Or a late cock-crow from the darkening farms.
 


^^EOP^^

Why make so much of fragmentary blue
In here and there a bird, or butterfly,
Or flower, or wearing-stone, or open eye,
When heaven presents in sheets the solid hue?
 
Since earth is earth, perhaps, not heaven (as yet)—
Though some savants make earth include the sky;
And blue so far above us comes so high,
It only gives our wish for blue a whet.
 


^^EOP^^

Spades take up leaves
No better than spoons,
And bags full of leaves
Are light as balloons.
 
I make a great noise
Of rustling all day
Like rabbit and deer
Running away.
 
But the mountains I raise
Elude my embrace,
Flowing over my arms
And into my face.
 
I may load and unload
Again and again
Till I fill the whole shed,
And what have I then?
 
Next to nothing for weight,
And since they grew duller
From contact with earth,
Next to nothing for color.
 
Next to nothing for use,
But a crop is a crop,
And who’s to say where
The harvest shall stop?
 


^^EOP^^

Here, in this darkened room of this old house,
     I sit beside the fire.     I hear again,
Within, the scutter where the mice carouse,
     Without, the gutter dropping with the rain.
Opposite, are black shelves of wormy books,
     To left, glazed cases, dusty with the same,
Behind, a wall, with rusty guns on hooks,
     To right, the fire, that chokes one panting flame.
Over the mantel, black as funeral cloth,
     A portrait hangs, a man, whose flesh the worm
Has mawed this hundred years, whose clothes the moth
     A century since, has channelled to a term.
I cannot see his face :  I only know
He stares at me, that man of long ago.
 
I light the candles in the long brass sticks,
     I see him now, a pale-eyed, simpering man,
Framed in carved wood, wherein the death-watch ticks,
     A most dead face :  yet when the work began
That face, the pale puce coat, the simpering smile,
     The hands that hold a book, the eyes that gaze,
Moved to the touch of mind a little while.
     The painter sat in judgment on his ways :
The painter turned him to and from the light,
     Talked about art, or bade him lift his head.
Judged the lips’ paleness and the temples’ white,
     And now his work abides ;  the man is dead.
But is he dead ?  This dusty study drear
Creaks in its panels that the man is here.
 
Here, beyond doubt, he lived, in that old day.
     “He was a Doctor here,” the student thought.
Here, when the puce was new, that now is grey,
     That simpering man his daily practice wrought.
Here he let blood, prescribed the pill and drop,
     The leech, the diet ;  here his verdict given
Brought agonies of hoping to a stop,
     Here his condemned confessioners were shriven.
What is that book he holds, the key, too dim
     To read, to know ;  some little book he wrote,
Forgotten now, but still the key to him.
     He sacrificed his vision for his coat.
I see the man ;  a simpering mask that hid
A seeing mind that simpering men forbid.
 
Those are his books no doubt, untoucht, undusted,
     Unread, since last he left them on the shelves,
Octavo sermons that the fox has rusted,
     Sides splitting off from brown decaying twelves.
This was his room, this darkness of old death,
     This coffin-room with lights like embrasures,
The place is poisonous with him ;  like a breath
     On glass, he stains the spirit ;  he endures.
Here is his name within the sermon book,
     And verse, “When hungry Worms my Body eat” ;
He leans across my shoulder as I look,
     He who is God or pasture to the wheat.
He who is Dead is still upon the soul
     A check, an inhibition, a control.
 
I draw the bolts.     I am alone within.
     The moonlight through the coloured glass comes faint,
Mottling the passage wall like human skin,
     Pale with the breathings left of withered paint.
But others walk the empty house with me,
     There is no loneliness within these walls
No more than there is stillness in the sea
     Or silence in the eternal waterfalls.
There in the room, to right, they sit at feast ;
     The dropping grey-beard with the cold blue eye,
The lad, his son, that should have been a priest,
     And he, the rake, who made his mother die.
And he, the gambling man, who staked the throw,
They look me through, they follow when I go.
 
They follow with still footing down the hall,
     I know their souls, those fellow-tenants mine,
Their shadows dim those colours on the wall,
     They point my every gesture with a sign.
That grey-beard cast his aged servant forth
     After his forty years of service done,
The gambler supped up riches as the north
     Sups with his death the glories of the sun.
The lad betrayed his trust ;  the rake was he
     Who broke two women’s hearts to ease his own :
They nudge each other as they look at me,
     Shadows, all our, and yet as hard as stone.
And there, he comes, that simpering man, who sold
His mind for coat of puce and penny gold.
 
O ruinous house, within whose corridors
     None but the wicked and the mad go free.
(On the dark stairs they wait, behind the doors
     They crouch, they watch, or creep to follow me.)
Deep in old blood your ominous bricks are red,
     Firm in old bones your walls’ foundations stand,
With dead men’s passions built upon the dead,
     With broken hearts for lime and oaths for sand.
Terrible house, whose horror I have built,
     Sin after sin, unseen, as sand that slips
Telling the time, till now the heaped guilt
     Cries, and the planets circle to eclipse.
You only are the Daunter, you alone
Clutch, till I feel your ivy on the bone.
 


^^EOP^^

I, being born a woman and distressed
By all the needs and notions of my kind,
Am urged by your propinquity to find
Your person fair, and feel a certain zest
To bear your body’s weight upon my breast:
So subtly is the fume of life designed,
To clarify the pulse and cloud the mind,
And leave me once again undone, possessed.
Think not for this, however, the poor treason
Of my stout blood against my staggering brain,
I shall remember you with love, or season
My scorn with pity,—let me make it plain:
I find this frenzy insufficient reason
For conversation when we meet again.


^^EOP^^

I shall go back again to the bleak shore
And build a little shanty on the sand,
In such a way that the extremest band
Of brittle seaweed will escape my door
But by a yard or two; and nevermore
Shall I return to take you by the hand;
I shall be gone to what I understand,
And happier than I ever was before.
The love that stood a moment in your eyes,
The words that lay a moment on your tongue,
Are one with all that in a moment dies,
A little under-said and over-sung.
But I shall find the sullen rocks and skies
Unchanged from what they were when I was young.


^^EOP^^

The living come with grassy tread
To read the gravestones on the hill;
The graveyard draws the living still,
But never any more the dead.
 
The verses in it say and say:
‘The ones who living come today
To read the stones and go away
Tomorrow dead will come to stay.’
 
So sure of death the marbles rhyme,
Yet can’t help marking all the time
How no one dead will seem to come.
What is it men are shrinking from?
 
It would be easy to be clever
And tell the stones: Men hate to die
And have stopped dying now forever.
I think they would believe the lie.
 


^^EOP^^

The soul, O ganders, flies beyond the parks
And far beyond the discords of the wind.
 
A bronze rain from the sun descending marks
The death of summer, which that time endures
 
Like one who scrawls a listless testament
Of golden quirks and Paphian caricatures,
 
Bequeathing your white feathers to the moon
And giving your bland motions to the air.
 
Behold, already on the long parades
The crows anoint the statues with their dirt.
 
And the soul, O ganders, being lonely, flies
Beyond your chilly chariots, to the skies.
 


^^EOP^^

Now that I know
How passion warms little
Of flesh in the mould,
And treasure is brittle,—
 
I’ll lie here and learn
How, over their ground,
Trees make a long shadow
And a light sound.
 


^^EOP^^

 I came here, being stricken, stumbling out
At last from streets; the sun, decreasing, took me
For days, the time being the last of autumn,
The thickets not yet stark, but quivering
With tiny colors, like some brush strokes in
The manner of the pointillists; small yellows
Dart shaped, little reds in different pattern,
Clicks and notches of color on threaded bushes,
A cracked and fluent heaven, and a brown earth.
I had these, and my food and sleep—enough.
 
This is a countryside of roofless houses,—
Taverns to rain,—doorsteps of millstones, lintels
Leaning and delicate, foundations sprung to lilacs.
Orchards where boughs like roots strike into the sky.
Here I could well devise the journey to nothing,
At night getting down from the wagon by the black barns,
The zenith a point of darkness, breaking to bits,
Showering motionless stars over the houses.
Scenes relentless—the black and white grooves of a woodcut.
 
But why the journey to nothing or any desire?
Why the heart taken by even senseless adventure,
The goal a coffer of dust?    Give my mouth to the air,
Let arrogant pain lick my flesh with a tongue
Rough as a cat’s; remember the smell of cold mornings,
The dried beauty of women, the exquisite skin
Under the chins of young girls, young men’s rough beards,—
The cringing promise of this one, that one’s apology
For the knife struck down to the bone, gladioli in sick rooms,
Asters and dahlias, flowers like ruches, rosettes. . .
 
Forever enough to part grass over the stones
By some brook or well, the lovely seed-shedding stalks;
To hear in the single wind diverse branches
Repeating their sounds to the sky—that sky like scaled mackerel,
Fleeing the fields—to be defended from silence,
To feel my body as arid, as safe as a twig
Broken away from whatever growth could snare it
Up to a spring, or hold it softly in summer
Or beat it under in snow.
 
                                                       I must get well.
Walk on strong legs, leap the hurdles of sense,  
Reason again, come back to my old patchwork logic,
Addition, subtraction, money, clothes, clocks,
Memories (freesias, smelling slightly of snow and of flesh
In a room with blue curtains) ambition, despair.
I must feel again who had given feeling over,
Challenge laughter, take tears, play the piano,
Form judgments, blame a crude world for disaster.
 
To escape is nothing.    Not to escape is nothing.
The farmer’s wife stands with a halo of darkness
Rounding her head.    Water drips in the kitchen
Tapping the sink.    To-day the maples have split
Limb from the trunk with the ice, a fresh wooden wound.
The vines are distorted with ice, ice burdens the breaking
Roofs I have told you of.
 


^^EOP^^

Loving you less than life, a little less
Than bitter-sweet upon a broken wall
Or brush-wood smoke in autumn, I confess
I cannot swear I love you not at all.
For there is that about you in this light—
A yellow darkness, sinister of rain—
Which sturdily recalls my stubborn sight
To dwell on you, and dwell on you again.
And I am made aware of many a week
I shall consume, remembering in what way
Your brown hair grows about your brow and cheek
And what divine absurdities you say:
Till all the world, and I, and surely you,
Will know I love you, whether or not I do.
 


^^EOP^^

My voice, not being proud
Like a strong woman’s, that cries
Imperiously aloud
That death disarm her, lull her—
Screams for no mourning color
Laid menacingly, like fire,
Over my long desire.
It will end, and leave no print.
As you lie, I shall lie:
Separate, eased, and cured.
Whatever is wasted or wanted
In this country of glass and flint
Some garden will use, once planted.
As you lie alone, I shall lie,
O, in singleness assured,
Deafened by mire and lime.
I remember, while there is time.
 
 


^^EOP^^

The house had gone to bring again
To the midnight sky a sunset glow.
Now the chimney was all of the house that stood,
Like a pistil after the petals go.
 
The barn opposed across the way,
That would have joined the house in flame
Had it been the will of the wind, was left
To bear forsaken the place’s name.
 
No more it opened with all one end
For teams that came by the stony road
To drum on the floor with scurrying hoofs
And brush the mow with the summer load.
 
The birds that came to it through the air
At broken windows flew out and in,
Their murmur more like the sigh we sigh
From too much dwelling on what has been.
 
Yet for them the lilac renewed its leaf,
And the aged elm, though touched with fire;
And the dry pump flung up an awkward arm;
And the fence post carried a strand of wire. 
For them there was really nothing sad.
But though they rejoiced in the nest they kept,
One had to be versed in country things
Not to believe the phoebes wept.


^^EOP^^

They sent him back to her. The letter came
Saying . . . And she could have him. And before
She could be sure there was no hidden ill
Under the formal writing, he was there,
Living. They gave him back to her alive—
How else? They are not known to send the dead—
And not disfigured visibly. His face?
His hands? She had to look, and ask,
‘What was it, dear?’ And she had given all
And still she had all—they had—they the lucky!
Wasn’t she glad now? Everything seemed won,
And all the rest for them permissible ease.
She had to ask, ‘What was it, dear?’
 
                                                                 ‘Enough
Yet not enough. A bullet through and through,
High in the breast. Nothing but what good care
And medicine and rest, and you a week,
Can cure me of to go again.’ The same
Grim giving to do over for them both.
She dared no more than ask him with her eyes
How was it with him for a second trial.
And with his eyes he asked her not to ask.
They had given him back to her, but not to keep.
 


^^EOP^^

Nature’s first green is gold,
Her hardest hue to hold.
Her early leaf’s a flower;
But only so an hour.
Then leaf subsides to leaf.
So Eden sank to grief,
So dawn goes down to day.
Nothing gold can stay.
 


^^EOP^^

It’s a strange courage you give me, ancient star:
  Shine alone in the sunrise toward which you lend no part!
 
                          I
Shine alone, shine nakedly, shine like bronze,
that reflects neither my face nor any inner part
of my being, shine like fire, that mirrors nothing.
 
                         II
Lend no part to any humanity that suffuses
you in its own light.
Be not chimera of morning,
Half-man, half-star.
Be not an intelligence,
Like a widow’s bird
Or an old horse.
 


^^EOP^^

O sweet spontaneous
earth how often have
the
doting
 
             fingers of
prurient philosophers pinched
and
poked
 
thee
,has the naughty thumb
of science prodded
thy
 
        beauty      how
often have religions taken
thee upon their scraggy knees
squeezing and
 
buffeting thee that thou mightest conceive
gods
         (but
true
 
to the incomparable
couch of death thy
rhythmic
lover
 
             thou answerest
 
 
them only with
 
                              spring)
 


^^EOP^^

As unto lighter strains a boy might turn
     From where great altars burn
And Music’s grave archangels tread the night,
          So I, in seasons past,
          Loved not the bitter might
          And merciless control
Of thy bleak trumpets calling to the soul.
          Their consummating blast
     Held inspirations of affright,
               As when a faun
          Hears mournful thunders roll
On breathless, wide transparencies of dawn.
               Nor would I hear
          With thee, superb and clear
The indomitable laughter of the race;
               Nor would I face
Clean Truth, with her cold agates of the well,
               Nor with thee trace
Her footprints passing upward to the snows,
          But sought a phantom rose
And islands where the ghostly siren sings;
               Nor would I dwell
          Where star-forsaking wings
On mortal thresholds hide their mystery,
                    Nor watch with thee
The light of Heaven cast on common things.
 
But now in dreams of day I see thee stand
A grey, great sentry on the encompassed wall
That fronts the Night forever, in thy hand
               A consecrated spear
To test the dragons of man's ancient fear
               From secret gulfs that crawl—
          A captain of that choral band
Whose reverend faces, anxious of the Dark,
                    Yet undismayed
By rain of ruined worlds against the night,
               Turned evermore to hark
The music of God's silence, and were stayed
By something other than the reason’s light.
               And I have seen thee as
               An eagle, strong to pass
Where tempest-shapen clouds go to and fro
               And winds and noons have birth,
But whose regard is on the lands below
               And wingless things of earth.
               And yet not thine for long
The feignéd passion of the nightingale,
Nor shards of haliotis, nor the song
Of cymballed fountains hidden in the dale,
Nor gardens where the feet of Fragrance steal:
     ’Twas thine the laying-on to feel
Of tragic hands imperious and cold,
That grasping, led thee from the dreams of old,
               Making thee voyager
Of seas within the cosmic solitude,
Whose moons the long-familiar stars occlude,—
               Whose living sunsets stir
With visions of the timelessness we crave.
               And thou didst ride a wave
That gathered solemn music to its breast,
And breaking, shook our strand with thought’s unrest,
Till men far inland heard its mighty call
Where the young mornings leap the world’s blue wall.
 
                                                 *            *            *
 
Nature hath lonely voices at her heart
     And some thou heardst, for at thine own
          Were chords beyond all Art
That thrill but to the eternal undertone.
     But not necessitous to thee
The dreams that were when Arcady began
Or Paphos soared in iris from the sea;
                         For thou couldst guess
The rainbows hidden in the frustrate slime,
               And sawst in crownless Man
               A Titan scourged thro’ Time
With pains and raptures of his loneliness.
               And thou wast wanderer
In that dim House that is the human heart,
               Where thou didst roam apart,
               Seeing what pillars were
Between its deep foundations and the sun,
               What halls of dream undone,
What seraphs hold compassionate their wings
Between the youth and bitterness of things,
                    Ere all see clear
The gain in loss, the triumph in the tear.
 
Time’s whitest loves lie radiant in thy song,
Like starlight on an ocean, for thine own
     Was as a deathless lily grown
In Paradise—ethereal and strong.
                         And to thine eyes
Earth had no earth that held not haughty dust,
And seeds of future harvestings in trust,
And hidden azures of eventual skies.
               Yet hadst thou sharper strains,
Even as the Power determines us with pains,
And seeing harvests, sawst as well the chaff,
And seeing Beauty, sawst her shames no less,
                    Loosing the sweet,
     High thunder of thy Jovian laugh
On souls purblind in their self-righteousness.
               O vision wide and keen!
Which knew, untaught, that pains to joyance are
               As night unto the star
That on the effacing dawn must burn unseen.
               And thou didst know what meat
               Was torn to give us milk,
What countless worms made possible the silk
               That robes the mind, what plan
Drew as a bubble from old infamies
               And fen-pools of the past
The shy and many-colored soul of man.
               Yea! thou hast seen the lees
In that rich cup we lift against the day,
Seen the man-child at his disastrous play—
               His shafts without a mark,
His fountains flowing downward to the dark,
               His maiming and his bars,
                    Then turned to see
His vatic shadow cast athwart the stars,
And his strange challenge to infinity.
 
               But who am I to speak,
Far down the mountain, of its altar-peak,
               Or cross on feeble wings,
Adventurous, the oceans in thy mind?
We of a wider day’s bewilderings
               For very light seem blind,
And fearful of the gods our hands have formed.
               Some lift their eyes and seem
To see at last the lofty human scheme
Fading and topping as a sunset stormed
By wind and evening, with the stars in doubt.
And some cry, “On to Brotherhood!” And some
                (Their Dream's high music dumb): “Nay! let us hide in roses all our chains,                Tho’ all the lamps go out!                Let us accept our lords!  Time’s tensions move not save to subtler pains.” 
And over all the Silence is as swords. …
Wherefore be near us in our day of choice,
               Lest Hell’s red choirs rejoice;
               And may our counsels be
More wise, more kindly, for the thought of thee;
               And may our deeds attest
               Thy covenant of fame
To men of after-years that see thy name
Held like a flower by Honor to her breast.
Thy station in our hearts long since was won—
              Safe from the jealous years—
Thou of whose love, thou of whose thews and tears
We rest most certain when the day is done 
And formless shadows close upon the sun! 
Thou wast a star ere death’s long night shut down,
               And for thy brows the crown
Was graven ere the birth-pangs, and thy bed 
Is now of hallowed marble, and a fane 
               Among the mightier dead: 
More blameless than thine own what soul hath stood? 
Dost thou lie deaf until another Reign, 
               Or hear as music o’er thy head
The ceaseless trumpets of the war for Good?
                    Ah, thou! ah, thou!
               Stills God thy question now?
 


^^EOP^^

Oh, oh, you will be sorry for that word!
Give back my book and take my kiss instead.
Was it my enemy or my friend I heard,
“What a big book for such a little head!”
Come, I will show you now my newest hat,
And you may watch me purse my mouth and prink!
Oh, I shall love you still, and all of that.
I never again shall tell you what I think.
I shall be sweet and crafty, soft and sly;
You will not catch me reading any more:
I shall be called a wife to pattern by;
And some day when you knock and push the door,
Some sane day, not too bright and not too stormy,
I shall be gone, and you may whistle for me.
 


^^EOP^^

And a poet said, Speak to us of Beauty.
     And he answered:
     Where shall you seek beauty, and how
shall you find her unless she herself be your
way and your guide?
     And how shall you speak of her except
she be the weaver of your speech?
 
     The aggrieved and the injured say,
“Beauty is kind and gentle.
     Like a young mother half-shy of her
own glory she walks among us.”
     And the passionate say, “Nay, beauty is
a thing of might and dread.
     Like the tempest she shakes the earth
beneath us and the sky above us.”
 
     The tired and the weary say, “Beauty is
of soft whisperings. She speaks in our spirit.
     Her voice yields to our silences like a faint
light that quivers in fear of the shadow.”
     But the restless say, “We have heard her
shouting among the mountains,
     And with her cries came the sound of
hoofs, and the beating of wings and
the roaring of lions.”
 
     At night the watchmen of the city say,
“Beauty shall rise with the dawn from the
east.”
     And at noontide the toilers and the way-
farers say, “We have seen her leaning over
the earth from the windows of the sunset.”
 
     In winter say the snow-bound, “She shall
come with the spring leaping upon the hills.”
     And in the summer heat the reapers say,
“We have seen her dancing with the autumn
leaves, and we saw a drift of snow in her
hair.”
     All these things have you said of beauty,
     Yet in truth you spoke not of her but of
needs unsatisfied,
     And beauty is not a need but an ecstasy.
     It is not a mouth thirsting nor an empty
hand stretched forth,
     But rather a heart enflamed and a soul en-
chanted.
     It is not the image you would see nor the
song you would hear,
     But rather an image you see though you
close your eyes and a song you hear though
you shut your ears.
     It is not the sap within the furrowed bark,
nor a wing attached to a claw,
     But rather a garden for ever in bloom and
a flock of angels for ever in flight.
 
     People of Orphalese, beauty is life when
life unveils her holy face.
     But you are life and you are the veil.
     Beauty is eternity gazing at itself in a mir-
ror.
     But you are eternity and you are the mir-
ror.
 


^^EOP^^

And a merchant said, Speak to us of
Buying and Selling.
     And he answered and said:
     To you the earth yields her fruit, and you
shall not want if you but know how to fill
your hands.
     It is in exchanging the gifts of the earth
that you shall find abundance and be satisfied.
     Yet unless the exchange be in love and
kindly justice, it will but lead some to greed
and others to hunger.
 
     When in the market place you toilers of
the sea and fields and vineyards meet the
weavers and the potters and the gatherers of
spices,—
     Invoke then the master spirit of the earth,
to come into your midst and sanctify the
scales and the reckoning that weighs value
against value.
 
     And suffer not the barren-handed to take
part in your transactions, who would sell
their words for your labour.
     To such men you should say,
      “Come with us to the field, or go with
our brothers to the sea and cast your net;
     For the land and the sea shall be bountiful
to you even as to us.”
 
     And if there come the singers and the
dancers and the flute players,—buy of their
gifts also.
     For they too are gatherers of fruit and
frankincense, and that which they bring,
though fashioned of dreams, is raiment
 and food for your soul.
 
     And before you leave the market place,
see that no one has gone his way with
empty hands.
     For the master spirit of the earth shall
not sleep peacefully upon the wind till the
needs of the least of you are satisfied.


^^EOP^^

And the weaver said, Speak to us of
Clothes.
     And he answered:
     Your clothes conceal much of your beauty,
yet they hide not the unbeautiful.
     And though you seek in garments the
freedom of privacy you may find in them
a harness and a chain.
     Would that you could meet the sun
and the wind with more of your skin and less
of your raiment,
     For the breath of life is in the sunlight
and the hand of life is in the wind.
 
     Some of you say, “It is the north wind
who has woven the clothes we wear.”
     And I say, Ay, it was the north wind,
     But shame was his loom, and the soften-
ing of the sinews was his thread.
     And when his work was done he laughed
in the forest.
     Forget not that modesty is for a shield
against the eye of the unclean.
     And when the unclean shall be no more,
what were modesty but a fetter and a fouling
of the mind?
     And forget not that the earth delights to
feel your bare feet and the winds long to
play with your hair.


^^EOP^^

And an orator said, Speak to us of Free-
dom.
    And he answered:
    At the city gate and by your fireside I
have seen you prostrate yourself and worship
your own freedom,
    Even as slaves humble themselves before
a tyrant and praise him though he slays
them.
    Ay, in the grove of the temple and in
the shadow of the citadel I have seen the
freest among you wear their freedom as a
yoke and a handcuff.
    And my heart bled within me; for you
can only be free when even the desire of
seeking freedom becomes a harness to you,
and when you cease to speak of freedom
as a goal and a fulfilment.
 
    You shall be free indeed when your days
are not without a care nor your nights with-
out a want and a grief,
    But rather when these things girdle your
life and yet you rise above them naked and
unbound.
 
    And how shall you rise beyond your
days and nights unless you break the chains
which you at the dawn of your under-
standing have fastened around your noon
hour?
    In truth that which you call freedom is
the strongest of these chains, though its
links glitter in the sun and dazzle your eyes.
 
    And what is it but fragments of your own
self you would discard that you may become
free?
    If it is an unjust law you would abolish,
that law was written with your own hand
upon your own forehead.
    You cannot erase it by burning your law
 books nor by washing the foreheads of your
judges, though you pour the sea upon them.
    And if it is a despot you would dethrone,
see first that his throne erected within you is
destroyed.
    For how can a tyrant rule the free and
the proud, but for a tyranny in their own
freedom and a shame in their own pride?
    And if it is a care you would cast off, that
care has been chosen by you rather than
imposed upon you.
    And if it is a fear you would dispel, the
seat of that fear is in your heart and not in
the hand of the feared.
 
    Verily all things move within your being
in constant half embrace, the desired and
the dreaded, the repugnant and the cherished,
the pursued and that which you would
escape.
    These things move within you as lights
and shadows in pairs that cling.
    And when the shadow fades and is no
more, the light that lingers becomes a
shadow to another light.
    And thus your freedom when it loses its
fetters becomes itself the fetter of a greater
freedom.
 


^^EOP^^

Then a lawyer said, But what of our Laws,
master?
    And he answered:
    You delight in laying down laws,
    Yet you delight more in breaking them.
    Like children playing by the ocean who
build sand-towers with constancy and then
destroy them with laughter.
    But while you build your sand-towers the
ocean brings more sand to the shore,
    And when you destroy them the ocean
laughs with you.
    Verily the ocean laughs always with the
innocent.
 
    But what of those to whom life is not an
ocean, and man-made laws are not sand-
towers,
    But to whom life is a rock, and the law
a chisel with which they would carve it in
their own likeness?
    What of the cripple who hates dancers?
    What of the ox who loves his yoke and
deems the elk and deer of the forest
stray and vagrant things?
    What of the old serpent who cannot
shed his skin, and calls all others naked
and shameless?
    And of him who comes early to the
wedding-feast, and when over-fed and tired
goes his way saying that all feasts are
violation and all feasters lawbreakers?
 
    What shall I say of these save that they
too stand in the sunlight, but with their
backs to the sun?
    They see only their shadows, and their
shadows are their laws.
    And what is the sun to them but a caster
of shadows?
    And what is it to acknowledge the laws
but to stoop down and trace their shadows
upon the earth?
    But you who walk facing the sun, what
images drawn on the earth can hold you?
    You who travel with the wind, what
weather-vane shall direct your course?
    What man’s law shall bind you if you
break your yoke but upon no man's prison
door?
    What laws shall you fear if you dance
but stumble against no man’s iron chains?
    And who is he that shall bring you to
judgment if you tear off your garment yet
leave it in no man’s path?
 
    People of Orphalese, you can muffle the
drum, and you can loosen the strings of the
lyre, but who shall command the skylark
not to sing?


^^EOP^^

Then said Almitra, Speak to us of Love.
     And he raised his head and looked upon
the people, and there fell a stillness upon
them. And with a great voice he said:
     When love beckons to you, follow him,
     Though his ways are hard and steep.
     And when his wings enfold you yield to
him,
     Though the sword hidden among his
pinions may wound you.
     And when he speaks to you believe in
him,
     Though his voice may shatter your dreams
as the north wind lays waste the garden.
 
     For even as love crowns you so shall he
crucify you. Even as he is for your growth
so is he for your pruning.
     Even as he ascends to your height and
caresses your tenderest branches that quiver
in the sun,
     So shall he descend to your roots and
shake them in their clinging to the earth.
                                       •
     Like sheaves of corn he gathers you unto
himself.
     He threshes you to make you naked.
     He sifts you to free you from your husks.
     He grinds you to whiteness.
     He kneads you until you are pliant;
     And then he assigns you to his sacred
fire, that you may become sacred bread for
God’s sacred feast.
 
     All these things shall love do unto you
that you may know the secrets of your
heart, and in that knowledge become a
fragment of Life’s heart.
 
     But if in your fear you would seek only
love’s peace and love’s pleasure,
     Then it is better for you that you cover
your nakedness and pass out of love’s
threshing-floor,
     Into the seasonless world where you
shall laugh, but not all of your laughter,
and weep, but not all of your tears.
                                      •
     Love gives naught but itself and takes
naught but from itself.
     Love possesses not nor would it be
possessed;
     For love is sufficient unto love.
 
     When you love you should not say,
“God is in my heart,” but rather, “I am
in the heart of God.”
     And think not you can direct the course
of love, for love, if it finds you worthy,
directs your course.
 
     Love has no other desire but to fulfil
itself.
     But if you love and must needs have
desires, let these be your desires:
     To melt and be like a running brook
that sings its melody to the night.
     To know the pain of too much tenderness.
     To be wounded by your own under-
standing of love;
     And to bleed willingly and joyfully.
     To wake at dawn with a winged heart
and give thanks for another day of loving;
     To rest at the noon hour and meditate
love’s ecstasy;
     To return home at eventide with grati-
tude;
     And then to sleep with a prayer for the
beloved in your heart and a song of praise
upon your lips.


^^EOP^^

Then Almitra spoke again and said, And
what of Marriage, master?
     And he answered saying:
     You were born together, and together you
shall be forevermore.
     You shall be together when the white
wings of death scatter your days.
     Ay, you shall be together even in the
silent memory of God.
     But let there be spaces in your togetherness,
     And let the winds of the heavens dance
between you.
 
     Love one another, but make not a bond
of love:
     Let it rather be a moving sea between
the shores of your souls.
     Fill each other’s cup but drink not from
one cup.
     Give one another of your bread but eat
not from the same loaf.
     Sing and dance together and be joyous,
but let each one of you be alone,
     Even as the strings of a lute are alone
though they quiver with the same music.
 
     Give your hearts, but not into each
other’s keeping.
     For only the hand of Life can contain
your hearts.
     And stand together yet not too near
together:
     For the pillars of the temple stand apart,
     And the oak tree and the cypress grow
not in each other’s shadow.


^^EOP^^

Then a hermit, who visited the city once
a year, came forth and said, Speak to us of
Pleasure.
    And he answered, saying:
    Pleasure is a freedom-song,
    But it is not freedom.
    It is the blossoming of your desires,
    But it is not their fruit.
    It is a depth calling unto a height,
    But it is not the deep nor the high.
    It is the caged taking wing,
    But it is not space encompassed.
    Ay, in very truth, pleasure is a freedom-
song.
    And I fain would have you sing it with
fullness of heart; yet I would not have you
lose your hearts in the singing.
 
    Some of your youth seek pleasure as if it
were all, and they are judged and rebuked.
    I would not judge nor rebuke them. I
would have them seek.
    For they shall find pleasure, but not her
alone;
    Seven are her sisters, and the least of them
is more beautiful than pleasure.
    Have you not heard of the man who was
digging in the earth for roots and found a
treasure?
 
    And some of your elders remember
pleasures with regret like wrongs com-
mitted in drunkenness.
    But regret is the beclouding of the mind
 and not its chastisement.
    They should remember their pleasures with
gratitude, as they would the harvest of a
summer.
    Yet if it comforts them to regret, let them
be comforted.
 
    And there are among you those who are
neither young to seek nor old to remember;
    And in their fear of seeking and remem-
bering they shun all pleasures, lest they
neglect the spirit or offend against it.
    But even in their foregoing is their
pleasure.
    And thus they too find a treasure though
they dig for roots with quivering hands.
    But tell me, who is he that can offend the
spirit?
    Shall the nightingale offend the stillness of
the night, or the firefly the stars?
    And shall your flame or your smoke
burden the wind?
    Think you the spirit is a still pool which
you can trouble with a staff?
 
    Oftentimes in denying yourself pleasure
you do but store the desire in the recesses
of your being.
    Who knows but that which seems omitted
today, waits for tomorrow?
    Even your body knows its heritage and
its rightful need and will not be deceived.
    And your body is the harp of your soul,
    And it is yours to bring forth sweet
music from it or confused sounds.
 
     And now you ask in your heart, “How
shall we distinguish that which is good in
pleasure from that which is not good?”
     Go to your fields and your gardens, and
you shall learn that it is the pleasure of
the bee to gather honey of the flower,
     But it is also the pleasure of the flower
to yield its honey to the bee.
     For to the bee a flower is a fountain of
life,
     And to the flower a bee is a messenger of
love,
     And to both, bee and flower, the giving
and the receiving of pleasure is a need and
an ecstasy.
 
     People of Orphalese, be in your pleas-
ures like the flowers and the bees.
 


^^EOP^^

Then said a teacher, Speak to us of Teach-
ing.
    And he said:
    No man can reveal to you aught but that
which already lies half asleep in the dawn-
ing of your knowledge.
    The teacher who walks in the shadow of
the temple, among his followers, gives not
of his wisdom but rather of his faith and
his lovingness.
    If he is indeed wise he does not bid you
enter the house of his wisdom, but rather
leads you to the threshold of your own
mind.
   The astronomer may speak to you of his
understanding of space, but he cannot give
you his understanding.
   The musician may sing to you of the
rhythm which is in all space, but he cannot
give you the ear which arrests the rhythm
nor the voice that echoes it.
   And he who is versed in the science of
numbers can tell of the regions of weight
and measure, but he cannot conduct you
thither.
   For the vision of one man lends not its
wings to another man.
   And even as each one of you stands alone
in God’s knowledge, so must each one of
you be alone in his knowledge of God and
in his understanding of the earth.
 


^^EOP^^

Pity me not because the light of day
At close of day no longer walks the sky;
Pity me not for beauties passed away
From field and thicket as the year goes by;
Pity me not the waning of the moon,
Nor that the ebbing tide goes out to sea,
Nor that a man’s desire is hushed so soon,
And you no longer look with love on me.
This have I known always: Love is no more
Than the wide blossom which the wind assails,
Than the great tide that treads the shifting shore,
Strewing fresh wreckage gathered in the gales:
Pity me that the heart is slow to learn
What the swift mind beholds at every turn.


^^EOP^^

Hair–braided chestnut,
coiled like a lyncher’s rope,
Eye–fagots,
Lips–old scars, or the first red blisters,
Breath–the last sweet scent of cane,
And her slim body, white as the ash
         of black flesh after flame.
 


^^EOP^^

My body is opaque to the soul.
Driven of the spirit, long have I sought to temper it unto the spirit’s
    longing,
But my mind, too, is opaque to the soul.
O Spirits of whom my soul is but a little finger,
Direct it to the lid of its flesh-eye.
I am weak with much giving.
I am weak the desire to give more.
(How strong a thing is the little finger!)
So weak that I have confused the body with the soul,
And the body with its little finger.
(How frail is the little finger.)
My voice could not carry to you did you dwell in stars,
O spirits of whom my soul is but a little finger . .


^^EOP^^

My mother the queen is dead.
      My father the king is old.
      He fumbles his cirque of gold
And dreams of a year long fled.
The young men stare at my face,
      But cannot meet my glance—
      Cavan tall as a lance,
Orra swift in the race.
 
Death was ever my price,
      Since my maidenhood began:
      At the thought of a Gaelic man
My heart is sister of ice.
’Tis another for whom I wait,
      Though I have not kissed his sword:
      He or none is my lord,
Though our night be soon or late.
 
The star grows great in my breast:
      It is crying clearly now
      To the star on the burnished prow
Of his galley far in the West.
The capes of the North are dim,
      And the windward beaches smoke
      Where the last long roller spoke
The tidings it held of him.
 
Sorrow I know he brings,
      Battle, despair and change,—
     Beauty cruel and strange,
And the shed bright blood of kings.
Breast, be white for his sake!
      Mouth, be red for the kiss!
      Soul, be strong for your bliss!
Heart, be ready to break!
 


^^EOP^^

i had scarcely got acquainted
when they took me by the paw & made me even-minded
nor did i mind
i had exactly enough window
i had exactly enough to get started
wine makes a person weak
that is not to say that wine is not delightful, only
that it makes a person weak
a person can be made weak with whiskey
and this was the mexicans’ military tactic
with the chiricahua apache
and the dutch with the lenape down in manahatta
there was a dog named charlie
cally called it an ‘it’
when we had our pronoun circle-jerk
i told the group they could call me ‘it’
you know like the sky and the grass and
a bird where you can’t tell what it is
it, its, itself
but then i sort of chickened out and said
if ‘it’ ‘made them feel weird’ as a pronoun for a human
they could call me ‘they’
or any gender-neutral pronoun i said
xe or zae or e or shim-sham or
two head-cocks and a click i joked
looking at charlie’s belly as charlie
rolled on its back
 


^^EOP^^

I saw the racer coming to the jump,
     Staring with fiery eyeballs as he rusht,
I heard the blood within his body thump,
     I saw him launch, I heard the toppings crusht.
And as he landed I beheld his soul
     Kindle, because, in front, he saw the Straight
With all its thousands roaring at the goal,
     He laughed, he took the moment for his mate.
Would that the passionate moods on which we ride
     Might kindle thus to oneness with the will;
Would we might see the end to which we stride,
     And feel, not strain in struggle, only thrill,
And laugh like him and know in all our nerves
Beauty, the spirit, scattering dust and turves.
 


^^EOP^^

Capitán profundo, capitán geloso,
Ask us not to sing standing in the sun,
Hairy-backed and hump-armed,
Flat-ribbed and big-bagged.
 
There is no pith in music
Except in something false.
 
Bellissimo, pomposo,
Sing a song of serpent-kin,
Necks among the thousand leaves,
Tongues around the fruit.
Sing in clownish boots
Strapped and buckled bright.
 
Wear the breeches of a mask,
Coat half-flare and half galloon;
Wear a helmet without reason,
Tufted, tilted, twirled, and twisted.
Start the singing in a voice
Rougher than a grinding shale.
 
Hang a feather by your eye,
Nod and look a little sly.
This must be the vent of pity,
Deeper than a truer ditty
Of the real that wrenches,
Of the quick that’s wry.
 


^^EOP^^

Once when the snow of the year was beginning to fall,
We stopped by a mountain pasture to say, ‘Whose colt?’
A little Morgan had one forefoot on the wall,
The other curled at his breast. He dipped his head
And snorted at us. And then he had to bolt.
We heard the miniature thunder where he fled,
And we saw him, or thought we saw him, dim and grey,
Like a shadow against the curtain of falling flakes.
‘I think the little fellow’s afraid of the snow.
He isn’t winter-broken. It isn’t play
With the little fellow at all. He’s running away.
I doubt if even his mother could tell him, “Sakes,
It’s only weather.” He’d think she didn’t know!
Where is his mother? He can’t be out alone.’
And now he comes again with a clatter of stone
And mounts the wall again with whited eyes
And all his tail that isn't hair up straight.
He shudders his coat as if to throw off flies.
‘Whoever it is that leaves him out so late,
When other creatures have gone to stall and bin,
Ought to be told to come and take him in.’


^^EOP^^

She had forgotten how the August night
Was level as a lake beneath the moon,
In which she swam a little, losing sight
Of shore; and how the boy, who was at noon
Simple enough, not different from the rest,
Wore now a pleasant mystery as he went,
Which seemed to her an honest enough test
Whether she loved him, and she was content.
So loud, so loud the million crickets’ choir. . .
So sweet the night, so long-drawn-out and late. . .
And if the man were not her spirit’s mate,
Why was her body sluggish with desire?
Stark on the open field the moonlight fell,
But the oak tree’s shadow was deep and black and
     secret as a well.
 


^^EOP^^

                                   THE ORE
 
Before Man’s labouring wisdom gave me birth
I had not even seen the light of day;
Down in the central darkness of the earth,
Crushed by the weight of continents I lay,
Ground by the weight to heat, not knowing then
The air, the light, the noise, the world of men.
 
                                  THE TREES
We grew on mountains where the glaciers cry,
Infinite sombre armies of us stood
Below the snow-peaks which defy the sky;
A song like the gods moaning filled our wood;
We knew no men—our life was to stand staunch,
Singing our song, against the avalanche.
 
                         THE HEMP AND FLAX
 
We were a million grasses on the hill,
A million herbs which bowed as the wind blew,
Trembling in every fibre, never still;
Out of the summer earth sweet life we drew.
Little blue-flowered grasses up the glen,
Glad of the sun, what did we know of men?
 
                               THE WORKERS
 
We tore the iron from the mountain’s hold,
By blasting fires we smithied it to steel;
Out of the shapeless stone we learned to mould
The sweeping bow, the rectilinear keel;
We hewed the pine to plank, we split the fir,
We pulled the myriad flax to fashion her.
 
Out of a million lives our knowledge came,
A million subtle craftsmen forged the means;
Steam was our handmaid and our servant flame,
Water our strength, all bowed to our machines.
Out of the rock, the tree, the springing herb
We built this wandering beauty so superb.
  
                                 THE SAILORS
 
We, who were born on earth and live by air,
Make this thing pass across the fatal floor,
The speechless sea; alone we commune there
Jesting with death, that ever open door.
Sun, moon and stars are signs by which we drive
This wind-blown iron like a thing alive.
 
                                      THE SHIP
 
I march across great waters like a queen,
I whom so many wisdoms helped to make;
Over the uncruddled billows of seas green
I blanch the bubbled highway of my wake.
By me my wandering tenants clasp the hands,
And know the thoughts of men in other lands.
 


^^EOP^^

I
Without how small, within how strangely vast!
     What stars of terror had their path in thee!
     What music of the heavens and the sea
Lived in a sigh or thundered on the blast!
Here swept the gleam and pageant of the Past,
     As Beauty trembled to her fate’s decree;
     Here swords were forged for armies yet to be,
And tears were found too dreadful not to last.
 
Here stood the seats of judgment and its light,
     To whose assizes all our dreams were led—
          Our best and worst, our Paradise and Hell;
And in this room delivered now to night,
     The mortal put its question to the dead,
          And worlds were weighed, and God’s deep shadow fell.
 
II
Here an immortal river had its rise,
     Though dusty now the fountain whence it ran
     So swift and beautiful with good to man.
Here the foundation of an empire lies—
The ruins of a realm seen not with eyes,
     That now the vision of a gnat could scan.
     Here wars were fought within a little span,
Whose echoes yet resound on human skies.
 
Life, on her rainbow road from dust to dust,
     Spilt here her wildest iris, still thine own,
          Master, and with thy soul and ashes one!
Thy wings are distant from our years of lust,
     Yet he who liveth not by bread alone
          Shall see thee as that angel in the sun.
 
 


^^EOP^^

Love me because I am lost;
Love me that I am undone.
That is brave,—no man has wished it,
Not one.
 
Be strong, to look on my heart
As others look on my face.
Love me,—I tell you that it is a ravaged
Terrible place.
 


^^EOP^^

Since you would claim the sources of my thought Recall the meshes whence it sprang unlimed, The reedy traps which other hands have timed To close upon it. Conjure up the hot Blaze that it cleared so cleanly, or the snow Devised to strike it down. It will be free. Whatever nets draw in to prison me At length your eyes must turn to watch it go.
  My mouth, perhaps, may learn one thing too well, My body hear no echo save its own, Yet will the desperate mind, maddened and proud, Seek out the storm, escape the bitter spell That we obey, strain to the wind, be thrown Straight to its freedom in the thunderous cloud.
 


^^EOP^^

When you, that at this moment are to me
Dearer than words on paper, shall depart,
And be no more the warder of my heart,
Whereof again myself shall hold the key;
And be no more—what now you seem to be—
The sun, from which all excellences start
In a round nimbus, nor a broken dart
Of moonlight, even, splintered on the sea;
I shall remember only of this hour—
And weep somewhat, as now you see me weep—
The pathos of your love, that, like a flower,
Fearful of death yet amorous of sleep,
Droops for a moment and beholds, dismayed,
The wind whereon its petals shall be laid.
 


^^EOP^^

The wind of night is mighty on the deep—
     A presence haunting sea and land again.
     That wind upon the watery waste hath been;
That wind upon the desert soon shall sweep.
O vast and mournful spirit, wherefore keep
     Thy vigil at the fleeting homes of men,
     Who need no voice of thine to tell them when
Is come the hour to labor or to sleep?
 
From waste to waste thou goest, and art dumb
     Before the morning. Patient in her tree
          The bird awaits until thy strength hath passed,
Forgetting darkness when the day is come.
     With other tidings hast thou burdened me,
          Whom desolations harbor at the last.
 


^^EOP^^

The farmer in deep thought
is pacing through the rain
among his blank fields, with
hands in pockets,
in his head
the harvest already planted.
A cold wind ruffles the water
among the browned weeds.
On all sides
the world rolls coldly away :
black orchards
darkened by the March clouds —
leaving room for thought.
Down past the brushwood
bristling by
the rainsluiced wagonroad
looms the artist figure of
the farmer — composing
— antagonist.
 


^^EOP^^

In passing with my mind
on nothing in the world
 
but the right of way
I enjoy on the road by
 
virtue of the law        —
I saw
 
an elderly man who
smiled and looked away
 
to the north past a house —
a woman in blue
 
who was laughing and
leaning forward to look up
 
into the man’s half
averted face
 
and a boy of eight who was
looking at the middle of
 
the man’s belly
at a watchchain —
 
The supreme importance
of this nameless spectacle
 
sped me by them
without a word —
 
Why bother where I went ?
for I went spinning on the
 
four wheels of my car
along the wet road until
 
I saw a girl with one leg
over the rail of a balcony


^^EOP^^

Of death
the barber
the barber
talked to me
 
cutting my
life with
sleep to trim
my hair —
 
It’s just
a moment
he said, we die
every night —
 
And of
the newest
ways to grow
hair on
 
bald death –
I told him
of the quartz
lamp
 
and of old men
with third
sets of teeth
to the cue
 
of an old man
who said
at the door —
Sunshine today!
 
for which
death shaves
him twice
a week
 


^^EOP^^

This is the time of year
when boys fifteen and seventeen
wear two horned lilac blossoms
in their caps — or over one ear
 
What is it that does this ?
 
It is a certain sort —
drivers for grocers or taxidrivers
white and colored —
 
fellows that let their hair grow long
in a curve over one eye — 
 
Horned purple
 
Dirty satyrs, it is
vulgarity raised to the last power
 
They have stolen them
broken the bushes apart
with a curse for the owner — 
 
Lilacs — 
 
They stand in the doorways
on the business streets with a sneer
on their faces
 
adorned with blossoms
 
Out of their sweet heads
dark kisses — rough faces


^^EOP^^

Somebody dies every four minutes
in New York State — 
 
To hell with you and your poetry — 
You will rot and be blown
through the next solar system
with the rest of the gases — 
 
What the hell do you know about it ?
 
AXIOMS
 
Do not get killed
 
Careful Crossing Campaign
Cross Crossings Cautiously
 
THE HORSES      black
                                 &
PRANCED             white
 
What’s the use of sweating over
this sort of thing, Carl ; here
it is all set up — 
 
Outings in New York City
 
Ho for the open country
 
Dont’t stay shut up in hot rooms
Go to one of the Great Parks
Pelham Bay for example
 
It’s on Long Island sound
with bathing, boating
tennis, baseball, golf, etc.
 
Acres and acres of green grass
wonderful shade trees, rippling brooks
 
               Take the Pelham Bay Park Branch
               of the Lexington Ave. (East Side)
               Line and you are there in a few
               minutes
 
Interborough Rapid Transit Co.
 


^^EOP^^

Still will I harvest beauty where it grows:
In coloured fungus and the spotted fog
Surprised on foods forgotten; in ditch and bog
Filmed brilliant with irregular rainbows
Of rust and oil, where half a city throws
Its empty tins; and in some spongy log
Whence headlong leaps the oozy emerald frog. . . .
And a black pupil in the green scum shows.
Her the inhabiter of divers places
Surmising at all doors, I push them all.
Oh, you that fearful of a creaking hinge
Turn back forevermore with craven faces,
I tell you Beauty bears an ultra fringe
Unguessed of you upon her gossamer shawl!
 


^^EOP^^

Tell me, dear beauty of the dusk,
   When purple ribbons bind the hill,
    Do dreams your secret wish fulfill,
Do prayers, like kernels from the husk
 
Come from your lips? Tell me if when
    The mountains loom at night, giant shades
    Of softer shadow, swift like blades
Of grass seeds come to flower. Then
 
Tell me if the night winds bend
    Them towards me, if the Shenandoah
    As it ripples past your shore,
Catches the soul of what you send.
 
 
 


^^EOP^^

Sister and mother and diviner love,
And of the sisterhood of the living dead
Most near, most clear, and of the clearest bloom,
And of the fragrant mothers the most dear
And queen, and of diviner love the day
And flame and summer and sweet fire, no thread
Of cloudy silver sprinkles in your gown
Its venom of renown, and on your head
No crown is simpler than the simple hair.
 
Now of the music summoned by the birth
That separates us from the wind and sea,
Yet leaves us in them, until earth becomes,
By being so much of the things we are,
Gross effigy and simulacrum, none
Gives motion to perfection more serene
Than yours, out of our imperfections wrought,
Most rare, or ever of more kindred air
In the laborious weaving that you wear.
 
For so retentive of themselves are men
That music is intensest which proclaims
The near, the clear, and vaunts the clearest bloom,
And of all vigils musing the obscure,
That apprehends the most which sees and names,
As in your name, an image that is sure,
Among the arrant spices of the sun,
O bough and bush and scented vine, in whom
We give ourselves our likest issuance.
 
Yet not too like, yet not so like to be
Too near, too clear, saving a little to endow
Our feigning with the strange unlike, whence
          springs
The difference that heavenly pity brings.
For this, musician, in your girdle fixed
Bear other perfumes. On your pale head wear
A band entwining, set with fatal stones.
Unreal, give back to us what once you gave:
The imagination that we spurned and crave.


^^EOP^^

The white bark writhed and sputtered like a fish
Upon the coals, exuding odorous smoke
She knelt and blew, in a surging desolate wish
For comfort; and the sleeping ashes woke
And scattered to the hearth, but no thin fire
Broke suddenly, the wood was wet with rain.
Then, softly stepping forth from her desire,
(Being mindful of like passion hurled in vain
Upon a similar task, in other days)
She thrust her breath against the stubborn coal,
Bringing to bear upon its hilt the whole
Of her still body. . . there sprang a little blaze. . .
A pack of hounds, the flame swept up the flue!—
And the blue night stood flattened against the window,
     staring through.
 


^^EOP^^

This is how the wind shifts:
Like the thoughts of an old human,
Who still thinks eagerly
And despairingly.
The wind shifts like this:
Like a human without illusions,
Who still feels irrational things within her.
The wind shifts like this:
Like humans approaching proudly,
Like humans approaching angrily.
This is how the wind shifts:
Like a human, heavy and heavy,
Who does not care.


^^EOP^^

Nothing was remembered, nothing forgotten.
When we awoke, wagons were passing on the warm summer   
          pavements,
The window-sills were wet from rain in the night,
Birds scattered and settled over chimneypots
As among grotesque trees.
 
Nothing was accepted, nothing looked beyond.
Slight-voiced bells separated hour from hour,
The afternoon sifted coolness
And people drew together in streets becoming deserted.
There was a moon, and light in a shop-front,
And dusk falling like precipitous water.
 
Hand clasped hand
Forehead still bowed to forehead—
Nothing was lost, nothing possessed
There was no gift nor denial.
 
2.
I have remembered you.
You were not the town visited once,
Nor the road falling behind running feet.
 
You were as awkward as flesh
And lighter than frost or ashes.
 
You were the rind,
And the white-juiced apple,
The song, and the words waiting for music.
 
3.
You have learned the beginning;
Go from mine to the other.
 
Be together; eat, dance, despair,
Sleep, be threatened, endure.
You will know the way of that.
 
But at the end, be insolent;
Be absurd—strike the thing short off;
Be mad—only do not let talk
Wear the bloom from silence.
 
And go away without fire or lantern
Let there be some uncertainty about your departure.
 


^^EOP^^

The language we currently use to describe ourselves is a form of Boolean algebra. 
I don’t want scars to remind me that I had to take a knife to this body in order to call it mine. 
I buy a dress shirt and I feel like a child again. It is a men’s size S and the cuffs go past my fingertips. 
A stranger mistook her left for her right and kissed me on the  shoulder instead of her boyfriend. 
I hope we evolve into higher beings with 6 sexually dimorphic  genders and needlessly complex sex. 
My parents watch a video of my nephew. They laugh and say he reminds them of me as a child. 
I watch the broad shoulders of the Asian man walking in front of me and feel euphoric. 
I don’t want to shoot up this body in order to call it mine. 
Would I prefer being a fairy in a dress or a butch dyke in menswear? 
This fear is habitual, unconscious, reflexive. 
My optometrist asks me, Number 3, or number 4?


^^EOP^^

Translated from the Japanese 
The square in    the square in the square in the square in the square.
The    square    circle    of    the square circular motion of the square circular motion.
The person who sees through the smell of the soap of the blood vessels that the soap passes through.
The earth made in imitation of the globe made in imitation of the earth.
Castrated socks. (Her name was words)
Anemia cells. your expression is also like the legs of a  sparrow.
The enormous weight that drives itself toward the diagonal of the  parallelogram.
The eastern autumn that welcomes the fragrance of coty unmoored from spring in marseille.
Mr. Z’s vehicle cruising the clear sky like a bird. It says Roundworm Medicine.
Rooftop garden. The young mademoiselle imitating a monkey.
The formula for a falling body speeding straight through the curved straight line.
Two wet bits of dusk pressed as xii on the dial.
The greeting from the fitted door from inside the canary in the  birdcage in the door inside the door.
The male or female friends who arrive at the entrance to the cafeteria split apart.
A sugar cube with black ink spilled on it is carted atop a tricycle.
Military boots stepping on a business card. Fake nasturtium that runs through the town.
The people who went down from above and up from below and down from above and up from below are the people who did not go up from below nor down from above nor up from below nor down from above.
The bottom half of that woman is like the top half of that man. (I am one who mourns the chance meeting of sadness.)
A square case starts walking (that is a strange thing).
The goodbye that rises up near the radiator.
Rain outside. Group migration of luminescent fish.


^^EOP^^




Honey-sweet song
—Pindar



Standing, leaning, with both long-
clawed paws she rips punk
wood out of a tree with 
a high hollow to get
at her cause inside—her sharp brute
parentheses tear at the living 
humming word. The honey
the tree has helped the bees
hide has drawn her near with 
its scent. Forcing the issue,
she’s heavy, off-balance, intent.
Flying defenders of the sweet 
they’ve produced and on
which they and their larvae
depend, the bees swarm her 
nose, her eyes, her tongue, her plan,
often they trace with their hovering
the lying-down eight of infinity 
before they sting and fall
mortally self-wounded.
Yet always in this valor they fail 
to defend—and who can succeed?—
the whole history of poetry.


^^EOP^^

Take the measure of wooden speech with a wooden tongue
The sound waves crash in, like a handful of grasshoppers
Take the nails and bang them into the weeping painting
The kids are shouting what they’re for: it’s making noise
Making noise and drinking milk with a magnifying glass 
The ancestor’s dead from reading books and breathing
From boxing vegetables and reading books and breathing
The cardboard boxes are in his brain in tiny mirroring bits
From the vein in his forehead to the vein in his toe they run
They run like children to the school milk and the myths 
Out of the crush they would say of him, mad as a string
The trees would say different of course when they saw him
Out of grace, they never were, they would mimic Umback
The leaves in his hair were the marks of a bush comedy
A bush comedy so good it could run forever without seats 
The little version of the novel, every novel he read at night
That he played out with his bosses, with strangers, his wife
The wife has another ancestor with the same name, related
That the lightning spilled down the hill in hot liquid form
A form that was repeated and parodied in the hill’s plants 
Take this string and wrap it round the painting as if alive
As if alive and attempting to survive out there in the bush
Take the clock and time the boy who went to get the milk
As if you can get milk from a large white rabbit that makes
The sound of death, chewing grasshoppers like a machine


^^EOP^^




Sabratha



He started out making feluccas;
an Egyptian taught him how.
Then he opened a shop by the beach, 
sold ice cream, parasols and chairs.
He asked for my hand when I was
in teacher college, first year. 
Time passes like the Ghibli here.
I was 7 months with my third baby
when someone sought him 
for a Zodiac. He traveled all the way
to Guangzhou, brought back a dozen,
has been selling them ever since. 
One night I asked how strong
they were, how many they carry.
“It’s all in the booklet,” he said, 
“no reason for what keeps happening
to them.” He sipped from a glass
of bokha and explained how 
from this same jetty, long before
the Arabs and Vandals, even before
the Romans and their famous theater, 
boats filled with people and goods
and sailed off. A day or a week later,
the sea sends back the drowned. 
His long-lashed eyes closed when
he spoke, his face unchanged by the years.
His fingers moved so carefully 
putting out his cigarette. He saw me
looking, nodded, then pulled me toward
his manhood to help him sleep.


^^EOP^^




From the sequence “Shekhinah Speaks”

Comfort, comfort my people ...
—Isaiah 40:1



A voice says, “Your punishment has ended.”
You never listen to that voice. You really suck
at being comforted. 
Another voice says, “Cry.”
That voice always gets your attention,
keeps you thinking 
about withered flowers and withering grass
and all the ways you’re like them.
Hard to argue with that. 
Death tramples you, an un-housebroken pet
trailing prints and broken stems,
pooping anxiety, PTSD, depression. 
It’s better to be animal than vegetable
but best of all is to be spirit
flying first or maybe business class 
with your emotional support animal, your body,
curled in your lap, soaring with you
above the sense of loss you’ve mistaken 
for the closest to God you can get.
You want to cry? Cry about that.
Who do you think created 
the animals to whom you turn for comfort,
dogs, miniature horses, monkeys, ferrets,
hungers you know how to feed, 
fears you know how to quiet?
I form them, fur them,
it’s my warmth radiating from their bodies, 
my love that answers
the love you lavish upon them.
Your deserts and desolations 
are highways I travel,
smoothing your broken places,
arranging stars and constellations 
to light your wilderness.
Sometimes I play the shepherd;
sometimes I play the lamb; 
sometimes I appear as death,
which makes it hard to remember
that I am the one who assembled your atoms, 
who crowned your dust with consciousness.
I take you everywhere,
which is why, wherever you go, I’m there, 
keeping you hydrated, stroking your hair,
laughing when you chase your tail,
gathering you to my invisible breasts 
more tenderly than any mother.
You’re right—you never asked for this. I’m the reason
your valleys are being lifted up, 
the source of your life laid bare.
Mine is the voice that decrees—
that begs—your anguish to end. 
When you suffer, I suffer.
Comfort me
by being comforted.


^^EOP^^

Does realism get your vote? It gets mine.
The plants with their insatiable thirst for appearances,
the heart-stopping 7:00 p.m. air moonlighting as a pressed-cardboard Korean ashtray
(server, modest coaster) decorated with a single blondish branch
holding six leaves and a piece of rose-colored fruit (pear, plum, ripe peach)
slightly raised as if applied to the flat, creamy space behind
flecked with light gray, light green, and brown marks of varying size
from pinpricks to ashes, pencil (it looks like) to brush.
The romance of the windowpanes (I’m squinting a little) has nothing
to do with the misguided view, the one with the Fates schmoozing
under the maroon awning of the high-rise (schmoos is more like it)
and the embarrassed-looking sycamores revealing for all they’re worth
in their slightly fictionalized but emotionally accurate way, which  contributes to the overall tone
without detracting from the realistic participation,
a motorbike taking the corner too fast, a cat knowing the worst that can possibly happen and managing to avoid it,
which could be the key signature if not for a free-standing
radiance just outside, unmoored, a hint of plum or Anjou pear.


^^EOP^^

Once & could-be-future girl, believe we’re not like you. Sure,
the pickup was tucked in dusk, shed all carefree w/ its sunburn
shimmer. Still nothing new to say about the creek, how reeds
get moony, or when we saw pelicans hold hands & gossip.
But y’all must wanna get this close to soft, so here goes: spool
heels, silver sleeves w/ pink accents, kind to stifle the trailer
static, same color Dot says Granny passed in. Past since good
& we did keep her pearls for you, kissed the hems holy, darned
the moth marks back to true. Goes: none of it imitation. Goes:
we are her barefoot bloodline, butter in the salt pan. Trust
you’re not from this sweat but still a goodness. You once most
only boy in the yard, laugh into your born polish. Step-joy,
uncousin: home is a name you bless in silk & cinch. Believe
we’re all alive here. Come hum this lace blood-warm. Glisten.


^^EOP^^

The thought
of all the grass 
blown over to one side
hurts me. That wind 
can do that. I must have
gotten to him first 
though he pushed out against
the little pouch in me 
I now call soulless.
Of everyone I’ve met 
on earth I always find
they got here first 
and will they teach
me their good 
reason for staying?
I would discipline 
a comet against
my way of leaving, 
push it out of sky after
sky and after 
every loss on earth
the baby I was 
would come back. That’s
what it means to be lovable, 
to give oneself whole
again whole birth 
whole placenta whole
breast whole milk 
whole fist whole flower
but only what fits 
harmlessly whole
in the mouth. 
The baby comes and goes,
comes back to weed me 
of my body, feeds my
bald birdies 
what’s not for me to know.
I had hoped that all 
my animosity toward men
would lead toward 
safety in one who
would wake me before 
I hit the wooden world
and rock me there 
to say what violence
had not yet come.


^^EOP^^

slate 1
 

   slate 2
 
   slate 4
 
 
 


^^EOP^^

in the cornfield along with the husks and splintered baseball bats
(I almost said smitten, as though late p.m. in October
were the moon and not just a windy compound)
and the risk-tolerant deer, woodchucks, crows, and occasional wild turkey
all of which darken perceptibly but don’t stop. Reading stops.
Like the active voice which the French use for weather (“Il fait ... ”)
so the subject takes on a cloudy presence but no reference,
sans agency sans intrigue sans whereabouts.


^^EOP^^

What injures the hive injures the bee, says Marcus Aurelius. I say
not wanting to hurt another, this late, should maybe more than
count, still, as a form of love. Be wild. Bewilder. Not that they
hadn’t, of course, known unkindnesses, and been themselves
unkind. When the willow’s leaves, back again, unfold all along
their branches, the branches routinely in turn brushing then lifting 
away from the pond’s face, it’s too late. Last night I doubted as I’ve
not doubted myself in years: knowing a thing seemed worthless
next to knowing the difference between many things, the fox from
the hounds, persuasion from the trust required to fall asleep beside
a stranger; who I am, and how I treated you, and how you feel. So
that it almost seemed they’d either forgotten or agreed without 
saying so to pretend they had. Did you know there’s an actual plant
called honesty, for its seedpods, how you can see straight through?
Though they’d been told the entire grove would die eventually, they
refused to believe it. The face in sleep, like a wish wasted. To the wings
at first a slight unsteadiness; then barely any. What if forgetting’s not
like that—instead, stampeding, panicked, just a ghost choir: of legends, 
and rumors, of the myths forged from memory—what’s true, and isn’t—
that we make of ourselves and, even worse, of others. Not the all-but-
muscular ache, the inner sweep of woundedness; no. Not tonight. Say
the part again about the bluer flower, black at the edges. I’ve always
loved that part. Skull of an ox, from which a smattering of stars
keeps rising. How they decided never to use surrender as a word again.


^^EOP^^

          The way to the toy store was blocked by a fallen tree
in the road. There was a policeman directing traffic down a
side street. I asked him, “What happened?” He said, “Lightning
in the night.” I took the turn and drove down the street
looking for a way to turn back. Other streets were blocked by
fallen trees, and I couldn’t find a way back to the toy store.
I kept driving and soon I was on the outskirts of town. I
got on a highway and drove, soon forgetting the toy store and
what I was supposed to get there. I drove on as if I was hypno-
tized, not noticing the signs for turnoffs. I must have driven
a couple of hours before I woke up, then I took the next exit
and had no idea where I was. I drove down a straight tree-lined
lane with farm houses on either side. There was a lake at the
end of the lane. I pulled over and parked. I got out and
started walking. There were several docks along the shore.
I walked out on one and watched the ducks swimming and diving.
There was something bobbing in the middle of the lake. I stared
at it for a long time before I realized it was a man’s head.
Then, a moment later, it was a coconut. No, it was an old tire
floating right side up. I gave up and started following the
ducks. They would suddenly fly up and circle the lake and
come down and splash land again. It was quite entertaining.
A man walked up behind me and said, “This government lake is
off-limits to the public. You’ll have to leave.” I said,
“I didn’t know it was a government lake. Why should it be
off-limits?” He said, “I’m sorry. You’ll have to leave.”
“I don’t even know where I am,” I said. “You’ll still have
to leave,” he said. “What about that man out there?” I said,
pointing to the tire. “He’s dead,” he said. “No, he’s not.
I just saw him move his arm,” I said. He removed his pistol from
his holster and fired a shot. “Now he’s dead,” he said.


^^EOP^^

begins in dirt, clumps of Queen Anne’s lace, bindweed unfurling its moons in the morning  to start somewhere to perform one’s certain act of  failure 
begins as still life with foliage and road 
one man with a shovel, digging one measure-full of map, a clump resting heavy on his blade 
one woman in a house up the grade laboring at a washbasin, her hands pinked raw, her mind worrying some idea east to west, passing it through every state her imagination has to offer 
begins with her view: blot of man in grass landscape  to throw one’s sorrow throw one’s lonely sorrow like a clod of dirt to the sky 
begins with the sound of rustling, dried stalk against stalk in wind whipped up by the motion metal makes through place 
and you, love, in the passenger seat with muddy boots and what’s native to your veins 
the window rolled down, the hand making waves 
and me admitting: I am that woman, I am that woman  make us thread and lace us let us be a vessel holding everything together 
silence to silence, thwap upon thwap of fence posts gauging speed 
then Briza maxima, big quaking grass rattling 
a car towing a car with a hitch-line 
the shock of scotch broom in a ditch giving order, yellowing the scene,  defining margin and median 
the blocks of who lives where, the borders of recognizable plots we create when we wake, we create in our wake 
networked, but not in the way General Pershing displayed his blueprint  for defense  to weave our fingers strong as rope to bond with knots something other  than a nation 
begins with the defenseless, the redlined neighborhood thought less than 
the dips and curves and blinker’s blitzing through the dark 
we feel in the heart, centrifugal force 
and we ride: no destination, no end to the turning ego, its fuel of insecurities  to be moving and acting and weaving through space 
the trace of our being here, tattooed in asphalt like the body’s Blaschko lines made visible 
a pattern, a pattern manifest, the way we were made  your palm look at your palm look at all the connections you hold in your hand


^^EOP^^

I sang all night for you, but you didn’t care. You were too sad. Little bird,  I said to myself, you can’t bring anybody back, but maybe you can keep him here. I thought you liked my song. But I couldn’t tell now. You looked angry, but you stayed in the room where I sang. I inherited the song. Not from my parents. Not from my grandmother. My grandfather doesn’t sing. My song was mine and I thought you liked it. I thought you loved me. Now you showed no sign of loving anything. But you stayed in the room all night. The room was full of statues with coins under their tongues. I felt bad for building them. Some don’t even have names. Sylvia, Ian, Anne, Emily, Seb. You barely moved. Sometimes, you moved. Little bird, I told myself, little bird, pretending I was you, I love you. Please sing for me. I didn’t want you to leave.  I kept singing.

 


^^EOP^^

If all the dead exist in the underworld, does the underworld occur outside of time, what does that mean for your father, through what magic will you locate your father who has only just arrived, has always only just departed, only just deported, did you don a suit and loiter on the highway your hands gripping a giant gilt-framed photograph of him and what questions did you interview at all who passed those vampires and angels you encountered, can you state for the record the moan you heard the ghosts emit across the nation-state,,, wuaahh buu,,, did you perform three miracles for a virile hag a witch with universes for eyes and did you request in barter a single boon his location or did you unlock his location using a skeleton, are we all a line assembled from white keys of death and is this song the sonata we hear when we press those keys, was your tool to search for him a wishbone, did you slice the wishbone from the breast of a monstrous old god, who was the god, what was his username, was it one of the ghost-giants you fled from terrified that he may have glimpsed even a shred of you, was it the famished god who grabs small ghosts to its mouth and slurps down their marrow, was it a devourer whose fingerprints leak out red tears in hysterical shame, was it Francisco Pizarro, was it King Leopold, did you see Joe Arpaio levitating each leg borne aloft by flying police cars, did you see Winston Churchill that infant-faced faminist turning loose new Emergencies, was it Andrew Jackson mounting a scorpion across that moist trail this pilgrimage for creating new ghosts, did the ghosts cry out wwuu wah,,,,,,,,, how did you kill the god, is revolutionary politics the name for deicide,, a wa wa,,,, is the translation for that moan “god grief!” did you slay the god with smallpox or pistols, hemlock or Maxim, London debt or land grants or fantasies or plague blankets or kryptonite, was it patricide, did you pry your fingers into his rib cage, did you hold the bone’s moist handles up into the sky and poke that plump cloud with your dowsing rod, did the stick sniff out your father from this city of ghosts until this wet rod twitched, until the witching stick tugged you through hell’s alleyways, until you arrived here at this modest house, what category of building is the house that contains your father, until you found a prison, until you found a shadowless space where he waited underneath a star, is death the story of until, is death the story you came to untell, did the light emit a silence like hssssssshs, this light the star wept—was it a message from the past strewn across black heaven, an emergency beacon from a plague universe calling help help from masters and money, what sound do you hear arrayed against you (here the ghost chorus leaps and screams keke keke!), did the star halt above that house like a police chopper spotlight, basking its blue heat on your skin, was this when the star’s strange beams obliterated your shadow, did you cry no please my shadow is all I have here, did you say without my shadow I am a ghost, without my shadow I have no history, how did you feel when the star cried and wailed down its weep-light in fragile pink lineaments, did you see the star throned above where your father may be waiting, is your father the king who sleeps in a cave beneath the city or does his life continue in this mute house, is he washing the dishes as we speak, is he talking on the phone in that loud way of his, is he watching a K-Drama while eating 牛 肉 麵, did he clip the soup’s recipe from that most authentic of sources Gourmet magazine, had you bought him the subscription for his birthday and was his reply to you months later, “Fine, these French can cook but take away butter and they don’t know how to do anything,” (hahahahaha say the ghosts) was that many years ago now in fact probably a decade, did you just glance down at your wristwatch to show how many days are left in your very own life, do the manic watch hands ratchet around like helicopter blades chuh chuh chuh, were you given this watch from your future self that renegade timelord, do you have the time, is time something one can possess or does it soar away from us on outspread wings, but doesn’t Dōgen say that time does not fly since it does not exist outside of us, is it impossible to exist outside the underworld, did you open the front door to the house and see the living room from your childhood, the white Naugahyde couch preserving the dark halo that he cast when he dozed off during his hair dye, the cubic light of a TV luminous solely from VHF, and framed by the window: a blue Honda, car of his youth!,,, these nostalgic recreations do they make you wonder if you had somehow time traveled to a coordinate outside of the underworld, traveled to the past, or would it be more accurate to say that we are already inside the underworld, that the apocalypse is not a spectacle but what elapses as we speak, what does it mean to speak,, ha ha blah blah blah,,,, did you tour the house of memory saying nothing, did you find the doors to each room shut, all handles locked, is this how your waking brain prohibits all fantasies, is it true that they have outlawed dreams, who is they, did you come to your bedroom door and open your wallet to take out your key, did you see on a dollar the face of an evil god, did Andrew Jackson wink at you from the currency and bare his fangs hsss sa sa,,,,,,, was this when the five dollar bill singed you, did the sign of the apocalyptic populist ignite and burn out the grooves from your fingerprints, how loud did you holler shocked, did your wallet keep falling into the floor and never stop, did the floor wobble like a trampoline, did a menacing voice laugh and say on god’s intercom here is your shadow catch, did you fall through the hole in the carpet, did you land in one of the old sewers and in the distance see someone sleeping on a stone slab, was it a body curled to the side uncovered by any blanket, did you talk on the phone with the woman from the ambulance, was it true that your sister and your stepmother saw his body covered only with a sheet, did the woman tell you what she had seen and do you remember telling her “You have a terrible job—you must tell everyone that the one they love has died,” did you recognize her when you entered this place and saw the Recording Angel, is the occupation of that archivist of prayers: writer, did the sleeping figure roll back as though on an airport conveyer, do the walls of the cave inch closer to strangle you, is the underworld a prison since those who enter it have no right to return, who will rescue you, who will rescue you now that you have lathered yourself with cave, is it true that you have forgotten how to breathe, did you aspire to be as breathless as the ghosts who populate this place or did you just have a bad day, would you like to stop, would you like to stop and catch your breath huh huhh huh, did you simultaneously call your expression narcissism and your restraint self-loathing, doubly self-damning, have you been given permission to forgive yourself, shall you ask the mirror Uncle what ails thee, what about your dowsing rod, will you wish for water, wish for air, witch for heir, did you tap your bone wand to the gray rocks repressing you, did the earth and its baroque caverns transpire into the simple night about you, did you look down through the wind from a ship sailing dark heights, did you find the ship’s steadiness strange given that nothing supported you above sky and city, well is the air nothing, was it the Maya who said that soul was simply breath, is the soul nothing, what if you crept into the airship’s spacious caverns and saw not helium but a palace of flowers, what if the entire vessel had been borne up by the exhalations of flowers their breath tasting sweet into the air, what if this was the world, what if you lived on a planet that had grown itself from the souls of flowers, did you once believe that grief was the philosopher’s stone whose touch silenced all spacetime into dark matter, on Sunday did you meet a man at the market who had returned to Haiti the day before the earthquake, did he tell you what that taught him, was the lesson to quit his job and love his daughter and begin afresh, did he remind you that you imagine the world for your child, is the poet what we name the vocation of love and freedom, on that first summer day in March did your child’s grandparents text you Christos Anesti, did you sit yourself down in the airship’s aisles unsuspended by clouds and float in the silver air, buoyed by nothing so magical as resurrection, did you take a deep breath and accept an in-flight complimentary beverage, did you gaze out the window at the spill of stars and think no not stars, the lights of the city, each one lit by a soul below?


^^EOP^^

What would the lovely Yang Guifei,
concubine to the emperor,
a Helen of China, have made
of our gleaming grocery stores, 
always awash in berries, melons,
tangerines? Her passion for lychees,
rushed north by a chain of horsemen,
laid waste to a dynasty. 
She must have understood,
at least upon the deadly finale,
the cost of transporting food
so fragile over so many li 
for pleasure, not necessity,
while the kingdom faltered.
History wants a great beauty
to undermine a ruler 
through human weakness.
And who of highest power
would deny his most-loved mistress
her longing for a flavor 
available briefly, far away?
There’s something classical
about her appetite, about the chain
of sweating couriers, thirsty, fearful 
of bruising the delicate fruit.
It proves how far we’ve come,
those tiny stickers with PLUs
and far-flung nations of origin 
so common, we decry the waste.
The good peasants of antiquity
always ate locally, if at the cost
of variety, and under tyranny. 
Neither they nor we would refuse
a bunch of ripe lychees in December.
Neither they nor we get to choose
who would eat humbly, who like an emperor.


^^EOP^^

We come to the city; we embrace the pantheon,
but they dream of their one and only god.
They want to be villagers again. 
Just when you began to distinguish
the sound of your history from its echo,
they want to be villagers again. 
You must not kill their sacred animal;
you must give up your taboo for theirs
for they want to be villagers again. 
Sunlight and shadow is what made this rose, you say,
a god who could not have arisen elsewhere
but they want to be villagers again. 
The twist in your tongue is the river’s song.
It’s how your feet walk now, how your fingers strum,
but they want to be villagers again. 
The dusk of their coffee, their muddy water booze,
the herb of life shooting out of the impeccable concrete,
but they want to be villagers again. 
You point to salt escaping the sea’s hold—
a vision of a tundra reclaiming the desiccated grass,
but they want to be villagers again. 
You build terraces for the ancient woods to breathe,
but haunted by maggots eating their dead bullock—the speed
of light is always late—they’ve become villagers again.


^^EOP^^

Unlike the monarch, though
the asteroid also slipped
quietly from its colony
on its annular migration
between Jupiter and Mars,
enticed maybe by
our planetary pollen
as the monarch by my neighbor’s
slender-leaved milkweed.
Unlike it even when
the fragrant Cretaceous
atmosphere meteorized
the airborne rock,
flaring it into what might
have looked to the horrid
triceratops like a monarch
ovipositing (had the butterfly
begun before the period
broke off). Not much like
the monarch I met when I
rushed out the door for the 79,
though the sulfurous dust
from the meteoric impact
off the Yucatán took flight
for all corners of the heavens
much the way the next
generation of monarchs
took wing from the milkweed
for their annual migration
to the west of the Yucatán,
and their unburdened mother
took her final flit
up my flagstone walkway,
froze and, hurtling
downward, impacted
my stunned peninsular
left foot. Less like
the monarch for all this,
the globe-clogging asteroid,
than like me, one of my kind,
bolting for the bus.


^^EOP^^

You have to make sure you have skin in the game was one of the rules they
yelled out near the end. Also one must have hope. Also watch the clock, the clock is running out. Out of what. I had hoped to escape. To form one lucid unassailable
thought. About what? It did not matter about what. It just needs to be, to be 
shapely and true. Let me tell you. To feel a thought one came up with one’s self.
Out of one’s interiority. There. That’s the whole story. If humanity. If to hang on claw
back what to call it. However atrophied. Not not-living. Yes horribly close-
quartered. However much we missed the bus. However much we should have 
been there while it lasted. Hear us: it lasted. Even here off the bus its lastingness
keeps blossoming & spooling onward. Yes it’s a game it’s always just a game. The wind is
hissing this all afternoon. But even it, raspy and weakening, plunders this space that it
might find some emptiness. From mind. Lean in & you’ll hear plenitude. Listen it’s trying 
to make a void again. In which to hear itself. It’s too alone. Everything wants em-
bodiment. But there’s this noise now it’s replacing everything. This humming of agreement
fast-track skipped-step information yes yes yes yes lost hope lost will—dear dis-
embodiment, here is an old wind, watch it orchestrate event, I raise my hand to find 
my face again, I know I am supposed to think I’m whole, there is no holiness in me,
can I begin again, I’d like to try to get this right, we might if gotten right go
on, whom am I speaking to, whom, I’ll pick up the acid the wrappers the 3D glasses, I’ll
gather up the spotless tools printers magnifiers, the place is wired for sound I’ll cut 
the wires, I’ll drag the cursors off, I’ll sweep it clean, they’ve taught me to, I think this way because I am human, that’s my secret occupation, I am unusually common, I can get it
right if you just tell me, we have a shot, whom am I speaking to, why is that laughter
seeping-out nonstop from the invisible, from hospice hospital embassy cathedral— 
oh ghost institutions—why must you hover here—spy here—before me always though in-
visible. Or is it invincible. I can’t make out the words being said. Or is it sent. In my
direction. I’ll wait for an answer. I have indeed nothing better to do. I have nothing
actually at all to do. We cannot remember having that—a thing to do. To be needed 
what was that like. To figure, discover, uncover, recover. To make bring think shape.
To fold, to crease prepare serve-up. To imagine. To buy hold name sell. To shape. To
order. This haunts us now. To make a thing for another. For another’s use. To fashion,
to offer, to bring, hide, make. To serve. Oh to serve.... My new humanity is now relieved of 
duty. My soul has its alarm turned off. No my soul has this knot in its throat—or is it a
gag—pacified, petrified, up all night counting silently toward infinity. Losing its
place. How many of us are left. What else could happen. Has it all already happened.
Who is they. That autocorrected to thy. Why. No matter what I say it fixes it. It’s fixed.


^^EOP^^

Mortality is itself immortal Leo thought, reminded five
years later of the performance. Having come, despite his
Irish darkness, to resemble one of the Carrot clan
himself. Whatever he had read, and the feelings that went
along with those books, articles and poems, layered his
unconscious now like lava. What was the voice of that
moment, he questioned his uni-ball pen. The playing
fingers, the singer, the wind that came in and made King
Carrot pop his collar. As even the King’d say now, after 
Usher. Usher’ll die like everyone else but not for a few
decades yet, touch head. Where Leo wandered as if
streets were wild with flowers rather than construction
Mortality was in memory: mortality was immortality
even. Quotidian checking, marking, jogging things along
(e.g. the economy) these are the columns and emojis of
obituary. The privileged sublime? The working artist
reading the world under a misprinted title, taking
pills to still contradiction, lines of sky gray, and 
greenery (tracing the eyeline of buildings’ weed
mascara). The forcing of life through an earth crumbling
with fatigue and love gone wrong: or was that the
humans standing on it? Yes, we all needed some grace
to get from one side of town to the other. And how have
a career without going up some real stone steps? To see
things and write them up, whether on bench or phone
while stopping, or on a keyboard once home. To Leo
death was always shocking: whether blighted cornfield 
defunct toaster or road possum. Anything might’ve had
poison tipped into its ear: think of Carrot III slumping as
the piano lid closed, and knocking a candle over. The
singer leaping from her stool, suffocating the flames
before giving the gift of life, making every line she’d
sang that night seem crucial. That’s what Leo—and
probably everyone else who was there—remembered, if
only because a new song about superficial human life
(“A river is thicker than royal blood”) soon ruled the air


^^EOP^^




[For J.A.]



After the wind just stops you still hear
the wind’s wild almost, its approach and retreat, and how it kept
circling as-if-trying, as if about-to-be, an almost-speech,
loud and full of syntax casting about for 
life, form, limit, fate. To be bodied. To strut. To have
meaning. How easily we wear ourselves
as if it is nothing to have
origin, whirl, outcome, end      and still be. 
After the high winds stop you’re forced to hear
the freshness of what’s
there. It smacks, shimmers—this sound of
the scarcely there, the adamantly almost, all betweens, sub-­ 
siding till adjustment—and then the re-blanketing evenness sets in ... Gone
all that acceleration shooting up and back, futurist, wild with naming and naming
its one price. Oh nothing holds. Just the rattling of the going and
coming together of things, as if matter itself is trying 
to find something true to
say—crazed investigation, tentative prophecy trying on savage
shape, figure, progression—widening without be-
coming. Is this the last war now, finally—but no, only more of notion’s 
motions—more more the wind says, break grief, loosen possibility, let vague
hopes float, sink—let other debris slip into
their place. Rootless mind. Shallow whirling of  law and more and yet more law
brocading the emptiness. Then suddenly 
all stills. It is near noon. No more
spillage. No more gorgeous waste of effort. No more upgathering,
out-tossed reachings of green as if imagining some out there exists—hovering
inhalations, then as-if-hiding, then all coughed-out at once in a tumble— too much, 
too many, disconcerted, uncountable. Yet no dream ... 
After the wind stops you hear fact. You hear fact’s plan. It is huge.
The tree does not escape. Things are finished forces.
You hear a name-call from far off, tossed, dropped. Someone gives up.
Light rips here from there. Where birdcalls cease, you hear the under- 
neath. Try living again day’s long pitched syllable-ooze
hums after the high winds stop & your final footprint lifts off & no matter how clean you want it to be
nothing is ever going to be gone enough. Oh. Oak, show us up.
Indecipherable green sound us. Stilled leaf-chatter quiver up 
again, rustle the secret rule we’ll never catch in
time. To be late is to be alive. This Sunday. All things are
mention of themselves—as the dog barks, the air conditioner
scours its air—and each thing takes its place. But look, keenly, adamantly 
a road has appeared—a sense that something is happening striates
the open air—there is a limping in the light, a tiny withdrawal of light from
light, which makes a form in the gully—you haven’t changed much it
says—children still appearing out of nowhere now, so violently heavy with 
life, they dart, they breed, you be a ghost now the surrounding tunes up, 
as if it is all going to begin again, though this time without you
standing here noticing.... So notice is given. The look on the light
is that of an argument about to be made and won.
Yes you were underneath history for this while, 
you were able to write the history of being underneath,
you were able to disappear and make the rest appear.
But now it wants its furious place again, all floral and full of appearance,
full of its fourth wall, its silvery after-tomorrow, 
and ramping-up now quite a spectacular dusk.
This page is turning. It is full of mattering. Our unrealized project glows in
your mind. The animals lift their heads for an instant then back.
New shoots in the parched field. All the details are important you think but 
no, even the ruins look like they might be fake—important but fake—
though we must learn what they have to teach then push them back
deep into the light. This is the way it is it murmurs, circling,
out here in the middle of summer. Which summer was it which was 
the last of the summers. All the children are returned home. Day turns its windless
folio. You stay it says. We pass here now onto the next-on world. You stay.


^^EOP^^

In a dream my dad fell 
      from the top of a steep       white       mountain 
            down       into a blue       crevasse
            like the space between       two waves
            where the light       shines through       just enough
            to tell you
            you will miss this life dearly. 
              The falling took years. 
              I could hear him moving through air       and then finally nothing.
   
In another dream       my dad was an angel 
      his see-through body dangling in the air 
              floating above me       face shimmery like tinfoil 
                     and I cried and cried when he told me 
                     I can’t come back to earth now       not ever.    
                                                                                 When my dad told me 
                                                                                      You will always be my daughter 
                                                                                            maybe it was like that.   
                                                                         Will I be allowed to come back to earth 
                                                                         and be your son?


^^EOP^^




After Mondongo’s “Políptico de Buenos Aires” and María Teresa Hincapié’s “Una cosa es una cosa”



born here a mutation. given a mutation. immediately. in what they name misery village 31.  
             what do you see, said brother, exiled to another quadrant?  
in the middle a hole. to one side a highway birth appearing much more Thursday. close to us a
demolition attached to bullet train. hole right here. box here. steel threads. steel cars there. bumps on
wax surface here. seats to magic mutating show up above and diagonal.  
                                                                                                   who cannot return to examine hole
asks remaining ones: do you see?
                                               ten boxes leaking on his back. mother’s tooth and eye. 40,000 brick
shacks demand windows. neighbors punch holes for water.  
          do you see?
hole here a singer with scaffold mouth          singer born a string of golden altered light         singer
with a radioactive suitcase      mirror lined with silver teeth          door full of crabs           singer a mouth
in boat full of mattress          paper bag masquerading as zinc roof            an eye against all false honey
          body in corner is a paper bag no a dispersing skyrise brother who hasn’t written his lesson yet  
          how to have peace?
an exquisite purple blind in the one purple house closed to sun     a scattered business emptying drains
overnight because government won’t do it    we all paid before each breakfast
                       under soil there are more stories alone  
you see?
                                               landmark eye plucked from ostrich?
           hair line remediators shamefully planted because of refractory mistake?  
           collector says village 31 full of growing miserables asks for bodies which contain fabric
sees 500 tiny threads collected as fees in jars           not alone water          not alone electricity     not
alone highway use       modification IDs if you must poke blood  
I know you took them hole there and charged five pennies for a soft creature                  all flowers
here      on the flip side, lightseekers attend a cathedral of  spreadsheets searching new red skies
                      on the flip side, a healthy boy sits in chair reading alone a masterpiece  
single knife      single thread              single hole
                                                                                             a soft penny for a breath


^^EOP^^

We used to say,
That’s my heart right there. 
As if to say,
Don’t mess with her right there. 
As if, don’t even play,
That’s a part of me right there. 
In other words, okay okay,
That’s the start of me right there. 
As if, come that day,
That’s the end of me right there. 
As if, push come to shove,
I would fend for her right there. 
As if, come what may,
I would lie for her right there. 
As if, come love to pay,
I would die for that right there.


^^EOP^^

          My wife and I were spending a quiet night at home. She was reading
a magazine on the couch and I was reading my novel in my chair. I said,
“Darling, can I fix you a cup of hot chocolate?” She said, “That would
be great.” So I got up and went into the kitchen and started to boil the
milk. A few minutes later I handed her the cup. “Hmmm, smells great.
Thank you, darling,” she said. I sat down and resumed my reading. She
said, “Did you know a tiger has the same number of bones in it as a monkey?”
“I don’t believe it,” I said. “And a whale has the same number as a mouse.”
“Get out of here,” I said. “These are some little known facts discovered
by a man named John D. Baxter,” she said. “He must be crazy,” I said.
Then we were quiet for a while. I looked over and she was asleep. I went
on reading my novel. Then I put my novel down and got up and started to
tiptoe around the house. I went into our bedroom and over to the dresser.
I opened up Mitzy’s jewelry box and let the jewels run through my fingers.
There were some fantastic pieces in there, diamonds, rubies, emeralds. I
thought about stealing some, but felt creepy about it. I put them back in
the box and tiptoed back into the living room. I tripped on the coffee table
and went crashing down. Mitzy woke with a start. “Go back to sleep,”
I said. “What was that?” she said. “I tripped, that’s all,” I said.
She started to get up. “Where are you going?” I said. “I want to look in
my jewelry box,” she said. “Why?” I said. “I dreamed somebody was trying
to steal something in there,” she said. She went into the bedroom and
looked in the box, then came out. “It’s okay,” she said. “Well, I’m glad,”
I said. She got back on the couch and picked up her magazine. “Did you
know jellyfish have bigger brains than humans?” she said. “I don’t believe
it,” I said. “Well, they do. It says right here,” she said.


^^EOP^^

If I believed in a god, he would be a sea god, like the sea
in its predictability—now approach, now recede—beneath
such a god I would not mind, I think, being the shore, say of the sea
what you will, it’s the shore that endures the routine loss
without which what strategies would there be for softening
the hollowness that any victory, give it time, comes with,
how curb the risk of arrogance, with its doomed but
not undangerous hound, complacency? ... I made this for you—
put it on. I know it’s not going to matter whether the decisions
I made were the ones eventually I even meant to make, or
should have, or should have thought maybe more than
twice about. What’s history anyway, except—according to
the latest mouth saying so—just what happened: I flourished
undramatically, to no apparent purpose, like pretty much
everyone. The sea dragged the shore; the shore suffered the sea.


^^EOP^^

          Mitzy fell asleep as soon as we got home, but I didn’t.
The evening had upset me. Why did Jack keep asking me if I’d
been married before? And why did my answer not satisfy him?
It was probably just a bad joke. Jack’s humor is off sometimes.
But he’s not a bad guy. Well, then I went to bed. When we woke up
in the morning Mitzy said, “Jack was right about you, wasn’t he?”
“What do you mean?” I said. “Jack said you were kicked out of
the Army,” she said. “I was never in the Army, how could I be
kicked out?” I said. “I don’t think he likes me.” “Oh, I think
Jack likes you a lot. He just wishes you were more interesting,”
she said. “And by making me secretly divorced and secretly kicked
out of the Army I’m instantly more interesting, is that it?” I
said. “According to Jack you are,” she said. “I think we had better
have breakfast,” I said. “Good idea,” she said. During breakfast
I said, “Don’t you think I’m interesting?” “Of course I do, honey,”
she said. “Let’s forget it. I mean, Jack is an old friend. Maybe
he was just drunk,” I said. “That’s probably it,” she said.
“What are you going to do today?” I asked. “I’m thinking of buying
a new dress for the wedding,” she said. “What wedding?” I said.
“You know, Carol and Bob’s wedding, next Saturday,” she said.
“Oh God, I forgot all about it,” I said. “How could you forget?
Bob’s your best friend,” she said. “I know, I just had my mind
on other things, but now I’ll focus on their wedding, I promise,”
I said. Shortly after that Mitzy left the house. I cleaned up
the breakfast dishes, then sat down on the couch. Why had Jack told
the two secrets I had told him years ago. I had sworn him to
silence, and now everybody knew. I had told him I would kill
him if he ever told anybody. I wasn’t going to kill him, but I
did think about disappearing, just vanishing altogether. Where
would I go? What would I do? And I do love Mitzy. I could tell
her the truth. I’ve had eighteen years to do that, and not a
squeak so far.


^^EOP^^

ONE 
The First Invention, ear laid to earth, is listening
to the fingerlength underground beings moving in segments
through tiny tunnels; one inch shrugs out another,
as bamboo climbs in segments, joint by green joint ... 
Or an inexpressive mask that must travel
the world, uphill and down, always keeping its own
counsel, impelling  forward from inward—
unspelling a logic that cannot look out or see. 
Or a thought that recurs, till one wonders
whether Bach’s theme, without cause, or pause,
is like a cat in a night-closet, the cat evenly leaping
from level to level; the theme that sinks down 
into one hand, next leaps to the other, reprises itself,
then doubles down softly, a counterpane on a shelf. 
SIX 
Have you ever noticed, in Piranesi’s Carceri d’invenzione, the tiny repeating figures in the foreground?
Brittle, frugal, fugal, they ignore that above them
stairways rise out of sight, and somewhere else 
collapse, in-swallowed, devolving through walls or domes.
The same way Bach’s motive splays out to the right,
swoons flatly, swans it, footnotes, follows up,
talks to itself, purls, mutters, dawdles, resumes ... 
Six is playing at infancy, one three five,
that’s all Baby knows, a block pile clumsily building.
Then the tall chord falls sideways—pretends
it’s a melody—everyone knows it’s a chord— 
or a problem in long division which at one point just sticks
on that endless, that déjà vu decimal, six six six ... 
ELEVEN 
Eleven is caterpillars, two, marching: the one
stave of thick-barred sixteenth notes set down
precisely beneath the other, tiptoe to toetip,
close-clinging, rising and falling and mirrored: 
one looks down and locks the other’s horns,
or its own; the two could be said to be linked
like the locked yet endlessly out-spiraling
spindled ribbons of DNA. Yet there’s something 
scary, like Cicero’s dizzying concept
of motus animi, hurtling mind unstoppably inventing
figures on figures, yet with no vanishing point,
a world of ladders or stairwells 
where space keeps revolving, welling up into space
endless, unfree, unfolding like stairs in a case.


^^EOP^^

          I told the doctor I wouldn’t be seeing him again. “No, I guess
you won’t,” he said. I walked out the door feeling really good. Of
course I knew I was going to die, but still the day looked bright to
me. I walked down to the water. Ducks were circling around and about.
A sailboat sailed by. I walked along the shore. The sun beat down
on me. I felt as though I might live forever. I sat down on a bench
and watched the joggers pass. A pretty blonde walked by and I said,
“Hello.” She looked at me and said hello. A man with a greyhound
on a leash walked by. I got up and started to walk. A woodpecker
was pounding on a tree. An airplane flew over, leaving a thick trail of
smoke. I left the lake and walked on up the road. I crossed at the
streetlights and crossed the bridge. A car swerved to miss me. I
thought, that could have been it, the end right there, but I walked on,
bravely dodging the cars. When I got to the residential district, I
felt relieved. There were large elms and maples overhanging the street,
and people pushing baby carriages. Dogs ran loose everywhere. A man
stopped me and asked if I knew where 347 Walnut Street was. I said
I didn’t. He said, “Oh well, it didn’t matter anyway.” I said, “Why?”
He said it was a funeral notice. I walked on, bumping into a fat lady
with a load of groceries. I said I was sorry. She kept going, dropping
a load of grapefruit. Then, further on, there was a giant explosion across
the street. Police and firemen were there right away. It appears it
was a gas main beneath the shop. No one was there, luckily, but the
firetrucks had their hands full. I left before it was out. The shop
was pretty much destroyed. When I got home I was tired. I made
myself a cup of tea and sat down on the couch. I thought about calling
my mother, but she was in heaven. I called her anyway. “Mom, how are
you doing?” I said. “I’m bored. Don’t come here. There’s nothing to
do,” she said. “Aren’t there angels?” I said. “Yes, but they’re boring,”
she said. “But I was going to come see you,” I said. “Go to hell, it’s
more exciting,” she said. I had fallen asleep with my teacup in my
hand. When I awoke I realized I had thought it was a phone. My
mother would never be so sarcastic about heaven.


^^EOP^^

I am unhappy about your description of my life as dull.
It is dull but I dislike you using the word dull. 
If I could I would unhook the receiver from the wall and
place it on your dirty mouth. I don’t feel able to elucidate. 
If you hadn’t known the German for lose/lose, if you
hadn’t the face of Dürer as Christ in Self-Portrait of 
Dürer as Christ

^^EOP^^

growing into ourselves
earnest and funny we were
angels of some kind, smiling visitors
the light we lived in was gorgeous
we looked up and into the camera
the ordinary things we did with our hands
or how we turned and walked
or looked back we lifted the child
spooned food into his mouth
the camera held it, stayed it
there we are in our lives as if
we had all time
as if we would stand in that room
and wear that shirt those glasses
as if that light
without end
would shine on us
and from us.
 


^^EOP^^

Holy the days of the prune face junkie men
Holy the scag pumped arms
Holy the Harlem faces
looking for space in the dead rock valleys of the City
 
Holy the flowers
sing holy for the raped holidays
and Bessie’s guts spilling on the Mississippi
road
 
Sing holy for all of the faces that inched
toward freedom, followed the North Star
like Harriet and Douglass
 
Sing holy for all our singers and sinners
for all the shapes and forms
of our liberation
 
Holy, holy, holy for the midnight hassles
for the gods of our Ancestors bellowing
sunsets and blues that gave us vision
  O God make us strong and ready 
 
Holy, holy, holy for the day we dig ourselves
and rise in the sun of our own peace and place
and space, yes Lord.
 
 
                                                                                                1969/70
 


^^EOP^^

We did not want to be
unblessed, so we were blessed.
 
Long, thin wire, a little
patch where we might lay our
 
heads. It was this way, this
looking fore and back, a pole
 
held tightly in our
hands. You want to tell me
 
what went wrong? Confusing
shapes across a wall, depression
 
in the ground. The gorgeous
soldiers fought and fell. Hie 
  unto hell. How we will lie in
that brave grave apart,
 
our aperture: a heart
that has been ruptured
 
absolutely by a passing God.
 


^^EOP^^

Extricate, but not too much,
unfaithful digger of concordances,
let be the whole tasty clutch of it, rhyme
of I’m, not, awake,
child,
bequeathing willow trees beside a stream.
Not only old ravines
but Euclid Avenue,
my first escalator (Hal-ease Department Store)
were woven in the mat where sat the cat.
I say Department, was a sexual story
because Mother’s store it was, her bailiwick,
father absent in a void called “Work.”
Precarious. Don’t try get it all in. Bailey’s
was another tasty store, such glitterglass.
And later learned that testicles was store,
alaya-vijnana.
O dark dirty Cleveland, the Viking Club, the mysteries!
All I want is loving you and blank-blank blank-blank blank-blank
It’s only unmentionable because there’s no end to chasing it
the tale of it and you and sustenance.
Hundreds are fleeing, but not hurricanes.
Violets, I always brought her wild violets in spring.
Breathless romanzas secret in the Flats.
Percolate the spiderwebs.
Not what you expected, eh?
I could bite you back, you furry thing, but you’d never understand.
 


^^EOP^^

All life long
you are unhanding
unhanding and unhanding
what was handed you.
 
All life long
you throw out the line of life.
You throw out the line, stinging
up from your guts.
 
Were they planting trees,
your father and your mother?
Did they ever plant?
Is that a line of trees
far away
green line?
 
All life long
you include something
that includes your life.
You are in the egg.
 
                                          (                In the center of a picture,
                                          two angels hold a transparent crystal
                                          egg of teardrop shape. In the egg
                                          the ocean god is throned, left leg
                                          crossed over right, trident in right
                                          hand. Under his outstretched arms two
                                          children or little people stand, a boy
                                          at his right, a girl at his left. The
                                          boy’s head is crowned with a sun, the
                                          girl’s, with a crescent moon.
 
                                                         That’s the middle level of
                                          the picture. At the top a blazing
                                          sun with human features dominates the
                                          vertical axis. At the bottom a man
                                          and a woman kneel on either side a
                                          furnace, man to the right of the
                                          furnace, woman to the left. In the
                                          furnace itself, directly below the egg
                                          containing the god, is suspended a
                                          similar egg, empty.                            )
 
All life long
the dew falls from heaven
all life long
trees climb up from underground waters. 
 
In the seed of the old god the new gods are swarming.
 
Earth is ready for planting.
 
The shut eye is opening.
 
The heat.
 


^^EOP^^

Dreamer of purified fury and fabulous habit,
your eyes of deserted white afternoons
target, stiffen, riot with unicorn candor
so I swallow your body like meanings or whisky or as you swallow me.
 
Break rhythm here:      your kiss is my justice:
look then now how orange blooms of jubilation unfold in satisfied air!
This sex is more than sex, under the will of the God of sex,
so I softly invoke transformation of your rueful image of haven
–those frozen rocks, that guilty lighthouse isolate from temptation–
to warm Flemish landscape green and brighteyed with daisies of
     dizzying color
where pilgrims are dancing after gospelling bird who sing of
      new springs, good water.
 


^^EOP^^

1.
 
hear them cry
the long dead
the long gone
speak to us
from beyond the grave
guide us
that we may learn
all the ways
to hold tender this land
hard clay direct
rock upon rock
charred earth
in time
strong green growth
will rise here
trees back to life
native flowers
pushing the fragrance of hope
the promise of resurrection
 
2.
 
such then is beauty
surrendered
against all hope
you are here again
turning slowly
nature as chameleon
all life change
and changing again
awakening hearts
steady moving from
unnamed loss
into fierce deep grief
that can bear all burdens
even the long passage
into a shadowy dark
where no light enters
 
3.
 
night moves
through the thick dark
a heavy silence outside
near the front window
a black bear
stamps down plants
pushing back brush
fleeing manmade
confinement
roaming unfettered
confident
any place can become home
strutting down
a steep hill
as though freedom
is all
in the now
no past
no present
 
4.
 
earth works
thick brown mud
clinging pulling
a body down
heard wounded earth cry
bequeath to me
the hoe the hope
ancestral rights
to turn the ground over
to shovel and sift
until history
rewritten resurrected
returns to its rightful owners
a past to claim
yet another stone lifted to
throw against the enemy
making way for new endings
random seeds
spreading over the hillside
wild roses
come by fierce wind and hard rain
unleashed furies
here in this touched wood
a dirge a lamentation
for earth to live again
earth that is all at once a grave
a resting place a bed of new beginnings
avalanche of splendor
 
5.
 
small horses ride me
carry my dreams
of prairies and frontiers
where once
the first people roamed
claimed union with the earth
no right to own or possess
no sense of territory
all boundaries
placed by unseen ones
here I will give you thunder
shatter your hearts with rain
let snow soothe you
make your healing water
clear sweet
a sacred spring
where the thirsty
may drink
animals all
 
6.
 
listen little sister
angels make their hope here
in these hills
follow me
I will guide you
careful now
no trespass
I will guide you
word for word
mouth for mouth
all the holy ones
embracing us
all our kin
making home here
renegade marooned
lawless fugitives
grace these mountains
we have earth to bind us
the covenant
between us
can never be broken
vows to live and let live
 


^^EOP^^

When ice outside makes daggers of the grass,
I come to where the tides of life still flow.
The water here still moves behind the glass.
 
In here, the seasons never seem to pass—
the sullen shark and rays still come and go.
Outside the ice makes daggers of the grass
 
and coats the roads. The meditative bass
won't puzzle how the blustery blizzards blow.
The water here still moves. Behind the glass,
 
rose-tinted corals house a teeming mass
of busy neon creatures who don't know
"outside." The ice makes daggers of the grass
 
and oily puddles into mirrors. Gas
freezes in its lines; my car won't go,
but water here still moves behind the glass.
 
No piles of valentines, no heart held fast—
just sea stars under lights kept soft and low.
Outside, the ice makes daggers of the grass;
in here, the water moves behind the glass.
 


^^EOP^^

Seventeen suns rising in seventeen bedroom windows. Thirty-four eyes blooming open with the light of one more morning. Seventeen reflections in the bathroom mirror. Seventeen backpacks or briefcases stuffed with textbooks or lesson plans. Seventeen good mornings at kitchen breakfasts and seventeen goodbyes at front doors. Seventeen drives through palm-lined streets and miles of crammed highways to Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School at 5901 Pine Island Road. The first bell ringing-in one last school day on February fourteenth, 2018. Seventeen echoes of footsteps down hallways for five class periods: algebra, poetry, biology, art, history. Seventeen hands writing on whiteboards or taking notes at their desks until the first gunshot at 2:21pm. One AR-15 rifle in the hands of a nineteen year old mind turning hate for himself into hate for others, into one-hundred fifty bullets fired in six minutes through building number twelve. Seventeen dead carried down hallways they walked, past cases of trophies they won, flyers for clubs they belonged to, lockers they won’t open again. Seventeen Valentine’s Day dates broken and cards unopened. Seventeen bodies to identify, dozens of photo albums to page through and remember their lives. Seventeen caskets and burial garments to choose for them. Seventeen funerals to attend in twelve days. Seventeen graves dug and headstones placed—all marked with the same date of death. Seventeen names: Alyssa. Helena. Scott. Martin—seventeen absentees forever—Nicholas. Aaron. Jamie. Luke—seventeen closets to clear out—Christopher. Cara. Gina. Joaquin—seventeen empty beds—Alaina. Meadow. Alex. Carmen. Peter—seventeen reasons to rebel with the hope these will be the last seventeen to be taken by one of three-hundred-ninety-three-million guns in America.


^^EOP^^

God started small                     At the first showdown
between good and evil       God didn’t come at anyone 
like a cowboy       God didn’t open with solar flares
or asteroids       or mass extinction            or planetary heat death 
God didn’t outgun anyone               God outmanned them
God made man        in the face of the beast 
And in the face of the beast      God made     —from inside 
the great and gaping maw         while languishing 
in the hot damp                           In the face of that 
great terror          God summoned the smallest— 
adrenaline        serotonin        hemoglobin        oxytocin        motes
of possibility      God started by making— 
light into land masses      sand into vessels      preservation
as civilization   and sometimes   God won
 


^^EOP^^

So it has come to this –
insomnia at 3:15 A.M.,
the clock tolling its engine
 
like a frog following
a sundial yet having an electric
seizure at the quarter hour.
 
The business of words keeps me awake.
I am drinking cocoa,
the warm brown mama.
 
I would like a simple life
yet all night I am laying
poems away in a long box.
 
It is my immortality box,
my lay-away plan,
my coffin.
 
All night dark wings
flopping in my heart.
Each an ambition bird.
 
The bird wants to be dropped
from a high place like Tallahatchie Bridge.
 
He wants to light a kitchen match
and immolate himself.
 
He wants to fly into the hand of Michelangelo
and come out painted on a ceiling.
 
He wants to pierce the hornet’s nest
and come out with a long godhead.
 
He wants to take bread and wine
and bring forth a man happily floating in the Caribbean.
 
He wants to be pressed out like a key
so he can unlock the Magi.
 
He wants to take leave among strangers
passing out bits of his heart like hors d’oeuvres.
 
He wants to die changing his clothes
and bolt for the sun like a diamond.
 
He wants, I want.
Dear God, wouldn’t it be
good enough just to drink cocoa?
 
I must get a new bird
and a new immortality box.
There is folly enough inside this one.
 


^^EOP^^

My favorite is the cream puff lie,
the kind inflated with hot air,
expanded to make an heroic-sized story.
 
Another is the cannoli, a long lie,
well-packed with nutty details,
lightly wrapped in flakey truth.
 
A macaroon isn't a little white lie,
but it's covered
with self-serving coconut.
 
The apple tart carries slices
of sour gossip, only
slightly sweetened with truth.
 
Then there's the napoleon,
an Iago lie of pernicious intent,
layer upon layer of dark deceit.


^^EOP^^

"A cradle thief," my mother called the man
we'd see in shops, cafes, parks, even church,
with "that poor girl" beside him. Hand in hand,
they'd walk as if they didn't feel the scorch
of people's stares. The day we saw him press
his lips to hers, my mother blocked my eyes
as if his mouth (I longed for my first kiss)
against her mouth was smothering her cries.
All week, I ran a fever that wouldn't break.
"A cradle thief"—a voice I only half
knew as my own surprised me in the dark,
my sick-bed wet with shivers. "A cradle thief,"
I said again, as if the words could will
my window broken, footprint on the sill.
 


^^EOP^^

My lost sister used to try the trick
with the tablecloth, waiting until
the wine had been poured, the gravy boat filled,
before snapping the linen her way
 
smug as a matador, staring down
silver and crystal that would dare move,
paying no mind to the ancestor gloom
gliding across the wallpaper like clouds
 
of a disapproving front—no hutch
or bureau spared, no lost sister sure
the trick would work this time, all those she loved
in another room, nibbling saltines,
 
or in the kitchen, plating the last
of the roast beef. How amazed they would be
to be called to the mahogany room
for supper, to find something missing,
 
something beautiful, finally, they could
never explain, the wine twittering
in its half-globes, candles aflutter, each
thing in its place, or so it seemed then,
 
even though their lives had changed for good.


^^EOP^^

Her sister was shot, and hers found bludgeoned
dead in her car trunk; her mother was alcoholic,
and hers a suicide; her daughter killed by an uncle,
and hers stayed alive thanks to prison.
Before the term, date-raped, she was. Before domestic violence, love punched her face.
 
We wanted the career. Not just skills and money,
but structure, focus, printed plans, the rowdy order
of raising buildings that years later would still stand
right where you left them. We joined a tradition,
expected a well-marked path and a welcome.
The earnest ads never mentioned
 
we’d be human minesweepers steering around
barricades, sinkholes, lethal instructions, We learned
Solidarity was a corporation privately held.
Some left in shock. Some were maimed.
Some went missing. A few found gold.
 
Those with talent for sifting real threat from bluff,
or detecting hair-triggers before the blast, fared best,
We taught ourselves to disarm booby traps, shared
hand-drawn maps, and prepared for a long winter.
We lied on postcards home.  
 


^^EOP^^

Everything you thought you knew
must be relearned overnight.
 
How to walk.
Walk, not trip, over cords, 2x4s,
used coffee cups, concrete cores.
Walk, 40 pounds on your shoulder, across
rebar or a wood plank; glide,
not wobble, not look like the bounce
beneath each bootstep scares you.
 
How to dress yourself
to work outdoors all day midwinter
and keep warm, keep working, fingers moving;
or midsummer, with no hint of breasts.
 
How to climb ladders–
not a stepstool or a 4-footer–
ladders that stretch up two stories
where someone’s impatient
for that bundle of pipe.
 
How to get coffee–
hot and how they like it–to a crew
spread out 10 floors; to carry muffins
three blocks in a paper sack
through sheets of rain.
 
How to look.
To never go back empty-handed
when you’re told, Grab me a This/That from the gangbox, if all you’ve done
is move things around, poke here and there;
if you haven’t emptied out the full contents
so the journeyman won’t shame you
by finding This/That in a quick minute,
after you’ve said, We don’t have any. 
 
How to be dependable
but not predictable-provokable.
Not the lunch break entertainment.
 
How to read
blueprints,
delivery orders,
the mood on the job;
how long it’s okay to sit down for coffee;
how early you can start rolling up cords.
 
How to do well in school
from the back row
of a seats-assigned-Jim-Crow classroom
How to learn tricks-of-the-trade
from someone who does not like you.
 
How to listen, to act-don’t-ask.
To duck when someone motions, Duck! 
Or when someone tells you, Don’t talk to Zeke,
to know what they mean
so you don’t even look
at Zeke, the ironworker who’s always first out,
last in, standing there, so four times a day–
start, lunch, quit–all the workers walk past him,
like a sandbar, waves washing back and forth,
that catches debris.
 
How to pick up the phone and call your friend,
the only one of the women not at class
the night the apprenticeship director met you all
at the door
carrying the nervous rumor
that one of the women had been raped
and you all look at each other
and it wasn’t any of you five.
 
How to respond–within protocol–
when someone takes your ladder or tools,
imitates your voices on the loudspeaker,
spraypaints Cunt on your Baker staging,
urinates in your hardhat,
drives to your home
where you live alone
with your daughter
and keys your truck parked
in your own driveway.
 
Later, you’ll need the advanced skills:
how–without dislodging the keystone–
to humiliate a person, how to threaten
a person. Deftly.
So no one’s certain for absolute
that’s what happened. Not even you.
 


^^EOP^^

I was cold and leaned against the big oak tree
as if it were my mother wearing a rough apron
of bark, her upraised arms warning of danger.
Through those boughs and leaves I saw
dark patches of sky. I thought a brooding
witch waited to catch me up from under
branches and take me, careening on her broom,
to her home in the jaundiced moon.
I looked to the roof of mom and dad's house
and wondered if the paisley couch patterns
would change during the day. My brother peeked
from a window and waved. When the bus came,
I pawed away from the trunk, fumbled,
and took my first step toward not returning.


^^EOP^^

The door to the past is a strange door. It swings open and things pass through it, but they pass in one direction only. No man can return across that threshold, though he can look down still and see the green light waver in the weeds. 
          Loren Eiseley   
A door opens in the wilderness.
People cross through it—bloused women families
 
Acquaintances friends all the ones I have loved
Sleep-walkers night-walkers each dazed and shorn—
 
Street aurous with ice, a snowfall scratched into
Moons—and everything I’d known—
 
Inside the bleak floating light of my lungs
In the capillaries of my eyes a blood
 
Glancing through the hatches—
If I said I would always be grateful
 
If I lied or touched with spite
If night is just a foamline of shadows
 
Though we were both lost—the door
Opening—the fear of being shown
 
Whole to the one who must love you still—
And stopped as if on a walk to say
  Look at that and what matters what really counts 
And I’ll tell you everything if you promise I promise
 
I stood at door and behind me heard
Snow-plows scrape against roads
 
At the center of night—unknown to yourself 
And the word I said out-loud to no one
 
That meant it was all to no purpose 
The word for the desire inside destruction 
 
For everything that can never be brought back—
Loose snow blown hard to each bank
 
And the common reel of those who
To avoid one extreme rush toward its opposite—
 
Snow blasted to piles—and never opened up to
Anything that could reach me until you reached me—
 
Which hours belonged to us
When was I unknowingly alone
 
Why did you always return to walk here a path
Behind my closed eyes shedding salt
 
Dry snowfall and sticks—still were you here
With me I might say The moon rose in the casement window 
  The red-haired boy across the street has learned to ride his bike
There are still picnics there are fountains
 
And the world I am leaving behind says One learns to see one learns to be kind—
 
I closed my eyes I closed my hands
I shut down the fields in my arms
 
The cattle on the plains veins ditches
Blue ravines a gray bird
 
Sailing through a poplar brake kids
Throwing snow I closed the last swinging juncos
 
Sheep wool caught on barbed wire I closed
Fumes and clear patches of sky I seized
 
The river the town I shut down
The hard muscles of sleep farmlands
 
Warming under midnight salt-lights scruff-pines
On the ridge animals scattering across slopes I closed
 
The smooth bone of evening a storm
On the hills white and noiseless spindled
 
Prairies where I was born I shut I seized
The clouds I closed in anger—fervor—ardor
 


^^EOP^^




^^EOP^^

you save me half a bag of skins, the hard parts, my fav, dusted orange with hot 
 
•  
you say we can’t go to the bar cause you’re taking your braids out
i come over, we watch madea while we pull you from you 
 
•  
you make us tacos with the shells i like & you don’t 
 
•  
i get too drunk at the party, you scoop my pizza from the sink with a solo cup, all that red 
 
•  
you, in the morning, bong water grin, wet chin 
 
•  
you, in the lawless dark, laughing like a room of women laugh
at a man who thinks his knowledge is knowledge 
 
•  
i text you & you say, i was bout to text you, bitch 
 
•  
you cook pork chops same way i do, our families in another city go to the same church 
 
•  
you, rolling a blunt, holding your son, is a mecca 
 
•  
you invite me out for drag queens on the nights i think of finally [ ] 
 
•  
you pull over in Mississippi so i can walk a road my grandfather bled on 
 
•  
you gave me a stone turtle, it held your palm’s scent for a week 
 
•  
i call your mama mama 
 
•  
you request like a demand, make me some of that mango cornbread
i cut the fruit, measure the honey 
 
•  
you & you & you & you go in on a dildo for my birthday
you name it drake, you know me 
 
•  
a year with you in that dirty house with that cracked-out cat was a good year 
 
•  
at the function, i feel myself splitting into too many rooms of static
you touch my hand & there i am 
 
•   do you want to be best friends?
a box for yes, a box for no 
 
•  
did our grandmothers flee the fields of embers so we could find each other here?
friend, you are the war’s gentle consequence 
 
•  
i am the prison that turns to rain in your hands 
 
•  
you, at my door the night my father leapt beyond what we know
you, dirt where i plant my light 
 
•  
the branches of silence are heavy with your sweet seed 
 
•  
you smell like the milk of whatever beast i am 
 
•  
your poop is news, your fart is news, your gross body my favorite song 
 
•  
you, drunk as an uncle, making all kinds of nonsense sense
i listen for the language between your words 
 
•  
& when we fight, not a ring, but a room with no exit
we spill the blood & bandage the wound, clean burns with our tongues 
 
•  
if luck calls your name, we split the pot
& if you wither, surely i rot 
 
•  
we hate the same people, we say nigga please with the same mouth 
 
•  
& before we were messy flesh, i’m sure we were the same dust 
 
•  
everywhere you are is a church, & i am the pastor, the deacons, the mothers fainting at the altar 
 
•  
as long as i am a fact to you, death can do with me what she wants 
 
•  
my body, water, your body, a trail of hands carrying the river to the sea 
 
•  
i ink your name into my arm to fasten what is already there 
 
•  
i would love you even if you killed god 
 
•  
you made coming out feel like coming in from the storm 
 
•  
you are the country i bloody the hills for 
 
•  
you love me despite the history of my hands, their mangled confession 
 
•  
at the end of the world, let there be you, my world 
 
•  
god bless you who screens all my nudes, drafts my break-up text 
 
•  
you are the drug that knocks the birds from my heart 
 
•  
ain’t no mountain, no valley, no river i wouldn’t give the hands for comin’ to you sideways 
 
•  
o the horrid friends who were just ships harboring me to you 
 
•  
& how many times have you loved me without my asking?
how often have i loved a thing because you loved it?
including me 
 
•  
& i always knew 
 
•  
with yo ugly ass


^^EOP^^

We’d pout. Our mother, brisking off,
urged Darlings! — your vitamins & minerals
dissolve inside with the milk & this-&-that
into instructions rejiggering more
vitamins, minerals, milk & this-&-that
to fizz up & turn into actual you,
or me, or anybody & etc. 
Experiment: — you might let drop
capsules & milk into spit in one
another’s cups. Watch, wait;
think, add, stir. I’ll be right back. 
One day it quits.
The whole business quits. Imagine that.


^^EOP^^

wit h bee f a nd veg gi es
b less ed wi th an e gg
sa ff ro n sul li ed c hil lin
w ith g arl ic or d irty n ot qu ite
re d bu ggin the bea ns
or jus t ri ce, wat er th e mi ra cl e
of sa lt t he gr a in s pr omi se
to pil lo w an d st retc h
i u sed to ha te r i ce
hat ed it h ated h ow
br oke it sou nde d rice rice rice a po cket
w ith thr ee co p per co ins
hu n ger s tamb our ine
i h ate d al l of it
h ated the w ate r
gh ostbl eac hed by sta rc h
hat ed th e p uff y mo on s
po ckin g my sto m a ch
lik e a si ck ne ss
end in g sic kn ess
hat ed ev eryth ing
th at i woul d mar ry no w l eg it wo uld
i wo uld m arry wa ter
coul d it hav e me
wi tho ut de adi ng me
i d m arry the m oon
cha nge my n ame
to it s ho ur
i wou ld w ed t he y o lk
go ld r ice stu ck
in th e yo lk yell ow tee th
of m y hom e girls w ere it n ot
alr eady jew els
mini ng th eir lau ghs
bl in ge d ou t li ke a do w ry shi nin
nex t to th e bi lls of m int bov ine rib bons co n fet t ied c ar rots


^^EOP^^

                                    all you have to do
                                    is show yourself
                              in case you hear us
                                  we are so small
                and fenceless in the shade
                           throw us a hook
                             when you can
                 touch the scribbled
              child in the inferno
             all you have to do
   is show yourself a little
                pin your dark
         olive green parts
 against the boulder


^^EOP^^




I.M. Ché Frye



i 
Kubla Ché, dreaming of ancient
Egypt, ate his hyacinths and was
marvelous. Wherever you are is
what I’m meant to say. Before you
beauty come, Dis crouching among
the black basalt, kneading master’s
soured linen, watching (bewatched)
the great beaten gold litter borne by,
deltoids sun-dewed stone, temples
bronze & strong &     in train     in
       thrall perpetual — 
                                I am of a mind,
daddy. Like, inside the blind-white
cloth-of-gold, the scented, sweating
box she sat in (think box, lock box) — 
Phoenician forest, seeder of  known
world’s every known green: malachite,
sea-green jasper, chrysocolla, olivine — 
& outside, too, other-handed, other-
landed, in rainless, treeless Thebes, my
dark knees tendered by two lands, rubbed
bare by work & love — 
       Move the tombs to the cliffs of
Beni Hasan. Send salt from the four
lakes. She is Nefertiti, she shares
the crown, she brings the single sun.
You do not watch the sun. But in
the Deeds of  Suppiluliuma she
says she is fearful     but there is no
fear past true heresy, her beauty is
clear of the next line & the next and
that kind of  beauty is     if not
redemption the possibility of a
separate resurrection.
      (Am I not beautiful too?)
      The miners are instructed: Find a
vein, gouge it to the very end.
 
ii 
Princeling Ché, wolfling Ché, fish-
eyed prodigy, anabole, brother
mine, all-beautiful boy, who’ll turn
your pages now? The lines unfurled
before you in your sleep, who sets
them to song? I cannot. (All men
have crowns and every crown can be
broken.)
       Were your senses mixed (blood
shaking your heart — orange, with
violet veins) or did hearing alone
stay and go last, were your nostrils,
at last, unblocked, your ears, at last,
symmetrized, did you unravel
first silence    did you dream?
       Maimonides says of Abraham
it is not God he disobeys but
Elohim; that in the bureaucracy
of divine instruction the envoy
fore the eyes supersedes the voice
in the ear     did they close your
eyes, daddy?     they must have
closed your eyes (enucleate the
globe, ligate the four recti, fix in
formalin) for under the sole edict
of sound
                     the son is killed.
 
iii 
Of  your father we dare & do
not speak.
 
iv 
Wherever you are, you are not
your death. You are not your cold
body, your subclavian blood, your
spine upon the body block that
proffers up your organs, your
humors pooled with gravity — you
are abed in natron, my friend, you are
forty days not in a metal slot but
roused into the mirror world, the
eastern fields of light, the father
sun rayed gentle on the rushes &
not the prosector but the jackal
keeps your stomach & the falcon
your intestines and your heart
remains your heart is yours for you
there are no more tests of   heart.
 
v 
My friend, magnificent, across your
empty desk they go on trading base
metals & precious gems. They found
flint in feldspar caves, below the first
cataract, where single stones, actioned
by wind, can mother a dune. They trade
tin south to children of  the stars, mix
alum with deep-red alizarin to
dye, to delight them who are yet to
learn the violence of  such charm
       heart hanging in its bloodslick
chamber     heart gleaming in its
rubied darkness
                   My husband, my god,
my gold-mad son
                                               lorn
issue, dim & darling eyes flooding
with natal sand, every night flooding
my free past. What’s a queen know
of this     my babies in their sunless
cease     what’s a queen’s knees know
but milk & crystalled honey     her
throat but subtle Mareotic wine     sun
smelted to gold, disced & sledding
behind her
       the whole world’s whole life
given her to give — 
 
vi 
Look, the dreamer comes!
                     Was this what you sleep-
conceived, this equal dialogue     this
black silt talk rife in death & germ
all-mixing, estuarizing, high-banked
along the flood’s go-down? (it
lowers down its voices, the flood     it
helps me to think, blessed ram, of
death as flood     for in it all
things high & low, fair & dun, flax
& inlaid faience, free & liened &
husbanded are leveled, meet, and
proven in the engorged     the
enchafèd delta.)
       I see it now. (The trick of death
is that it keeps returning.) Lady of
all women, they call me, they are
all my children now. (Labors of
my dim life.) I will prepare each
part for them. (From the front, no
back     from behind, no face     am
I purged at last of the various
envies?)
       I will build a city for you.
      (I will build a city for you.)
 
vii 
Twenty years ago we were nineteen
and already elegiac, we were
future tensed & annealed, we were
quenched in the dark peace of
violent histories — Karnak, Babylon,
Persepolis, Byzantium — the names
alone     (quarry our bones, convey
us to Karnak)     our names we
preserved, bent to stave & strophe,
accomplishing our envy, gathering
our violence, we were altogether
desire, (only ever) all we would
be     full of  imminence     (light
first, sun later)     stayed, asituate,
unforgiving.
 
viii 
Now you are time’s but I say to you,
Ché, in full mouth: We will be perfect.
There will be a recognition. The skill
has left your fingers, the dream your
brainpan but time, too, is prospected by
work     (the lumen of the vein)     (the
schist afire through the rock) and humans,
too, may burn like candles, their spines
wicks, their feverdreams the sputting
flames — 
       Work in the shadows. We will work
in the shadows, the rest being the
madness. Naughty naughty boy. Ward
residuum. Hold to murmur, hold
to method. You see? Time breaks along
its faults, lays bare its jeweled fragments
for those who love and work. It gives
it all for free. It asks only reversion
at the end. (And like, that end whereof
we could not think     thereof  (no
questions asked) you spake & said, My
father     and you answered, Here am I,
my son)     O tell me — go, you go
first (you went first) — what reason
makes this right, what insupposable
value, what excuse but ultimacy which
all know to be the breath of evil? 
       I will build a city for you.
 
ix 
About beauty they really got it, those
masters: great wonders call for great
suffering. The father straps down
his son, carves along the throat’s chalked
crease (signaling purpose), the slavers
slough off infants into sand holes
(streamlining, focusing the workforce),
the queen conceives eternal city, she
deracinates a people to upraise it
with their bowed backs, mortar it with
their warm, oxygenated blood     sunk
generations & contingency &
opportunity cost     gambling our
own lives’ great gamble: that wrong,
actioned by time, can be made
soluble in art.
                                            So,
Volchénochëk, you may be absolved — 
I tried & trying.
 
x 
Listen, I want to say something to you.
You arrived just in time. You told me
they’re not better than us, you honored
our sin, repaired my will, you were
havoc in the trees, the dense infolding
fire & its fuel at once (white fusion,
wild usufruct)     always your mind
was the Emergency, always severaled,
chording the upper & lower, equal
& bonded in appetency, bonded
always to mine.
       This is a moment of children.
Who cares who sees? (Who sees?) We
scoff at faultless entropy, we strip the
pith from the inner stalk, we count to
three. Talk me into it, daddy (the
first rolls were blank)     oxidize
this carbon black significance — heart
of water — this red hematite & blue
frit, these yellow ochres that every
child knows enflesh the unreal
sun — 
 
xi 
Put it another way: the ink gleams
for three more words before it (and
meaning) sets. In those three beats I
must be thousand-faced, entelechied,
liable, I must be totally told on — 
       in the middle of my life
a myth, a tidal mouth, I am planted
in bitter celery, in the phytolithic
matrix     all-possible clay     I sense
your slow impulsion all around me.
       Heart’s lake, calendula on my
fingers, laughter in the morning-
golded reeds (shaking the papyrus),
the scale in the wind that shakes
the reeds, deus absconditus, the only
gossip of the living, I miss you
so much.
 
xii 
Either we are eternal, with neither
end nor beginning, or we are
sprung from a single thing and
proliferative — in either case death
is not death (though time cannot but
give form to suffering). Believe
(if you must) as I must: 
       In all things moment.
       In each thing everything.


^^EOP^^

Hear me 
Neglect turned everything to gold 
Midas touch     I turn the comfortable 
To the dead     an anti-elegy tho     I’m 
Learning not to mourn what I make 
It’s a complex     this gravity I birth unknowing 
Not my complex     yours     say it 
I am owned by several things     all of  them 
Inherited from a horizon claimed before 
I was languaged     Invoke the historical 
Somethingsomethingsomething Chains 
Somethingsomethingsomething Unworthy 
I’m citizen of a clumsy imperative 
Belonging     is a concern of a self   I deaded 
Past participle implies the historical is a mob 
Try again     I mobbed my own lonely and was legion 
Play some offense then     Gold the impossible wound 
Citizen of  betrayal     Citizen of the going going going — 
Recursion     this fugitive state as native to me as my father’s 
Eyes     chestnut of a tree felled before we were languaged 
See   Inheritance is a hell of a drug     We Black and highly valued 
For our Flex     I said what I said     and became citizen 
Of  this petty excuse for forever     Flex on ’em then 
Invocation of the bicep I have and the bicep throttling me 
I live here now     Mississippi     and everywhere is everywhere 
That someone may have escaped from     Fugitive 
A sad motivation for river     It’s a strange thing 
That belief you are beautiful be a subversion of the water 
But here I am     winter gasping at the conditions 
Too weak to even strangle the grass to soil     No instead 
Trees feathered with their hollowed offspring 
Here the wind don’t howl just blooms a militia 
Of castanets     seven people were lynched here 
I looked it up and nobody will tell me which tree 
You are not as tired of the image as I am of uncertainty 
Every day the rain threatens     Every day my same imperious lonely 
Hear me     the sun ran like a punk     the sun ran like it owed 
Not even the gold     is trustworthy     why gold? 
Because it was the color of my love     and by extension 
The life I buried here     Gold the genesis of one lonely 
My ancestors were traded mere miles from here     Gold the genesis 
Of  another     I know they are not the same in anything but geography 
Still it is an act of   Flex just to stand anywhere     gravity being what it is 
Attempt the volta toward impossible     Midas the lonely into a radif 
Dreams of living life like a gilded garrote 
                                                                                     Flex 
The crown of scar tissue still the crown 
                                                                                     Flex 
Go to therapy if  you scared 
                                                                                     Flex 
Shuck the fear out of  the opposition 
                                                                                     Flex 
Every day gold for the sake of your attention 
                                                                                     Flex 
Your hereness a mountain plumed with trees 
Branches hemmed like unplayed notes 
A history can be undone with less than an alphabet 
Amend the scandal of the time that brought you here 
Fled to Flex     Ex. My family fled from Mississippi 
My family Flexed from Mississippi     and you become 
The muscle driving you forward     See     you were ugly 
Once     because you believed it     Dire invocation 
I am some kind of unkillable and don’t know how to act 
Everything I said I couldn’t live without 
                                                                                     Gone 
Lucky me     to be born into a language of mistakes 
I leave the violent on Seen and watch them wither 
Turns out I was their gravity     their forgetful sovereign 
I Flex     they flinch     the sonics of the words     cousins 
By virtue of a pistol     This is how I was taught to bridle 
Sadness like an American     Run with a band of  kids 
With silver caps     so you know we bad     waiting for the bone 
Eviction     Flex like value native to your mouth     Tooth out 
A tiny moon     a second grin shimmering in your palm     Flex 
The loss     the cost is secondary   Hear me     a life I had ended 
While I was trying to pursue the life I wanted     by pursuing 
A loss cobwebbed as a bride     All of this true the calcium winnowing 
Under the gold     I widowed my own comfort     I am in danger 
My squad an echo     my squad a promise you get dead someday 
If you touch me     thus I’m untouched     Neglect killed the grass 
The dead turn to gold before they resurrect     I am framed 
By a pastoral I might have escaped once     O the history 
O the lineage     the renowned Flex of survivors     I’m here 
I’m back     muscled like a creek          or the whisper 
That threads a storm miles later     Maybe not     Stick to the facts 
I’m alive despite a growing and planetary grief     I wear a chain 
Somedays     and a sweatshirt that translates to     I Am Coming  Back For What Is Mine     Gaudy surprise on the faces of children 
Of owners     They think I am impossible     They think I am a ghost 
I Medusa like my daddy taught me     their eyes wilt and are 
Ill-tended grapes consumed by the skull     I’m metaphoring 
I told you     I don’t know how to act     but I know how to anthem 
My lyric loose and I got time today     I’m the type of  bad 
No synonym alive can hold


^^EOP^^

Nothing
better
for people
than dogs
nothing better than ma
king
you scream
here. There were
two super
new cars
and then
some pink
chicken
filets
I guess
there were
berries
for sale
in Scandinavia
a man in
a plaid
shirt &
cookies
also they
are
working
in the ceme
tery
I can see
their blue
ladder
from here.
A man
has written
a book
about many
deaths
or many
things to do after.
Read it
read it
they say
but what
comes
after
is a small
idea. Now
is large
rainy.
Amy I wish
you luck


^^EOP^^

a girl     buried to the chest
in red earth         her wrists 
bound beneath the soil
with twine    a crowd gathers 
to father her                 its infinite
hands      curved loosely around 
a stone                   small enough
that no single throw   is named 
as cause of death           no single
hand       accountable to the blood 
the girl   undaughter         unnamed
unfaced         undone from the lineage 
her photographs               pulled already
from bookshelf   from walls    her father 
among the hands             his pebble
streaked with quartz      the first to rise 
to carve the air & arc     toward the girl
the rootless tree          faceless & erect 
& perhaps the stones             twisting
like fireworks                        the girl 
their nucleus                   rise    & rise
for a time                  opposite of rain 
opposite of  hail & perhaps the silence
a beat too long                       & another 
another                    & then a rustling
of  wings                        above the girl 
a flock                   thick mixed cloud
of avifauna          partridge & nightjar 
& golden sparrow                  & avocet
& lapwing               & every other sort 
of  plover        & ibis & heron & gulls
though the sea    is far & to the north 
& the minutes pass & the girl is untouched
& each bird in its beak        tongues a stone
 
•  
[what if  i will not die]  
[what          will govern me then]  
[how         to govern me then]  
[what bounty           then            on my name]  
[what stone       what rope              what man  
                                              will be my officer]


^^EOP^^

1  
Her story is a part of something larger, it is a part
of history. No, her story is an illumination 
of history, the matchstick lit in the black seam of time.
Or, no, her story is separate 
from the whole, as distinct as each person is distinct
from the stream of people that led 
to the one and leads past the one. Or, her story
is surrounded by history, the ambient spaciousness 
of which she is the momentary foreground.
Maybe history is a net through which 
just about everything passes, and the pieces of her
story are particles caught in the interstices. 
Or, her story is a contradiction, something ordinary
that has no part in history at all, if history is 
about what is included, what is made important.
History is the galleon in the middle 
of the Pacific Ocean, in the middle of the sixteenth
century, swaying like a drunk who will take 
six months to finally reach his house.
She is on another ship, centuries later, on a journey 
eastward that will take weeks across the same ocean.
The war is over, though her husband 
is still in his officer’s uniform, small but confident
among the tall white officers. Her hair 
is marcelled like a movie star’s waves,
though she has been too sick with the water’s motion 
to know that anyone sees her. Her daughter is two,
the blur of need at the center of each day’s 
incessant rocking. Here is a ship, an ocean.
Here is a figure, her story a few words in the blue void.  
 
2  
Research is mourning, my friend says. Which means what,
exactly, for the things listed in the archives 
as filling the galleons when they left Cebu and Manila — 
ivory objects, jade objects, copper objects, 
brass objects, lacquer objects, mother-of-pearl inlaid furniture,
pearls, rubies, sapphires, bolts of cotton cloth, 
silks and gauzes, crepes and velvets, taffetas
and damasks and brocades, stockings, cloaks, robes, 
kimonos, bed coverings, tapestries, linens, church
vestments, rugs, blue-and-white porcelain that numbered 1,500 
in one ship, wax, tallow candles, cordage,
sailcloth, musk, borax, camphor, cigars, varieties of tea, 
cinnamon that was dried and powdered, 40,000 pounds of it
listed in one ship’s manifest, cloves, pepper, 
nutmeg, tamarind, ginger, martaban jars from Burma,
dragon jars from China, Vietnamese jars, 
Siamese jars, Spanish jars, 800 jars found with the wreck
of one salvaged ship, jars that would have 
contained tar for caulking, oil, wine, bizcocho bread,
salted meats, dried fruits, lard, bacon, beans, chickpeas, lentils, 
flour, garlic, cheese, honey, rice, salt,
sugar, food for months, not enough food, not enough water, 
chickens, cows, pigs, up to one thousand souls
depending on whether the ship had a tonnage of 300 or 500 
or 1,000 or 2,000, ships that in the 250 years
of the trade route wrecked somewhere along the way 
more often than they arrived in Acapulco, sailors,
mercenaries, officers, noblemen and their entourages, priests 
and missionaries, slaves that were called indios
or chinos, nails, tools, iron cask hoops, fireworks, opals — elegy?  
 
3   We didn’t want to be noticed, so we put charcoal on our faces.
I listen to the hours of tape, of the two of us at the dining table.  All the girls, looking like dirt. / My father was always drinking
Questions about the town, her parents, the names of people  or with women, my mother had to take care of the business. / 
that only she could now remember. The images, I imagined,  My sister broke her back when she was a child, she grew up
scrolling in her mind, and translated into the answers she gave.  into a hunchback. She died very young. / They set up a dance
Sometimes pausing, not because she couldn’t recall, but didn’t  at the municipal tennis courts to celebrate the end of the war,
want to recall badly, the pause a kind of gap between what she  and he was there, in his US uniform. / He always insisted that
knew and what the words could do. The two things a voice  we sit at the front, but when I was by myself on the bus I sat
can say when it is saying one thing, the things that suddenly  somewhere in the middle. I didn’t want trouble. / I was around
return when you are speaking, like pockets of color coming to  fifty-five when I had my first real job, working as the security
life in your mind: I listen to her with my skin and my eyes,  at Macy’s. / I always liked to read. I wanted to go to college
my ears. I had had the notion that asking her about her life  like my sisters, but I got married. / You know that wedding
might add something to what I thought of as my art, as though  dress in the picture, we had to borrow it from our neighbor. / 
her past and her love could be vectors of use. But I started to  I liked Japan when he was stationed there. It was so clean.
realize that what I actually needed to know, I would have  Then Norfolk. Richmond. / I was so sick on the ship, I can’t
to conjure for myself, because what we know most deeply  remember much. Your mama just kept running all around.
we guard best, even as she spoke, laughed, passed the glow  It was a navy ship. / My mother’s name is Canuta Sacay and
of each story to me, like a document I could have in hand  my father’s name is Enrique Omega. My grandparents were
but could not understand. I put the tape away, felt for years  farmers outside Ormoc. / I was born in Ormoc, December 8,
that it was enough, the responsibility done. Our conversation  1924 or 25. / This was the apartment we lived in in Maryland.
stopped when my aunt came to take her out for some errands.  That’s Junior there in the picture. And there’s your mama.
Chatter, chairs moved around, then noises that are just noises.  
 
4  
In Madrid I orient myself     I walk on the wide boulevards
and know an empire is its boulevards     I stand below the angel  
skeptical of the beauty of angels     at the royal gardens I count
the 138 kinds of dahlias     at the crystal palace I imagine  
the exhibition of plants indigenous to my islands     I walk
up the street of the poets     read the bronze lines on the ground  
the longing and song of the pirate     in one museum I stare
at Picasso’s lightbulb     in the oldest neighborhoods  
I wonder if  José Rizal walked these streets     studying diseases
of the eye during the day     writing his novel in the night  
in another museum I look     at the paintings of the dwarves
of  the horses     of  the undying fruit     in the train station  
I visit the memorial for the murdered     in the great white
square at dawn I walk     inscribe myself  like letters on a page  
at the naval museum I look into the face of  Magellan     show the
painting my face     I sing the neighborhoods of Huertas  
and Chueca     maybe only in Madrid     is the light a gold
weight always     at the supermarket I overhear     two Filipinos  
speaking and I turn away and break     I find myself in
the cathedral     in the movie theater     where I watch a movie  
without understanding the words spoken     around a corner
I stop because a kind of meadow     has been grown on the side  
of a building     like a tallness of heart     a dream carried
into waking     my life breathing before it     incredible and true


^^EOP^^


 


^^EOP^^

My mother is dying of too much electricity on the brain, my father, a limp in his walk, & my macho lost his green card at a bus station. I want words split letter for letter to turn sound into wisdom on my losses.
 

•
 

My macho says: Your skin is the color of milk, you glow between sheets. ¿Who gives more light: me, or the luna lunera? Too much milk makes you sick — drink, drink, cascabelera.
 

•
 

I want to leave my hembra behind. ¿What are my options? She bleeds on the rug, births a litter, then hides limp bodies in kitchen cabinets.
 

•
 

I lied. My father is dying of too much electricity on the brain, my macho, a limp in his walk, & my mother lost her green card at a bus station. Who these losses happened to matter to no one but me. To others, my loss is only worth its sum parts.
 

•
 

I pour a shot to get the flies drunk. Watch their little legs stagger. I like the flies tipsy, like my macho likes me when I am glazed on the kitchen floor, begging him not to leave me.
 

•
 

Come kill me over the stove, under the running shower head, gravel my skin bloody. I am so afraid one night my macho will choke me to death, though I am not afraid of dying.
 

•
 

My macho says: Hembra, I imagine the woman I love when I’m with you, but you’re not that woman. I ask: Who is she? My macho says: Cállate, take off your dress. Each of   his fingers strokes death. I only want to die. So I die, una y otra vez.


^^EOP^^




For Hasna Henna and the Rohingya



Lice? My aunt once drew a comb through my hair steady;
she wouldn’t let what feeds on blood eat my inner tree. 
Where now is the word for such intimacy? I know it still,
but all I see are jungles burnt of our rarest trees. 
My point is: it takes a while to say, “I am a fire hazard,” or,
“a household of rare birds” is another way to say tree. 
I wrote one draft of this poem, then she died. Will I
forget her name, Hasna Henna? Let’s smell a tree; 
night-blooming jasmine, o-so-heavenly! A sapling
succeeds by flourishing from a tree’s seed. 
How else to perfume these needs we breathe? A sapling
of course = a small and soft tree (i.e. baby tree). 
I grieve the rice she fed me off a palm leaf.
Only now can I fully marvel: how finely formed is a tree! 
Someone I loved said to stop with the oceans in my poems — 
well, oceans + oceans + oceans! We drown so many trees. 
(Night blooming tree = baby tree = once and future tree.)
Lately, all I think about are trees. 
Read this again to replace tree with refugee.
Tarfia = joy in the margins + one who lies to protect trees.


^^EOP^^

I have hidden your lost teeth in the net of all my famous hair
And with foresight promised your umbilicus 
To several minor gods. I paid your fee in fawn skin
& the lightest fringe of tissue, all the quiet noons assembled, 
In yard stars & the light of phosphorescent pens,
The dioramas that it takes to fill lacunae, in ancestral knots 
That tell the story of our humble people: watchmakers,
Mainly, ventriloquists & scholars of quintessence, 
Amateur lifeguards I meant to surpass. How I loved
My green & distant futures! But I love you more 
From late Holocene out to the farthest buoy, unto
Blackmail & a verb that means renouncing Christ 
Or else describes the path of sap before it’s amber,
Before it dimples, just a little, to collect — 


^^EOP^^

I know better than to leave the house without my good dress, my good knife 
like Excalibur between my stone breasts. Mother would have me whipped, 
would have me kneeling on rice until I shrilled so loud I rang the church 
bells. Didn’t I tell you that elegance is our revenge, that there are neither victims nor victors 
but the bitch we envy in the end?

^^EOP^^

Anything can be a bird if you’re not careful.
I should say something nice about the weather.
I should be in awe of the living, but the world dulls
when I step into it. The squirrels scatter, the branches
lift. Sure, I’ve hurt the ones I’ve loved
by not paying attention. Not alone — never alone
is a lesson I need to understand. It was you who said that.
It’s you still. You who says, Look! You who points
to the sky. You who tilts my chin toward the heron,
who cups the minnow in your hands,
who spots the deer miles ahead, who dulls
the world with your absence. You who says, Look!
& when I look, you are gone, replaced
by the whitetail’s hind legs, fading into the bush.


^^EOP^^

I’ve stopped asking:                                                        ¿Why?
             I’ve let a man whistle
                           from the table for more beer,
& brought it to him
                           with a smile. I’ve slapped
a man & ran
                           while he laughed — 
             atrevida.
I’ve had a miscarriage. I’ve let a man
                                       kiss me
after an abortion
                                       & comforted his hot tears.
I’ve done these things,
                                                       while other girls
work in maquilas
                           piecing together
Dell computer boards,
                                       while other girls
work in brothels,
                           & cake foundation across
their bruised arms,
                                       while other girls
                           ride the bus home alone
             at night, every night,
while other girls are found
             wearing clothes
                           that don’t belong to them, or no
clothes at all. I’ve done all of this
                                       while other girls are found
                           with puta
                                       written in blood across
their broken bellies.
             My mother used to cover
my eyes
                           when we’d walk by girls
working the corner,
             & say:
                                       See how lucky you are, not to have to work
                           like they do? I have been
             muy puta,
                                       have been called puta. Yes, I’d say, very lucky.


^^EOP^^

Poor devil, dog six years on a tether
clipped to a cubby box.
The sun dropped into a slot
on one side & after a dark spell
popped up on the other.
Birds of a weather chattered along
wires overhead & the yards around
shrilled emergencies. 
Who knew? Once upon afternoon
a dust demon spins itself up
in the master’s tumbleweed to his match scratch: puff:
mega blaze & four hours’
ruckus until doused out. I’ll bask 
three days in wonders. I’ll slobber & yawn. I’ll gnaw
& grunt in my groin to my heart’s content. 
They say death changes a body’s
mind about things.
Master shuts up & just rots.


^^EOP^^

Too hot to rest, I toss my arms off
the bed. My night- gown wet with sweat. I feel you
— a sack of scavenged skulls on my chest
— sipping the salt from my breasts. Imp.
Incubus. Im- pulse. You and me like a mare
that must be broken in by breaking in-
to. Tamed is how fire is by giving itself
something to destroy: it destroys it- self. But who
can deter- mine what’s inside another?
What is risked when we enter    ...     Caliper. Forceps.
Scalpel. Oculus. Perhaps you’re the wilderness
that waits with- in me. Perhaps an other mystery, I
open beneath you. Yoked. Harnessed. Paralyzed.
At once a- wake and a- sleep. I nay.
I knock over the kerosene lamp. Light of
the rational mind snuffed. Shadow of shadows.
Because I can’t see, I sense. Your thumb
thrumming my mouth. A command. Arch-
angel. Vision of invasion. Insemination.
My horse heart beating with yours.

^^EOP^^

dear suicide  how is the war? is it eating? tell me of the girls charging backwards into dumb tides death’s wet mouth lapping their ankles, knees, eyebrows. tell me of the sissies like drunk fireworks, rocketing into earth afterimage burned into river & cement memory. how is the war? does it have a wife? does she know how the bodies got in her bed? 
dear suicide  i know your real name. i bind you from doing harm. i enter the room like a germ. i say your name, it is my name. the walls cave around me like a good aunt. the window hums. the door rocks me. the dresser leaves to go make tea. the room knows my name. it binds us from doing harm. 
dear suicide  where are you keeping my friends? every cup i turn over holds only air. i jimmy open a tulip expecting their faces but find only the yellow heart. what have you done with them? yesterday i took my body off beat it on the front steps with a broom & not one of them came giggling out my skin yelling you found me! not one of them i called for was already in my hand. 
dear suicide  you a mutual friend a wedding guest, a kind of mother, a kind of self love, a kind of freedom. i wish you were a myth but mothers my color have picked ocean over boat, have sent children to school in rivers. i known niggas who just needed quiet. i seen you dance, it made me hard. i would not deny you what others have found in the sweet mildew behind your ear. i know what happens when you ask for a kiss, it’s all tongue, you don’t unlatch, you suck face until the body is gone. 
dear suicide  that one? i promised him i would kill for him & my nigga was my nigga & my word is my word. dear suicide, where are you? come see me. come outside. i am at your door, suicide. i’ll wait. i’ve offed my earrings & vaselined my face. i put on my good sweats for this. i brought no weapon but my fist. 
dear suicide  you made my kin thin air. his entire body dead as hair. you said his name like a dare. you’ve done your share. i ride down lake street friendbare to isles of lakes, wet pairs stare back & we compare our mirror glares. fish scare into outlines, i blare a moon’s wanting, i wear their faces on t-shirts, little flares in case i bootleg my own prayer & submit to your dark affair. tell me they’re in your care. be fair. heaven or hell, i hope my niggas all there if i ever use the air as a stair.


^^EOP^^




With statements by President Donald Trump



I write my body, as border between We have some bad hombres here
this rock & the absence of water. & we’re going to get them out.
I cut myself with a scimitar, When Mexico sends its people,
as political documentation. they’re not sending their best.
How do you write about the violence They’re not sending you.
of every man you’ve ever loved? They’re sending people
Macho, you that have lots of problems
breathe bright in the neocolony, & they’re bringing those problems to us
a problem of Empire pulling They’re bringing drugs. They’re bringing
the capitalist threads of my border. crime. They’re rapists.
Empire: you were so sterile Mexico’s court system [is]corrupt.
& shiny with your dead man’s coins I want nothing to do with Mexico
& castration, your white roses other than to build an impenetrable
& that trash bag full of a Mexican WALL & stop them from ripping
woman’s dark hair. Empire: you off U.S. I love the Mexican people,
made us hungry for the glint but Mexico is not our friend.
of machismo, the dim glare They’re killing us at the border
of marianismo. Tonight on TV, & they’re killing us on jobs & trade.
muted montages of the largest FIGHT! Happy #CincodeMayo!
ICE raid in Texas. I drink The best taco bowls are made
pink champagne in a hotel bar, in Trump Tower Grill. I love Hispanics!
& correct the pronunciation of   my name.


^^EOP^^

i was mothered by lonely women       some
of  them wives     some of them             with 
plumes of  smoke for husbands    all    lonely
smelling of  onions & milk         all mothers 
some of them to children some to old names
phantom girls acting out a life        only half 
a life away      instead        copper kitchenware
bangles pushed up the arm    fingernails rusted 
with henna          kneading raw meat with salt
with coriander                     sweating upper lip 
in the steam       weak tea          hair unwound
against the nape         my deities      each one 
sandal slapping against stone heel      sandal-
wood & oud                    bright chiffon spun 
about each head     coffee in the dowry china
butter biscuits on a painted plate      crumbs 
suspended in eggshell demitasse       & they
begin                  i heard       people are saying  i saw it with my own eyes       [      ]’s daughter a scandal                  she was wearing [      ] 
& not wearing [   ]            can you imagine a shame                                             a shame


^^EOP^^

In a new translator’s version of Genesis, there’s no Adam.
No serpent. In paradise, I don’t bleed. Fig leaf-free girl, dear God, I say as we converse fluently without tongues,
joined as two spice-drenched beloveds in a song of songs, could we please ask the gardener to plant a pomegranate grove
by a stand of non-fruiting olive cultivars, which don’t bloom
and aren’t so messy?

^^EOP^^

I was probably worst at selling weed — 
robbed weekly, used too much
of my own product, cut each bag
with a dash of oregano — 
but then I have to consider that summer
Matty asked me to help him boost cars,
his dad called me a liability — 
too paranoid to be lookout,
too shaky to use the slim jim,
didn’t even know how to drive stick — 
oh yeah, & let’s not forget
that time Mo almost lost an arm
after I convinced him to pay me
twenty bucks to stitch his wound
with fishing line instead of going
to the hospital, or that time
I convinced Aliyah to let me
tattoo a cross on her ankle
with a safety pin & a ballpoint — 
& then there’s that time I swiped
a Stentor from Carl Magee’s locker
& tried to set myself straight
by becoming a violinist,
but of course, the noise complaints,
the neighbors banging the portraits
off the walls, the boys talking shit,
calling me prodigy, fancy chink — 
& I wonder if they’re still having
a good laugh, like when they found out
I wanted to be a poet & so they glued
roses & violets to the hood of my Kia,
& so maybe I wanted, for the first time,
to prove them wrong, prove
I didn’t belong there,
& so maybe I made new friends — 
friends who wrote poems,
who sat around talking about poems,
who went to school to study poems
and lived in off-campus apartments
where I crashed on nights
I got too fucked up on white boy drugs
to drive back to the Eastside,
where, even without me, the rosin glow
of junkers trace the block, where Mandy,
three years sober, tucks the kids
into bed, where Lee,
first in his class, spray-paints
the fleet of stolen bikes gold,
where Andrew stands in the kitchen
reading the Bible in the dim light
from the microwave, where Nikki,
years later, coming home
after a double at Champps, calls
to wish me a happy birthday,
& I am, of course, too busy
to answer — somewhere in a different time
zone, at a swanky party celebrating a man
I do not know, who just won an award
for a book I have not read
& the woman who smells of citrus,
who’s been raving to me all night
about how much she admires my work,
excuses herself to use the bathroom,
leaving, in the seat beside me, her open purse.


^^EOP^^




                                                  I find myself in the deep corridor
that would have been dark
if my right hand wasn’t shining like a torch.
— Tomas Tranströmer



One of those idle hours I did not want
To participate in “group,” when it seemed
Impossible I’d know a word to haunt
Again, or make me laugh, or spur that dream 
To roam myself the ranges of the tongue;
When on that ward I thought not one aspect
Of anything, no matter how strong, strange,
Or keen, could sharpen the “blunted affect” 
Even electric shock had no effect on    ...
During one such despondent interval
I read these lines from his New Directions
New collected poems, and the verbal 
Sequence somehow composed the correct code
To unlock feeling: corridor, right hand,
Dark

^^EOP^^

Today I woke and believed in nothing.
A grief at once intimate and unfelt,
like the death of a good friend’s dog.  
Tired of the mind reaching back in the past for rescue
I praise the day.
I don’t mean merely some mythical, isolate instant
like the mindless mindfulness specialist
who at the terminal cancer convention
(not that it was called that)
exhorted the new year’s crop of slaughters
(ditto)
to “taste” the day, this one unreplicable instant of being alive.
(The chicken glistened.)
Nor do I mean a day devoid of past and future
as craved that great craze of minds and times Fernando Pessoa,
who wanted not “the present” but reality itself,
things in their thingness rather than the time that measures them.
Time is in the table at which I sit and in the words I type.
In the red-checked shirt my father’s mother used to wear
when she was gardening and which I kept
because it held her smell (though it does no longer)
there is still plenty of time.  
Two murderers keep their minds alive
while they wait to die.
They talk through slots in their doors
of whatever mercy or misery
the magazine has ordained for the day — 
the resurgence of the Taliban in Afghanistan, say,
ten signs that a relationship is on the rocks.
When their communion flags, as communions will,
they rekindle it with personal revelations, philosophical digressions,
humor. This is a true story,
one of them says sometimes by way of preface,
as if that gave the moment more gravity,
asked of the listener a different attention,
at once resisted and reinforced an order
wherein every hour has its sound, every day its grace,
and every death is by design.  
“Love is possible for anyone,” I hear the TV talk-show host say,
which is true in the way most things in this life are true,
which is to say, false,
unless and until the nullifying, catalyzing death is felt.
Love is possible for anyone
because it is equally impossible for everyone.
To be is to be confronted with a void,
a blankness, a blackness that both appeals and appalls.
Once known — known by the void, I mean — one has three choices.
Walk away, and unlearn the instinct of awe.
Walk along, and learn to believe that awe asks nothing of you.
Are you with me, love?   
(For love read faith.)   
Naked once and after a rat, my father cried, “Die, vermin, die!”
banging the broomstick over and over on the floor
so incorrigibly dirty it might as well have been the earth itself.
This is my mother’s story, though I was there, I’m told,
and no small part of the pandemonium.
We were five souls crammed into one life,
and so incorrigibly poor — or was that fear? — we all slept in one room
and shared one great big chester drawers, as we called it,
and not with irony but in earnest ignorance,
just as like meant lack, as in
“How much do you like bein’ done with your chemo?”
and just as I and every other child I knew,
before we tucked into our lemon meringue pie,
solemnly wiped the calf slobbers off.
Ah, local color, peasant levity, the language fuming and steaming
rich as the mist of rot that rises off the compost heap
(“kitchen midden,” you might hear an old Scot still say).
When do we first know? That there’s a world
to which we’ve been, not oblivious, exactly,
but so inside we couldn’t see it, who now see nothing else?
Heaven is over. Or hell.
Did you forget the rat?
It thumps and thrashes like a poltergeist inside
the chest of drawers but somehow, though my father is fast,
and though his rage is becoming real, every drawer he opens
is empty. What happens when we die,
every child of every father eventually asks.
What happens when we don’t
is the better question.  
To kill a wasp on water is the peak of speed.
My brother who is other has a mind of lead.
I with my stinging griefs watch from away.
How can it be there are no adults left?
What matters here is timing, not time.
His hand is high and white above the blue.
A wasp is also atom and urge, hover and touch.
Even wings are not a clean distinction.
Down comes the slap like a rifle shot.
What vengeance can there be on blank necessity?
My brother who is other has a way.
His hand is high and white. And then it’s not.   
Once when my father’s mother’s health was failing
and she found it more and more difficult to tend
to the tiny family plot at Champion, Texas,
which is less town than time at this point,
a blink of old buildings and older longings the rare driver
flashes past, I took it upon myself to salt the graves
as I must have read somewhere would work for unwanted growths.
As indeed it did.
In the months after, every Sunday when we spoke,
she thanked me for the blankness, the blackness,
(my words, of course)
this new ease I had allowed her mind.
Until one day leaning over with flowers the leached earth
opened and my eighty-year-old grandmother
tumbled right down among the bones
of the woman from whom she’d first emerged.
To see that image you have to be that sky.
It has to happen in you, that crushing calling viewless blue
that is so deeply in you that it is not you.
“O, Law’, honey, I like to died.”  
You don’t climb out of poverty so much as carry it with you.
Some shell themselves with wealth.
Some get and spend, get and spend, skimming existence like a Jesus lizard.
But for those whose souls have known true want
— whose souls perhaps are true want — 
money remains, in some sense, permanently inert,
like an erotic thought that flashes through a eunuch’s brain.
In 1980 my father bought his first airplane,
a scream-proof four-seater we crammed five inside,
which he considerately slammed into a sorghum field alone.
Unkillable, he killed the next ten years with work and wives,
then bought another, and brought it down in the solitary fire
that was his aspect and atmosphere. Homes, schemes,
thirty years of savings plowed into a sign company (!)
that did not, it turned out, exist.
A hole is hard to carry.  
People ask if I believe in God and the verb is tedious to me.
Not wrong, not offensive, not intrusive, not embarrassing.
Tedious.
Today I saw a hawk land on Elizabeth’s chimney.
It sat with its bone frown and banker’s breast
above the proud houses of Hamden.
Are you with me? Then see,
too, a lump of animate ash rising from the flue
(or so it seems) to be a pigeon
fluttering dumbly down
next to that implacable raptor,
suddening a world of strange relations
wherein there is no need for fear, or far,
or meat.  
There was a man made of airplane parts,
one of which was always missing.
He wandered the hospital grounds in search of a rudder,
an aileron, or some other fragment
that would let him fly from this place
where he was not meant to be.
There was a woman who emitted invective
ceaselessly, dispassionately, an obscenity machine.
One timid gentleman saved Saran wrap for five full years
and every night wrought an ever-more-solid ball
with which, it turned out, he planned to bash the skull
of the first soul he saw the dawn God blessed his weapon.
(A success story, alas.)
Another man with anvil hands sat six months of nights in faith
that there would come occasion of darkness, unguardedness, and vision
sufficient to rip from its socket one of my father’s bright blue eyes.
(Ditto.)
My father moved among them like a father.
He attended and pacified, he instructed and consoled.
Late to the trade, he worked too much,
and trusted his heart, no doubt, more than he should,
but was, by all accounts, at this one thing, and despite the end, good.  
For love read faith
into these lines that so obviously lack it.
For love let words turn to life
in the way life turns to world
under the observer’s eye, the swirl
of particles with their waves and entanglements,
their chance and havoc, resolving
into some one thing:
a raptor on a rooftop, say.
No power on earth can make it stay.
But is it lost or released into formlessness
when we look away?  
To be is to believe
that the man or woman
who inscribed with an idiosyncratic but demanding calligraphy Fuck da money — Trust no one
on the rough blanket of the residential motel
where my father spent the last two years of his rough residential life
intended the note of defiant, self-conscious (da!) humor
that left my father, whom I had not seen in years,
and I, whom years had seen grow sere, far even from myself,
erupting in laughter until we cried.  
Before my good friend’s good dog died
ten times a day she pressed her forehead to his
“to confirm the world and her place in it.”
Now she won’t even say his name.
Strange how the things that burn worst in one heart
one must keep silent to keep.  
Ten to one you thought of men.
The murderers, I mean.
But no. This is a true story.
There is another cell, you see,
in which a woman I have known since childhood,
and since childhood have known to be
suspended on a wire of time but nimble-witted nonetheless,
lies on the cold stone floor.
She is even more naked than they have made her.
She has killed no one not even herself.
Punishment, perhaps, or some contagion of fate, finds her here,
her hair shorn, both wrists wrapped, her eyes open,
pondering the parable of perfect silence.   Remember, he said, memory is a poor man’s prison.
Make to have and to love one live infinitive

^^EOP^^

pyramidal, its certain form
certain it is a form    wittgenstein or anyone
can think of a stag in their mind
but not be able to shoot that stag
and where is all that everlovin antimatter
that matter supposedly co-creates?
at the end of the dream, the poem
at the end of everything    what else, the end    sighs sor juana
the doors have an 11-minute song called ‘the end’
which feels serious when you are 11 and stupid
six or eight months later    nor did I offer up my own dream
which was a meadow in my cup    meadowtation ha ha ha
the ship kissed the sands of galenic shores at the buttressed
end of my dream where spectacles do not fear to interpose
long fallen out of  the mouth of vishnu    so long gabriel so long usen
now the instrument of my reflection no longer necessary since
the inside is the out    and I’ve jiggered the mechanism
such that my jacket’s always dry & clean & my
cock is hard only when I want    no more embarrassing
sublunarities    and my cunt is wet just as my lover thinks
of fucking it    cities appear    golden to my gaze    a figure
empyreal    arises in shadow    long for this world    aching on the
threshold of my upturned arse and my one
ways and means, lilified cloak enmaned
w/ tresses, baldly dignified, the cloak was
regal it did not speak, yet diogenes leapt on it, yet the trumpets
pointed one direction    entrained to a kind of roseate beam
the same pink beam philip k. dick saw
emanating from the fish necklace around the neck of
that delivery girl he saw in his doorway after he’d
had his wisdom teeth removed
that same beam that triangulated
w/ arcturus, aka alpha boötis, to flash up and
hit it smack in the third eye till it and we and we are bent sobbing,
having given up our library, having died of the
plague and worse, having vowed never again to write w/ pen and ink
having inscribed yo la peor, I the worst, in blood
on the back of a dirty pamphlet, but oh what
unmiserable mind is this    no me miserum    noli me tangere
nothing miserable    nothing touches me


^^EOP^^

In the old place, there was no place
that did not see me.
Wherever I went mothers whispered
about me like a Greek chorus: I heard that boy    ...    I heard that.
I was just a boy. But it was
true, what they said, that I liked
other boys, that I had stolen Sarah’s,
though he was four years older
and they were very much in love.
I made him break up with her
in a Chili’s parking lot
while I waited inside. I was
fourteen. How embarrassing
to have been fourteen, to have eaten
at that Chili’s, often. That summer
I had no taste for anything
but him. Faintly of chlorine.
When he left for college
I had no one. Sarah’s friends
stared me down at school.
I found it was better,
if I could not be no one,
to be someone. Small, but
particular. Specified, which was
an apprenticeship for special.
Cold, another word for cool.


^^EOP^^

ninety-nine names for my god
though i know none for my [     ] 
a failing not of my deity but of
my arabic      not the language 
itself rather the overeager mosaic
i hoard      i steal       i borrow 
from pop songs          & mine
from childhood fluency    i guard 
my few swearwords like tinkling
silver anklets     spare & precious 
& never nearly enough to muster
a proper arabic anger      proper arabic 
vulgarity     only a passing spar
always using the names of animals 
i am not polite         i am only inarticulate
overproud      of my little arsenal 
a stranger blows a wet tobacco kiss
through the window    of my taxi 
& i deploy     my meager weapons
[dog]          [pig]         [donkey] 
& finally        my crown jewel
i pass my tongue across my teeth 
crane my neck about the window
& call        [your mother’s                  ]


^^EOP^^

She steps into La Roue de la Fortune movie theater
off the Jersey Turnpike, buys a ticket, 
and so swiftly the waters roll
above her instinctual visions: Plaza, Il Piazzo, 
creep of film over the sound of the words piano, purr, whisper across her neck, 
one door opens another,
in the labyrinthine pitch to preserve 
order, the expulsion from Eden, the dark
soda up her clear plastic straw, reels 
of rodents, popcorn, teenage workers,
acne, blood and circulation turn to ice 
inside this mechanized paradise,
where reality meets the sound of gardens 
growing past their makers’ dreams,
growing strange and outrageous. 
She stops to check her phone
and the phone lights up, Putin, Botox,  Trump, the garden grows outward, up,
to each side, the ghosts are simply 
plants who forgot to stop growing;
they groan, shriek, quake, giggle, gurgle, 
stare, and point fingers at the living. I’m glad I’m in love, she thinks.


^^EOP^^




After Thomas Hardy



The milkmaids say Pray for their speech is reserved, fixed here in circles of opalized light. 
Presenting themselves without fancy or choice chapped hands on the full udder’s verge, 
y’know — cream-skinned, gathering toad spume on skirts relentlessly cracking the snails underfoot — 
a century later & more their compeers bow heads to these luminous fields made of ether, 
of blue & extravagant air, calling up with the same nimble fingers their ciphered familiars, 
girl-souls at large in a nonhuman hour. Speaking their argot & screen-practiced moue. 
Not to you, with your paper, your man-heavy shoes, untouched by the mulch of the digital yard! 
They only gaze rapt at threshold, milk spilled. No purchase for you here, Sir, & no clue —


^^EOP^^

goodbye city. goodbye stoop. goodbye rush hour traffic plume. 
goodbye feminist qpoc weed delivery group. goodbye cheap noodle 
spot on the corner. goodbye drag bar next door serving the messy 
deep into the dead eggplant evening. goodbye drunks screaming 
about literally nothing below my window. goodbye window & all 
it’s seen & forgiven. goodbye urine stains talking shit between 
parked cars. goodbye stars erased from the polluted heavens. goodbye  getting my steps in. goodbye highway streaked red & white with 
shipments of grapefruit trucked in by the refrigerated crateful. 
goodbye angels dressed in thrifted robes. goodbye locusts —   i’ll see you in a decade or so.  
i’m beguiled by & guided by goodbyes : meaning go ye with god : 
meaning ghost-flushed & godless : meaning guided by some guy away. 
who cares who? some new charon who smiles big as a river. who 
rivers big as i ferry with him toward death. the city you’re in now 
will never be the city you live in again. the ferryman with his good 
bile smiles good with his good will toward men. with his good 
guiding arm. no need for goodbyes when i got this phone where 
i can visit both my living and my dead.  
good grief. what’s my root for all this avoidance? for never saying 
peace to anyone’s living face? for this foolish and footloose decree? 
my casual excuses for slipping out the back door before the party gets 
lit? must be the  jew in me. this blood doctrine. my family who survived 
what i cannot write, never said goodbye, only, i’ll see you again soon. 
the stories we carried are the only country i’ll pledge my sword to, guiding 
me even now toward the safety of strange men’s rooms through 
cruisy city parks. exile is an heirloom. plant your sneakers in the garden 
so as not to bury your children in the backyard. goodbye park bench. 
goodbye best friends. goodbye graffiti at union & metropolitan that 
reads godbye krewl world written moments before that poor girl leapt 
out into the electric commuter dark. when god closes a door, he bolts it —   
god the comptroller : god the poorly contoured : god the slumlord. 
boards up the building before you can flee the house. gone the orator. 
gone the forest. gone the morgan stop bookshop before i even 
moved here. everywhere was better before humans came and gave 
it language. god the skyline’s remarkable this time of day — light 
tricked through the carbon in the atmosphere. god even the leaves 
are changing and going away. god the rivers flooded with factory 
waste and the air’s been replaced with arrogance. my therapist wants 
closure, but i ghost the session. i text, transition from one state 
of matter to the next.  
goodbye city. goodbye stoop. when i moved you were already gone. 
a simulacrum. a worn photocopy of what brought us in 
by the refrigerated crateful and when i return you’ll be even further 
distorted, disoriented organism, a fourth mortgage, an organ exhausted 
by fingers, yet still at night anyone who sleeps in you’s bathed in gold. 
to all my dead, i’ll see you again soon. to all my living, let bygones be 
gone by the time you take this next breath. let’s live instead here, 
in this transitional state. the instant water evaporates. riding the trains 
below the city.


^^EOP^^

something scrambled
out of me at least I thought it was out of me
it could have been into me very fast very sly
dirty breath’d assassin     spiders
ants                earthworms I witnessed
being dissected by my brothers and crane flies
I tried   but never managed
to capture whole   such fey stupid wings
and legs left drifting on walls mostly I was a witness
mostly   I’ve kept
out of  the way with my hood zipped
up to my chin what is the surest thing
we know?   that as we grow older
we think less of killing things and more
of coming back who knows where
we acquire our knowledge   from our mothers   aunts
perhaps they pass it on
like a candle through an ancient pockmarked door
something parenthetic   like a clasp
broken     useless as a rotten wick a spider climbing
the sublime coast of  your shoulders
walking through those rooms again   a web breaking
on the back of  your hand  


^^EOP^^




^^EOP^^




After  Jean-Michel Basquiat



Crows
               and more crows.
One crow
               with a rat
                              hanging
               from its beak,
sloppy
               and beautiful.
Another crow
               with its wings
                              plucked
               empty.
I wanted
               so much of today
                              to be peaceful
               but the empty crow
untethers
               something in me: a feral
                              yearning for love
               or a love that is so full
of  power,
               of  tenderness,
                              the words
               fall to their knees
begging for mercy
               like tulips
                              in wind.
I don’t wear the crown
               for the times power
                              has tainted
               my body,
but I can tell the difference
               between giving up
                              and giving in.
If  you can’t, ask the crow
               that watches me
                              through the window,
               laughing as I drink
my third bottle of wine.
Ask the sound
               the tree makes
                              when the crow has grown
               disgusted
with my whining.
After years of repression,
               I can come clean.
                              I was a boy
               with a hole
other boys
               stuffed themselves into.
I have wanted
               nothing to do with blackness
                              or laughter
               or my life.
But about love,
               who owns the right,
                              really? Who owns
               the crow
who loves fresh meat
               or the crow who loves
                              the vibration
               of its own throat?
Everything around me
               is black for its own good,
                              I suppose.
               The widow,
the picture of the boy
               crying on the wall,
                              the mirror
               with its taunting,
the crows
               that belong
                              to their scripture.
Can you imagine
               being so tied to blackness
                              that even your wings
               cannot help you escape?
About my life,
               every needle,
                              a small prayer.
               Every pill, a funeral
hymn.
I wanted the end
               several times
                              but thought,
               Who owns this body, really?
God?
               Dirt?
                              The silly insects
               that will feast
on my decay?
Is it the boy
               who entered first
                              or the boy
               who wanted everything
to last?


^^EOP^^

Maybe it was my old friend Fascination
who first let me know that Danger
was right across the hall, or maybe
it was the unrealized absence of pollen, or,
was it the nearness, Danger, of your hair’s
blatant softness, just toweled.
Or, I wanted to stop thinking — and, I wanted to ask, Do you think God understands                                                     attraction? Surely, right? 
Or, I wanted you to notice my anger,
which you might not characterize as dangerous, per se,
but rather, fickle, a synonym
for “mercurial.” Maybe that’s typical. Yup,
there is a liquid sharpness in me I wouldn’t unlid
except    ...    damn, Danger,
             there’s this certain way you draw out epiphany    ...     
You’re messy, Danger,
baby, meaning untidy, confusing, monumental,
great in size, and also, of or serving
as a monument, which leads me to reconsider
the dimensions of sandwiches, as well as apartheid,
the aphid, and the scarab beetle.
                                                   Danger, can you feel
me tremble?
But I am saying nothing, dear
                                                   Danger, you don’t already
know — you’re used to being pursued
with rage, unwanted advice, riddles. That’s not me,
respectfully — Joy is always waiting
to cyclone you with nothing more
than a matchbook,
a long gaze, a warm bowl.


^^EOP^^

There was this bear cam
on the Internet. It was pointed at a place
called Katmai National Park, Alaska. A few years ago
my friend sent me a link to it.
I would watch it sometimes
but I never saw any bears.
Maybe it was bad luck
because my friend said she saw bears.
All I ever saw was the enormous river rushing
and the tall pines in the background doing nothing.
I mean, that was OK, of course.
I loved the sound of the river
and wind in trees and the sheer thrill
that such a sublime nothingness
could be witnessed like this. 
But I wanted to see a bear.
It seemed even more thrilling to be typing
in a cubicle and suddenly out of nowhere
there’s a bear on your screen
that maybe 50 other people in the world catch
a glimpse of. Maybe they are on a break from Facebook
or filling out a spreadsheet and BOOM, a bear. 
So I thought while I was writing this
that I would just check the bear cam online
and sure enough a fat bear is in the middle of the river
eating a salmon right there in the Katmai National Park.
I get up from my desk and tell my colleagues
“You guys, come here!” and my colleagues
come in my office but by the time they run in
the bear crosses the river, or pixelated
screen or whatever, salmon in his jaws
and the only thing there is the river
and trees and they say,
“Sandra, this is boring,” and walk
back to their own offices.


^^EOP^^

Even though it’s May & the ice cream truck
parked outside my apartment is somehow certain,
I have a hard time believing winter is somehow,
all of a sudden, over — the worst one of my life,
the woman at the bank tells me. Though I’d like to be,
it’s impossible to be prepared for everything.
Even the mundane hum of my phone catches me
off guard today. Every voice that says my name
is a voice I don’t think I could possibly leave
(it’s unfair to not ask for the things you need)
even though I think about it often, even though
leaving is a train headed somewhere I’d probably hate.
Crossing Lyndale to meet a friend for coffee
I have to maneuver around a hearse that pulled too far
into the crosswalk. It’s empty. Perhaps spring is here.
Perhaps it will all be worth it. Even though I knew
even then it was worth it, staying, I mean.
Even now, there is someone, somehow, waiting for me.


^^EOP^^

yesterday I was at the Wailing Wall
pretending to be a man, pretending to be a Jew 
it was research for my job
still I tried to feel God, touched the Wall
said a prayer for my sick mother 
the women go to one side
the men to the other 
the rest of us float and bobble like space trash 
around the corner is the empty co-ed wall
no one prays before the genderless stones
they smell the concession 
the gay rabbi said Jerusalem
has been conquered forty-four times 
I walk with the men, stolen yarmulke in my hand
past the dancing bar mitzvah boys
on the other side of the fence
their mothers throw hard candies at them


^^EOP^^

Is that your house he asked
This used to be my house I said 
But those are not your people
So that can’t be your house 
But it is my house I said
I had some people maybe a few 
Even though those are not your people
Even though they don’t look like you 
I had to live somewhere I said
This is the house where I lived 
But where are your people he said 
My people live in a different house
They don’t care to know about me 
If you’re the devil
Why are you asking me questions 
The devil said since the house
You had to live in is gone
I thought you’d be happy 
It sure is a hot day I said
Of course it is said the devil
Why do you think I work in town


^^EOP^^




It burns up all the grass too, and breaks the stones, so tremendous is its noxious influence.
— Pliny the Elder, “Natural History”



On a blood- or honey-colored moon at midnight & no 60-watt abuzz. With
Sirius ascendant. From a dunghill’s punk egg hatched 
By toad or serpent. From cold gland & pillaged crib, from ruined sluice,
Bible comics & potshots at swallows. From the Ring of Fire, the Zipper, 
The Nighthawk with her victims taloned upside down. From pistis to gnosis
To the midway where they draw a bead on cardboard sheikhs. From no harvest. 
From no temperate father. From years borne down tainted water
& all we failed to mark in frequencies cranked up, from 
How laughing we cast our own forfeit. O well —
It’s cinch your boots up now, it’s shoulder to the wheel, it’s soldier on 
To lay coins on the fang marks & stand already spent,
Condemned for what we wrongly thought exhaustion. 
Comes now the bright arrival, comes the pageant rain of ashes:
The seal torn & tablets fixed but still impossible to read.


^^EOP^^

Yael picks at their cuticles. When they speak to themself, they speak out loud. They speak to themself this morning. I think, they say, that I am coming down with wisteria. Their nail beds a bit purplish.

There’s a Caesar cipher decoder ring in their shredded wheat and, unsure of what to decode first, Yael hides it under their pillow. Yael says, Today I’ll be lonely. They need the practice.

Yael never drinks their cereal milk, pours it back into the jug. But they are thirsty. Outside of their tent, the lawn is still entirely a lawn — the neighbors kept to themselves last night, trampled none of the daffodils. A good omen. Today Yael can leave their tent without fear. Of what? The omen has no answer, it presents only the bright of things.

Yael shoves three empty bottles into their bag and heads toward the river.
 

•

The pigs are having a swim and pay Yael no mind as they submerge each bottle. Yael imagines the bubbles that shimmy out are the  bottle’s breath, that they have the power to take breath from anyone.

The hair on their arms turns golden. Then the water. Then the pigs flee. Yael looks down as Sun approaches. They were already kneeling.  Their shins disrupting the path of an ant colony’s leaf-carrying  ceremony. The ants do not bite Yael — Sun is watching, and the ants like being alive, love to feel the weight of a veiny leaf, love even more the sound their mandibles make piercing through that leaf.

Sun kicks a flowering fennel as He walks toward Yael, but forgets to change the wind’s direction. The seeds blow into Yael’s hair and up their nose. Though Yael did not see Him do it, Sun gives himself away by whining, It’s not my fault.
 

•

Sun’s whine reminds Yael of their husband, Heber. Heber whines like that when Yael wants to leave his tent. When Yael doesn’t invite him into their tent. When Yael doesn’t want to watch a movie that Heber has seen a dozen times.

It’s exhausting to be shown things, to try to enjoy a movie while also giving a convincing performance of that enjoyment. Heber ruins these screenings — he weeps before the scenes that call for weeping. He mouths each pivotal line.

So far, Yael has spent their life absorbing men’s favorites. On the rare occasion that Heber does ask to watch their favorite movie, Yael can’t remember having one. This makes Yael feel a creaking, hollow-boned kind of gloom.

This gloom opens the flaps in their brain that make them want to lie in bed all day.

Yael does not know the sound of their loudest yell. All their noises  have been practiced. Maybe this is why Sun’s whine makes their cheeks flush. The sound is a selfish one. Why should it go unpunished?
 

•

Sometimes, when they think of Heber away at war, Yael grows giddy,  presses their smile hard into their pillow until the whirling joy  subsides. But what is the mainspring of that giddiness? They try to dissect the thought:

          Heber = Giddy

                    Or

                              Heber away = Giddy

                                        Or

                                                  Heber away at war = Giddy
 
•

If Yael were to look up from the dirt, they’d see the kestrels circling above, their left talons leashed to Sun’s wrist by neon green fishing line. Taut line. No give.

Yael won’t look up.

Sun exhales and lets loose His belly. It peeks out from under His shirt. You can keep thinking of me as Sun. He’s relieved Yael is alone. I’ve been looking for a new name. His old name felt stale. Dead by comparison. Sun is perfect.

I have a very important job for you, Yael, descendant of — He’d left His notes at home — Yael. Enlist in my war against the wicked and blessed shall you be above all people in the tent.

Sun doesn’t mention that Yael isn’t His first, or even His second, choice.


^^EOP^^

Whenever folks discuss finding themselves,
ya get kinda giggly. Maybe b/c ya found
yrself considering yr Armenian love
who preferred ya in both corset and bindi,
and it was for her ya begrudgingly waxed
yr jungle-scabbard    ...    Ya find yrself in the fret
of reclamation via musks all motherland-misty
(coconut milk, marine accord, mimosa tree). Last
weekend, ya found yrself in leggings to argue
again with yr Dominican love over the tender
texture of Texas tamales. Ya not-so-secretly want
to find yrself in a garden kissing a risk-
taking party until ya feel as good as a half-price
smoothie. Somehow, identity never finds ya
kohl-eyed in magenta blooms photographed
by a mixed-race admirer on a humid evening,
mostly b/c yr too busy galaxy-gazing
to be anyone’s so-fair-and-lovely. Was that
a touch of pride or self-pity? Probably. But ya
just can’t deal with another stranger’s surprise
at yr love of both tequila and mango lassis.
Does yr Guyanese love truly expect ya to replace
the chicken & fish in yr diet with mushrooms
that arbitrarily? You’re so black, yr told pretty
frequently. Ya don’t know what to make of it:
humanity. Ever find yrself advised by
Bangladeshi Brooklynites? Like they know
yr bae Poetry! Loves, let’s stop projecting
insecurities. But maybe it’s like when ya tried
to be cheerful after a famous poet called ya Debbie
Downer for mentioning the hurricanes in yr other
sovereignty? Never don’t find yrself coring
what music can be cleaved from a dull language
into an anomalous nationality. A personal theory:
we all behave oddly around fat titties. Now here
Poetry comes to say she wants to be an ode to what is
muddy. OK, baby. Here’s to dank difficult borders,
gardens of ingrown perennials, fractured fins,
the wings of inner menageries. Here’s to our own
empires of dirt — no one’s pruned-perfumed colonies
of exotic beauty. This is not a poem! Or is it
an efficient exercise in surviving hysteria?


^^EOP^^

When we got close enough
we could hear
 
rivers inside the ice
heaving splits
 
the groaning of a ledge
about to
 
calve. Strewn in the moraine
fresh moose sign—
 
tawny oblong pellets
breaking up
 
sharp black shale. In one breath
ice and air—
 
history, the record
of breaking—
 
prophecy, the warning
of what's yet to break
 
out from under
four stories
 
of bone-crushing turquoise
retreating.


^^EOP^^

There is big excitement in C block today.
On the window sill,
in a plastic ice cream cup
a little plant is growing.
This is all the men want to talk about:
how an apple seed germinated
in a crack of damp concrete;
how they tore open tea bags
to collect the leaves, leached them
in water, then laid the sprout onto the bed
made of Lipton. How this finger of spring
dug one delicate root down
into the dark fannings and now
two small sleeves of green
are pushing out from the emerging tip.
The men are tipsy with this miracle.
Each morning, one by one,
they go to the window and check
the progress of the struggling plant.
All through the day they return
to stand over the seedling
and whisper.


^^EOP^^

Every morning, my grandmother cleaned the Fischer stove
in the back of the trailer, lifted ash in a shovel, careful
 
not to spill the white-gray dust. Precious, she said, her breath
smoking in the cold. Precious in winter's first lavender
 
not-quite-light—and you could smell it, the faintest acrid hint
of ash, a crispness calling you from bed. You could watch her
 
cap it in a chicory coffee can to stack among others, back bent
from a long-gone fever. For the garden in spring, she said.


^^EOP^^

The tide pool crumples like a woman
into the smallest version of herself,
bleeding onto whatever touches her.
 
The ocean, I mean, not a woman, filled
with plastic lace, and closer to the vanishing
point, something brown breaks  the surface—human,
 
maybe, a hand or foot or an island
of trash—but no, it’s just a garden of kelp.
A wild life.
 
This is a prayer like the sea
urchin is a prayer, like the sea
star is a prayer, like the otter and cucumber—
 
as if I know what prayer means. 
 
I call this the difficulty of the non-believer,
or, put another way, waking, every morning, without a god. 
 
How to understand, then, what deserves rescue
and what deserves to suffer.
 
Who.
 
Or should I say, what must
be sheltered and what abandoned. 
 
Who.
 
I might ask you to imagine a young girl,
no older than ten but also no younger,
on a field trip to a rescue. Can you 
  see her? She is lead to the gates that separate
the wounded sea lions from their home and the class.
How the girl wishes this measure of salvation for herself:
 
to claim her own barking voice, to revel
in her own scent and sleek brown body, her fingers
woven into the cyclone fence.
 


^^EOP^^

into the strenuous briefness
Life:
handorgans and April
darkness,friends
 
i charge laughing.
Into the hair-thin tints
of yellow dawn,
into the women-coloured twilight
 
i smilingly
glide.  I
into the big vermilion departure
swim,sayingly;
 
(Do you think?)the
i do,world
is probably made
of roses & hello:
 
(of solongs and,ashes)
 


^^EOP^^

I hate the word, and I guess that’s why it is said?
People love to hurt one another.
It is what makes us human.
I do love dogs.
They don’t seem to be evil unless humans make them that way.
Dogs can maul and they can sniff out bombs.
They’ll get as close to you as they can while you’re sleeping.
They’ll share heat and scent in the crook of your knees.
Is there really a thing such as innocence?
I have desired from birth to live.
Daily, I wrestle the tight arms of guilt.
At the shelter, the adoption coach told us that our new dog was highly food motivated.
I have been called a bitch.
Our dog trembles when he’s afraid and the only thing we can do is wait for the fear to leave.
There’s no comforting him.
In a dream they held me down, scrawled BITCH across my chest in old embers.
They covered my head as a weapon was raised.
I had a dog who once kept me from walking into the arroyo.
She blocked my path and wouldn’t move.
I’ll never know what, or who, she saved me from.
 


^^EOP^^

They pay me to lift
the ball off the bat
touch the slender hand
and slip beneath the taut band
 
I plant bulbs and mulch the mound
I hone a group of black birds
I do the simplest thing
 
In unison with the trees
people move as the sun moves
He calls a seagull an eagle
and I agree
 
Across the pond
they say I will
I know this is a problem
for the painter, etc.
 
Tell me where to go
if they ditch me mid-season
tell me a word
seeks its world
 
Praise be to the upper lip of decision
praise be to dumb clanking stems
 
Everything is alive
even you, floral loafer
 


^^EOP^^




Like guns and cars, cameras
are fantasy-machines whose use is addictive.
—Susan Sontag

 



I place a photograph of my uncle on my computer desktop, which means I learn to ignore it. He stands by a tank, helmet tilting to his right, bootlaces tightened as if stitching together a wound. Alive the hand brings up a cigarette we won't see him taste. Last night I smoked one on the steps outside my barn apartment. A promise I broke myself. He promised himself he wouldn't and did. I smell my fingers and I am smelling his. Hands of smoke and gunpowder. Hands that promised they wouldn't, but did.           
This album is a stop-loss. By a dim lantern
or in the latrine
he flips through it.
He looks at himself
looking nearly as he does—
closest to himself then
as he could be, just learning
how to lean into his new body.
He suspends there
by standing order,
a spreading fire in his chest,
his groin. He is on stage
for us to see him, see him?
He stands in the noontime sun.     
 
A young soldier (pictured above) the son of an imam, brother to six, is among the latest casualties in the military campaign of Susangerd.    
 
your whole body in a photo your whole body sitting on a crate pressing your eyesocket to the viewfinder of a bazooka crouched as you balance the metal tube on your shoulder in one you guide a belt of ammo into the untiring weapon proud your elbow out as if mid-waltz your frame strong and lightly supporting the gun a kind of smile ruining the picture           
You’re posing. You’re scared.
A body falls
and you learn to step over 
a loosened head. You begin to appreciate
the heft of your boot soles,
how they propel you, 
how they can kick in
a face–
the collapse 
of a canopy bed
in an aerial bombardment,
mosquito netting doused 
in napalm–cheekbones fragile
as moth wings beneath the heel.
You tighten your laces 
until they hold together
a capable man.
Whatever rains, 
the weight of your feet
swings you forward,
goose-stepping pendulums 
a body less and less yours–
a body, God knows,
is not what makes you 
anyway. So the hands
that said they never would
begin finding 
grenade pins around their fingers,
begin flipping through this album
with soot under their nails      
you were not ready
But they issued the shovel and the rifle and you dug
But to watch you sitting there between the sandbags
But to watch the sand spilling out the bullet holes
But what did they expect
But what did they really think a sheet of metal could prevent
But I sat rolling little ears of pasta off my thumb like helmets
But it was not a table of fallen men
But my hand registered fatigue
But the men in fatigues were tired of sleeping in shifts
But you snuck into town and dialed home until you wrote your fingers
       were tired
But the code for Shiraz was down
But all of Shiraz was down
But the sheet lightning above the Ferris wheel of rusted bolts
But I am sure they are alright you wrote Well to reassure yourself
But the wind like an old mouth shaking the unnamed evergreen outside
       my window
But what I mean is I'd like very much to talk a bit  Hello          
 
Operation Ramadan was an offensive in the Iran-Iraq War. It was launched by Iran in July 1982 near Basra and featured the use of human wave attacks in one of the largest land battles since World War II. Aftermath: The operation was the first of many disastrous offensives which cost thousands of lives on both sides. This one in general boosted the casualty limit up to 80,000 killed, 200,000 wounded, and 45,000 captured. In retrospect, the Iranians lacked effective command and control, air support, and logistics to sustain an attack in the first place. Saddam Hussein offered several ceasefire attempts in the following year, none of which were accepted by the Revolutionary regime. [6] [dead link] 
   Congratulations and condolences 
They would say That's the house of a martyr
pointing with their nose That's the mother of a martyr 
They are building a museum
for the martyrs.
Some metal shelf
a white archival box 
with his personal effects. 
I am attempting my own 
myth-making. He didn’t want to have 
anything

^^EOP^^

To kill correctly
takes calculation.
 
Down to a science.
Arsenic
cacodylic acid.
 
Know water and rice
on a cellular level.
 
Make sure
no surviving
seed can be
collected
and planted.
 
Because even
a small seed
assures
survival.
 
Because
mortars,
grenades
and bombs
cannot destroy
a grain.
 
Because our
heart is made
of seeds.
 
Know what it
takes to kill
the seeds.
 
Know what it
takes to deprive
the plant of water,
to dehydrate it.
 
To be surrounded
by love but unable
to absorb it.


^^EOP^^

this morning
weaving Chi in the garden
invisible ball in my hand
 
 
*
 
 
Halong Bay
battle distant memory
smoke from Gulf of Tonkin
 
 
*
 
 
did the atom
ever know its destiny
how our hands create?
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A student asked me,
“Why do your people
believe in dragons?”
 
 
*
 
 
river birch –
undressing
in the wind
 
 
*
 
 
the solid bones of elk antlers
or branches of a limber pine –
memory
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
bobcat with mange
unwatered plants
also dying
 
 
*
 
 
mountain lion
her land, before ours
invasive plants
 
 
*
 
 
scent of orange blossoms –
memories of my late grandma
who planted this tree
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
yarrow seedlings
pop up a week later –
each moment a small beginning
 
 
*
 
 
stopped in my tracks
by a primrose blooming –
I, too, will overcome this
 
 
*
 
 
dinner
a bowl of rice and soy sauce
food to survive on
 
 
*
 
 
my heart
the Santa Ana winds today
branches fall to the ground
 


^^EOP^^

When he tells the story now
he's at the center of it, 
everyone else in the house
falling into the backdrop— 
my mother, grandmother,
an uncle, all dead now—props 
in our story: father and daughter
caught in memory's half-light. 
I'm too young to recall it,
so his story becomes the story: 
1969, Hurricane Camille
bearing down, the old house 
shuddering as if it will collapse.
Rain pours into every room 
and he has to keep moving,
keep me out of harm's way— 
a father's first duty: to protect.
And so, in the story, he does: 
I am small in his arms, perhaps
even sleeping. Water is rising 
around us and there is no
higher place he can take me 
than this, memory forged
in the storm's eye: a girl 
clinging to her father. What
can I do but this? Let him 
tell it again and again as if
it's always been only us, 
and that, when it mattered,
he was the one who saved me.


^^EOP^^

Do not hang your head or clench your fists
when even your friend, after hearing the story,
says, My mother would never put up with that. 
Fight the urge to rattle off statistics: that,
more often, a woman who chooses to leave
is then murdered. The hundredth time 
your father says, But she hated violence,
why would she marry a guy like that?—

^^EOP^^

1 
In which I try to decipher
                          the story it tells,
this syntax of monuments                           flanking the old courthouse:
                                       here, a rough outline
like the torso of a woman                           great with child—                                        a steatite boulder from which                           the Indians girdled the core
                                                     to make of it a bowl,                                        and left in the stone a wound; here, 
the bronze figure of Thomas Jefferson,                                        quill in hand, inscribing                           a language of freedom,                                                     a creation story—                                        his hand poised at the word                            happiness. There is not yet an ending,                                        no period—the single mark,
intended or misprinted, that changes                           the meaning of everything. 
Here too, for the Confederacy,
                          an obelisk, oblivious
               in its name—a word                           that also meant the symbol
to denote, in ancient manuscripts,                the spurious, corrupt, or doubtful;
                                             at its base, forged                           in concrete, a narrative                of valor, virtue, states' rights.  
Here, it is only the history of a word,                           obelisk,                that points us toward                           what's not there; all of it
palimpsest, each mute object                 repeating a single refrain:                  Remember this.


^^EOP^^




How hard it is to sleep
in the middle of a life.
— Audre Lorde



We wake in the middle of a life,                    hungry.
We smear durian            along our mouths, sing soft
death a lullaby. Carcass breath, eros of  licked fingers
and the finest perfume. What is love if  not         rot?
We wear the fruit’s hull as a spiked crown, grinning
in green armor.   Death to the grub, fat in his milky
shuffle! Death to the lawlessness       of dirt! Death
to mud and its false chocolate!   To the bloated sun
we want to slice open and yolk                      all over
the village. We want a sun-drenched           slug feast,
an omelet loosening its folds like hot Jell-O. We want
the marbled fat of steak and all        its swirling pink
galaxies. We want the drool, the gnash, the pluck of
each corn kernel, raw and summer                   swell.
Tears welling up                     oil. Order up! Pickled
cucumbers piled like logs for a fire, like fat limbs we
pepper and succulent                in. Order up: shrimp
chips curling in a porcelain bowl like subway seats.
Grapes peeled from bitter bark — almost translucent,
like eyes we would rather see. Little girl, what do you
leave, leaven              in your sight? Death to the open
eyes of  the dying. Here,           there are so many open
eyes we can’t close each one.          No, we did not say
the steamed eye of a fish. No eyelids fluttering like
no butterfly wings. No purple yam lips. We said eyes.
Still and resolute as a heartbreaker.         Does this break
your heart?                                      Look, we don’t want
to be rude, but seconds, please. Want: globes of oranges
swallowed whole like a basketball or Mars or whatever
planet is the most delicious.                   Slather Saturn!
Ferment Mercury! Lap up its film of dust, yuk sung!
Seconds, thirds, fourths! Meat wool! A bouquet of
chicken feet! A garden of                   melons, monstrous
in their bulge!               Prune back nothing. We purr
in this garden. We comb through berries and come out
so blue. Little girl,                            lasso tofu, the rope
slicing its belly clean. Deep fry a cloud so it tastes like
bitter gourd or your father leaving — the exhaust of
his car, charred. Serenade a snake and slither its tongue
into yours and                           bite. Love! What is love
if  not knotted in garlic? Child, we move through graves
like eels, delicious         with our heads first, our mouths
agape. Our teeth:         little needles to stitch a factory of
everything made in China.      You ask: Are you hungry?
Hunger eats through the air like ozone. You ask: What
does it mean to be rootless? Roots are good to use as
toothpicks. You: How can you wake in the middle of
a life? We shut and open our eyes like the sun shining
on tossed pennies in a forgotten well. Bald copper,
blood. Yu choy bolts                  into roses down here.
While you were sleeping, we woke to the old leaves
of  your backyard shed and ate that and one of your
lost flip-flops too. In a future life, we saw rats overtake
a supermarket with so much milk, we turned opaque.
We wake to something boiling. We wake to wash dirt
from lettuce, to blossom into your face. Aphids along
the lashes. Little girl, don’t forget              to take care
of  the chickens, squawking in their mess and stench.
Did our mouths buckle                                at the sight
of  you devouring slice                after slice of  pizza and
the greasy box too? Does this frontier swoon for you?
It’s time to wake up. Wake the tapeworm who loves
his home. Wake the ants,                  let them do-si-do
a spoonful of  peanut butter. Tell us, little girl, are you
hungry, awake,                               astonished enough?


^^EOP^^

In the nighttime house I don’t know where you are
My allegiances could change
How can I stop my allegiances from changing?
Morning is a gown put on at midnight, but no one’s coming
I don’t know what your secrets are
You say you have no secrets but I can feel them,
they’re bumps under the blanket
You do not let me in
This mood kept me up all night, like stars in my face,
like the burning fuel of dead stars burning right through my face
So now I have my own secrets
This voyage at nighttime, these burning holes
I can’t take you with me — 
I don’t know who you are
You say it’s me, but I’m dreaming,
I can’t recognize anything except someone else’s song,
which sounds like a kind of siren,
it’s calling me, it puts a light on Give me three reasons
Oh, you think I test you?
You think I work you too hard?
You think it’s too much to make you master the task
on your blue-black knees at 3 am?


^^EOP^^

The comet taught us how to watch the war.
The comet contended that fire 
is romantic and recommended we each behold it alone,
envisioning out there somewhere our next
lover, craning up at this same sky. 
Was the comet simply endeavoring
to keep us divided, I asked it, and the comet 
did not reply. Then we discovered the men
who wanted us dead
were convening at night on the site where their hero 
had been unceremoniously
interred. And so we exhumed the guy, burned him up,
and fed his ash to the rapids, 
to be churned into marlstone and mud-rich
air. Good thinking. Now he’s everywhere.


^^EOP^^

The landlord says we have to go. On the night the thermostat read seventeen
below zero, and there was no heat on the first floor, the Massachusetts State
Sanitary Code appeared in the landlord’s in-box like a spirit tapping bony
knuckles on his window, and a letter appeared in the landlord’s in-box
like a spirit scratching the words no rent in the frost on his window,
and the landlord’s mouth foamed as if he’d swallowed detergent,
and the foam froze on his beard, and the landlord’s plumber laid
twenty-four feet of baseboard on the first floor, and now we have to go. 
The landlord keeps his purple vintage 1976 Monte Carlo parked at the edge
of the driveway, purple inside and out, paint job and upholstery purple,
the color of emperors. The mad emperor Caligula assassinated his cousin,
jealous of his purple cloak, and the mad emperor’s mouth foamed
as if he’d swallowed detergent, and the foam froze on his beard. 
The neighbors report a moose sighting today. The moose charges from the woods,
mad as an emperor jealous of a purple cloak, sees the purple vintage
1976 Monte Carlo as another moose, and rams Caligula’s chariot with
his bristling antlers, kicking the car the way a teenager high on detergent
T-boned my leased Toyota Corolla two weeks ago, and so the moose claims
his territory, this land without a gas station or a movie theater or a pizza joint
or a doctor’s office, and gallops back into the woods, snorting foam. 
Now come the hunters tracking the moose, crossbows bristling since crossbow
season is upon us, their vision blurred by a night of Red Bull and detergent,
and see the purple vintage 1976 Monte Carlo as a moose, firing volley
after volley of arrows into the windshield, and the talisman of the air freshener
hanging from the rearview mirror does not keep the glass from exploding,
and the jumper cables coiled in the back seat do not rise magically like electric
eels, and the hunters explode in a cry of huzzah, waving their crossbows
as if their arrows thumped the hump of Richard the hunchback king. 
The purple vintage 1976 Monte Carlo is a dead moose, tow truck dragging
away the carcass to a round of applause in my brain. The landlord will snort
and foam, demanding to know why there is nothing left but his mutilated
vanity plate stamped with the year 1976, and I will speak to him in Brooklynese,
palms turned upward in the universal gesture of the uncooperative witness.
He will keep my security deposit, his territory without a gas station
or a movie theater or a pizza joint or a doctor’s office. I say huzzah.


^^EOP^^




Poverty is black ice.
— Naomi Ayala



You leave me sleeping in the dark. You kiss me and I stir,
fingers in your hair, eyes open, unseeing. You leave me asleep
every morning, commuting to the school in the city at sunrise. 
The landlord’s driveway, a muddy creek, ices over hard after
the freezing rain clatters all night. Your feet fly up, your head
slamming the ground, an eclipse of the sun flooding your eyes.
You sleep under the car. No one knows how long you sleep. 
You awake with a hundred ice picks stabbing your eardrums.
You awake, coat and hair soaked, and somehow drive to school.
You remember to turn left at the Smith & Wesson factory.
The other teachers lead you by the elbow to Mercy Hospital,
where you pause when the nurse asks your name, where you claim
your pain level is a four, and they slide you into the white coffin
of an MRI machine. You hold your breath. They film your brain.  Concussion: the word we use for the boxer plunging face-first
to the canvas after the uppercut blindsided him, not the teacher
commuting to school at sunrise in a Subaru Crosstrek. Yet, you would
drive, ears hammering as they hammer in the purgatory of the MRI. 
A week before, Isabela came to you in the classroom and said: Miss, I cannot sleep. Three days, I cannot sleep. Her boyfriend called
at 2 am, and she did not pick up. At 3 am, a single shot to the head
put him to sleep, and he will sleep forever, his body hidden beneath
a car in a parking lot on Maple Street, the cops, the television cameras,
the neighbors all gathering at the yellow-tape carnival of his corpse. 
You said to Isabela: Take this journal. Write it down. You don’t have to show me. You don’t have to show anyone. On the cover of the journal
you bought at the drugstore was the word: Dream. Isabela sat there
in your classroom, at your desk, pencil waving in furious circles.
By lunchtime, as her friends slapped each other, Isabela slept,
head on the desk, face pressed against the pages of the journal. 
This is why I watch you sleep at 3 am, when the sleeping pills fail
to quell the strike meeting in my brain. This is why I say to you,
when you kiss me in my sleep: Don’t go. Don’t go. You have to go.


^^EOP^^

                                                        to enter the sky with our bodies
                                                        the principal concern for
                                                        inventing airplanes
                                                   no one taught me this
                                      any more than they taught me
                     to say good morning to my hippocampus
                      but I do because I love my hippocampus
                                        I was in a band one summer
                                        we never could harmonize
                                        we smiled and kept playing
                                        we loved our united disunity
                                        a wild stubborn focus
                                        chewing its way out
                                        how awkward the
                                        archer after
                                        shooting
                                        his arrow
                                        remembering
                                        first time getting
                                        into bed just
                                        for sex
                                      they say
                               I’m old now
                            ask my advice
                   all I have to offer is
            make as many mistakes
     as you can handle but make
  them as soon as possible
  oh and don’t waste time
following each other from
opposite sides of the river
   when storm blows wig
      off my head it simply
        means it is time to let
         the storm take its share
 


^^EOP^^

the bo’y wakes up
the bo’y looks at itself
the bo’y notices something missing
there is both too much and not enough flesh on the bo’y 
the bo’y is covered in hair
what a hairy bo’y
some makes it look more like a bo’y
some makes it look more like a monster 
the bo’y did not learn to shave from its father
so it taught itself how to graze its skin and cut things off
the bo’y cuts itself by accident
the blood reminds the bo’y it is a bo’y
reminds the bo’y how a bo’y bleeds
reminds the bo’y that not every bo’y bleeds 
the bo’y talks to a girl about bleeding
she explains how this bo’y works
this bo’y is different from hers
bo’y has too much and not enough flesh to be her
the biology of a bo’y is just
bo’y will only ever be a bo’y 
the bo’y is Black
so the bo’y is and will only ever be a bo’y
the bo’y couldn’t be a man if it tried
the bo’y tried 
the bo’y feels empty
the bo’y feels like it will only ever be empty
the bo’y feels that it will never hold the weight of another bo’y inside of it
no matter how many ds fit inside the bo’y 
the bo’y is a hollow facade
it attempts a convincing veneer
bo’y dresses — what hips on the bo’y
bo’y paints its face — what lips on the bo’y
bo’y adorns itself with labels written for lovelier frames
what a beautiful bo’y
still a bo’y
but a fierce bo’y now
a royal bo’y now
a bo’y worthy of  being called queen
what a dazzling ruse
to turn a bo’y into a lie everyone loves to look at 
the bo’y looks at itself
the bo’y sees all the gawking at its gloss
the bo’y hears all the masses asking for its missing
the bo’y offers all of its letters
— ‘ b ’ for the birth
— ‘ o ’ for the operation
— ‘ y ’ for the lack left in its genes
what this bo’y would abandon
for the risk of  being real 
the bo’y is real
enough and too much
existing as its own erasure
— what an elusive d —
evading removal
avoiding recognition
leaving just a bo’y 
that is never lost
but can’t be found


^^EOP^^

it started with the first time
i opened the closet in my new
bedroom. paper flecks bursting from
behind the door. they had been waiting
all millennia. you helped
me pick them from my hair but even
weeks later we’d still find pieces
in between teeth — under tongues — 
on shoulders & lodged beneath fingernails.
you were always so gentle as you’d release
them out the window — same as you’d do
for a spider. when finished with
a rainbow it is the task of the youngest
angel to put it through the paper shredder.
he crouches in the cloud mist — taking
handfuls of the body’s remnants.
he learns not to weep after years of practice.
the first rainbow he shredded was that one
that we tried to follow in your car — 
driving around wet fallen trees — mist
rising from the asphalt. we never did get there
but we did stop for ice cream. you bit
the bottom off the cone. the sound
of the rainbow’s destruction was only a dull
static noise to us down here. i noticed
it but didn’t want to tell you. the next
time i was tearing open what looked like
a credit card offer in the mail & out
came the confetti. we had just stopped finding
it on everything — gushing like an artery
i covered my face until it was through.
mounds upon mounds of color. stole the rake
from my aunt’s shed we had used to rake leaves
in early october before the weather gave
herself over to frost. i resisted the impulse
to make the confetti into piles to leap into.
you were coming over & i wanted to be
clean. the next time we slept together
i transported myself somewhere else as you kissed me.
sat on the collarbone of the rainbow as
it was shred along with my hair. me, with the
thousand-piece body. me, getting blown
away by the first breeze. me, inhaling
the tears of the kneeling angel. i came
back to the room when you knelt,
spitting paper out of your mouth. confetti began to
pour out from behind my lips, miraculously dry.
each time i tried to apologize more came out;
you, naked on the bedroom floor trying to dispose
of the colors as they came. flow mountain spring.
flow slit neck of a pig. flash flood &
flow melted ice cream down to our elbows.
by the time it stopped your fear turned to anger.
slammed the door as you left & there i
was with all this color. i put some in my mouth
but it was too bitter too swallow.
if i don’t kiss anyone this won’t happen again — 
i can keep it a beautiful secret. routine:
each morning removing the piles of cut paper.
when you come over i sometimes find them on your
skin. you don’t notice so i kiss them off
your neck. i’m trying i’m trying.
i peel the rainbows free & roll them up like
yoga mats in the closet. the shredding has
gotten so loud — i ask you if you hear
it & you shake your head, unknowingly.
i can’t stand it — i can’t stand it.
caress this color out of me.


^^EOP^^

The Queen sits on a throne
of gem-trimmed robes. 
Between her robes
the jutted moth, it follows 
dust. She can’t rest before
the funeral, her self- 
unmaking, some maid
whose hair is browned 
by blood; a matching
queen. Nights’ dim candles, 
grackles’ glib decrescence. Now dance, now weep. 
No rest for feet still
warm from summer’s 
phrasing — odors / ankle
/ thorn. Keeping time 
while dying, the Queen grows
bored, her hand’s throat 
out, amiss. (Yet I sob,
I paw. Yet) I kiss.


^^EOP^^

I still keep it hidden in the jar of  saltwater you gave me     don’t worry, no one can hear me, my husband’s in the bathroom & my daughter’s in her bedroom wearing those headphones made of sponges on her ears

yes, I’ve kept it all these years, and kept it hidden, but — I have to tell you something:

something about it has changed

recently     has changed     since the last time we talked     the shell has opened, and — 

calm down      please      I’m about to tell you     I’ve waited years to tell you     how?     how could I have called you?     I don’t know where you live: I don’t even know your name!

so     I’m telling you now: the gluey seam that held it closed     at some point it began to dissolve     I don’t know     around Christmastime, I suppose     but it was gradual     subtle     not something easily seen through water, through glass      so perhaps it started earlier than that, but that’s when I first noticed — 

(of course it’s still alive     I know because I know)    

so     after the seal first began to loosen, things accelerated after that     and I could see inside of  it     and what I saw was a tongue     but very pale     the tongue was white, in fact, and thin as a strip of paper     also smooth     no bumps or grooves     but there was no doubt: this was a tongue

I’m sorry    I used the past tense only so that you might understand how it appeared to me when it was new and strange     to describe to you what I saw then     not because it’s changed     because it hasn’t      except in its familiarity

I spend an hour with it every morning      and if the weather’s mild, after they’ve gone to bed, I take it out at night, lie on my back in the grass, hold the jar on my chest, and together we watch the metallic flower petals spin at each other in that dangerous memory of  heaven, or the past    please     don’t cry    no one’s to blame     and nothing’s ruined, nothing’s wrong      there’s no discomfort      there seems to be no pain     there’s only time, letting something looser     and I’ve made the preparations     it will die when I die

no, she isn’t listening    and if  she is     well, then the eavesdropper’s punishment is hers      she can’t be spared      all her life spent holding her breath    only to hear     the sound absorbed by moss stuffed into the ears of  a stillborn kitten      all her life     over and over again at the kitchen table     playing the tapes of a conversation she recorded with a microphone slipped into a coffin thirty-six years ago     finding no meaning in those     and searching for the jar in which she’s certain it still floats      the tongue of  her mother’s ghost


^^EOP^^

I am the type to go to bed with my feet dirty  
A man calling from a balcony is not to be trusted  
In 1988, the nation sings a song I can’t understand but I sing it  because everyone looks at me like a thief and no one likes a thief  
Algae gather in plastic cups along the Jersey Shore  
The dull prongs of a fork still count as a weapon  
I gather plastic cups along the shore and shake them out to use for tea, juice, a home for my toothbrush  
The pledge of allegiance is a building ledge, an alleged crime, a leg crossed over another leg, a plea gone askew, a glance shared in a room with someone else who looks like you  
Hundreds of toxic wild boars are roaming across northern Japan and it would be a mistake to identify with them  
In 1960, my grandmother holds no knife in no tall wheat  
When washing her feet, my grandmother tells me she spent decades without shoes, wonders if the mud misses her  
When we look at each other, we also look away, knowingly  
I am a good daughter and I can repeat this indefinitely without  taking a breath  
Often, I call out to myself just to hear an echo, to hear something moving in the walls like a healthy family of rats  
My mother has been told, repeatedly: “You cannot walk here”  
Here is a white stone, a white fence, a white seagull, a white jug of milk, a white candle, a white duvet, a white patio, a white bar of soap to wash your mouth out  
Sometimes I dream in Cantonese and I have no idea what is being said  
You grow to love what you create, pouring out of your mouth  
In 1988, my father sees his reflection in the rearview mirror and identifies with the blood moon lighting his way to Atlantic City  
From a balcony, a man yells at me: “You need some white dick” and I turn into a boar  
我 在 广 东 做 梦  
My father disappears for weeks and my mother keeps weeding the garden, pulling cigarettes from the splintering tomatoes I will devour  
I study asymptotes for months and dream in curves — almost but never touching  
My mother writes in her English diary for night school: “I hate him I hate him I hate him I hate him I” and her ESL teacher only gives her a check, so I give her a check plus  
To be a good daughter means to carry everything with you at all times, the luggage of the past lifted to the mouth  
When we look at each other, my mother laughs like an overripe tomato on a windowsill  
In 1989, I spent months assembling a puzzle map of the United States of America and the teacher said, “Good job, Jane” and then louder and slower like a drowning sloth: “Gooooood jooooob, Jane” and I did not touch a single piece  
Bloody drunk and a blood moon, my father fights with another gambler and jabs at his arm with a dull fork and they both laugh celestially  
你 是 一 只 美 丽 的 野 猪  
During elementary school, I did not say a single word, not even when called on, and thus the teachers and administrators  decided I could not speak English because they looked at me  
Mao Zedong explains math: “In geometry, I just drew a picture of an egg — that was enough geometry for me”  
My grandfather was jailed by the Red Army sometime between 1966 and 1976 and my mother says: “I saw him cry when I tried to visit. He wanted to eat the bao I made for him”  
Algae gather, gleaming like jewels, on the head of my 5th grade betta fish  
Counterrevolutionaries during the Cultural Revolution are likened to “finding a bone inside an egg”  
I was born, healthy, in the year of the rat  
The man on the balcony invests in a foldable set of two chairs and one table in eggshell white — mold resistant, perfect for outdoor use  
你 不 敢 看 我  
I was ten when I willed a rock to fall off a ledge, just by staring at it long enough


^^EOP^^

The streets ram themselves into coochies:
sodden women with bamboo for backs
& taffy for sex. Both sweet & sour. 
Star-cloaked women who don’t bend
or break. Who catch Hondas right in they grills.
Women with electric-pink hoofs that drag 
in the slow churn of the intersection. Clog
the sidewalks. Metastasize along the corridor
of Main Street. They have come to settle 
around the bend of this corner. Pose
under carnival-like car lights at just nine-thirty.
Note: It ain’t even prime time & they got all that  good-good going on sale. The gully accordion,
their arms sway in & out of tempo with traffic.
They stagger in & out of the busted frame of Pop’s 
Grocery neon-blue open sign. Their smoke-thin throats
glitter when they slip into the ringing center of the motel lobby.
Strangled light bubbles & soaps along their jaws like melted crayons 
through the Plexiglas. A rush of shade strains
against their nylon-clamped thighs, rides up their hips
& dangles around their soft bellies as they saunter on in. 
They be harvested sounds for the replay later this evening.
When they got to make it do what it do. When they got to
cash they own checks. Trace dollar signs into ceilings — signals 
cut with their zirconia-encrusted toes.
Giggle & grunt at all the right moments
for the Best in Show.


^^EOP^^




For  Jack Agüeros (1934–2014)



I was eight when the blackout struck and the lights died all across the city
like a massacre of fireflies. In the projects of Brooklyn, I steered myself
to 14F, fingers spread against the cool tiles of the hallway, past the concrete
and chicken-wire terrace where I once burnt ants with a magnifying glass. 
Many years later, at the Chinese restaurant uptown, Jack said: They got  any flan here? He was my first poet. I had seen the fireflies in his sonnets
blink and float away: Fulano the philosopher in the unemployment line;
Blanco the painter, painting in the madhouse; Monterosa the dealer killed
by shotgun in a bar on Avenue A; his mother the seamstress and the quick
needle of her sewing machine; Jack the moving man, his hands sliced raw.
He stacked his apartment with dictionaries in three languages. I knew
the raconteur’s grin with every tale: Raúl Juliá is a friend of mine: a Puerto Rican playing Macbeth. He took 14 curtain calls on opening night. 
Maybe he would tell me now that flan was not Puerto Rican, or Mexican,
or Spanish, but Chinese, invented by a trembling cook to satisfy the palate
of an emperor in the Ming Dynasty. No flan, Jack, I said. This is a Chinese  restaurant. Two minutes later, he said: They got any flan? I showed him
the dog-eared and fingerprinted menu. No flan, I said. When the waiter
unfurled his pad, Jack said to him: You got flan? He sang this song for an hour.
The egg roll was not flan. The fried rice was not flan. The fortune cookie
was not flan. Can we get some flan? he said. Goddammit, Jack, I said. 
The poets crowded into the bar, striding to the mic. Jack stood with poem
in hand, read the title, tilted his head and said it again, studied the page
as if the words shriveled up like ants burnt under a magnifying glass,
then sat down. I witnessed the massacre of fireflies. A few of us clapped,
not knowing what to do with our hands, staring at the sonneteer who lost
all his quatrains and couplets in the denim jacket he left on the subway,
the words of Fulano still waiting on the unemployment line: The faster  you spin, the stiller you look. / There’s something to learn in that, but what? 
After the diagnosis, I handed Jack a book of poems. He dangled the book
upside down like a stiff mouse by the tail, something we would sniff  behind
the refrigerator. I wanted sonnets. Jack kept singing the chorus of a song: Get me to the church. Get me to the church. Get me to the church on time.  
At the end, I leaned over Jack’s bed to read his own poem in his ear, but some
words come home after the blackout, fingers crawling on the wall. I know
what I should have said at the Chinese restaurant: Jack, let’s get some flan.
We should have braved the subway at rush hour, straphangers rocking
all the way to 14th Street and 8th Avenue, to La Taza de Oro, gone now
like Jack, for rice and beans, squid in its own ink, café con leche y flan,
Jack: a spoonful of flan for you after all the years of sonnets and bread
for me, the steam rising when your hands cracked the crust at the table.


^^EOP^^

A black sun rises in the West of me & will never set. God of my fathers, sleep like the one sleeping next to me; inert & tenderly coiled. I am so grateful to yóu, that breathes as the dead breathe in their shallow land — barely, below the range of my hearing. That draws in the thin streams of black air & shifts & puts a white arm around me. I want to know, Né, what it is like in the kingdom of the dead where you are. Is the one I fear there with her train of silver hair? Have you seen John, the temples of his glasses duct-taped to the hinge? I know it is not still there; I know everything is in furious motion beneath the black sun & the sky white as chalk —  the torrent of silver hair whipped about her face that woke in the moonlight on the last morning, lucid & fluent, & turned toward my father & said, “I love you,” walking backward on the white road into the white sky toward the white city, black sun clearing the horizon & a wind lifting in the torn leaves like the wind in the wood above Lady’s Walk where I trespassed in spring, singing, Sigh no more, ladies, sigh no more, the bluebells hissing like cats & the canopy a violent array, violently outside me in flickering Islamic greens / Spanish grays, the topside / bellyside of milled leaves, the harebells biting their bitter tongues, & raising its head in panic, a juvenile fallow deer stippled with thick white spots. Then someone shouted, “Oy, stay there, you fúck,” Oyé, Whale, & my launces in his side, & I went down the hill with the sweetgrass pulling at me & the spit in my mouth. Né, I cannot sleep. Ever since I lost my little children. I look for their shapes on the ceiling, in the dark, & they are not there. Né, never, no, no, never, never, never, never. There is nothing, Né. Neither the night nor the white city like Conholt in its great estate. Not the hart, nor the furious wood. O,           John, John. I came downstairs still drunk to find you asleep with your head on the hoover, & the hoover still running; half-shaved, the tape on your glasses, your mouth open & the tattered Crombie. Then years later when Oli called & you were, O John. Y am alpha and oo, the firste and the laste, bigynnyng and ende. O,           John, John. No white city as a wijf ourned to hir hosebonde, no voice in the wind, in the (clouds) crying Lo! Y make alle thingis newe. I make all things new. Como una novia adornada para su esposo. Como tu cuerpo en la noche, Né; like this body that pregnancies have raged over & I have loved with my mouth moost feithful and trewe. i              And let him that is athirst come. ii             And let him that heareth say, Come. iii            And let the dawn thunder up in the street while you are sleeping with the first cars sauntering by & the dustmen & women whistling. Lord, I will stand before yóu when yóu wish in death’s little house & yóu will eat my pronoun.
 
•  In that other life that will be ours where there is neither marriage nor children, I may kneel beside you, Mouse, & not know you — our eyes like a golem’s, empty of their own will, but full of hís, the dead Lord at the center of hís dead city. In the days when my glory is stripped from me, & yours from you, & all are made equal — no aesthetic splendor, no charm, no subversive, faithless glances to- ward those I have loved & have loved me; no property, no desire, no variation, no sparrowhawk thrusting through birches in the snow toward the wood, for hé never stepped in a wood, nor saw a harebell easing its frail metaled head, its light pinks & papery blues, through the first tranche of snow in November, nor the gray cere of the plunderer beneath her blue helmet, her single attention, wings volute in air, head w/ beak narrowly ajar in concentration & hunger breaking the line of the fence at the old house in Broadway; in the snow; in the snow that has flattened everything, the bells ringing out, the clouds heaped above the Blackdowns dragging themselves from the earth, headlights on the ridge in the wind groping toward them, the hills featureless, snuffed, white, black, dull, shining w/ no light. No drinking in the afternoon, no dope, no flaring temper. No bed to sleep it off, Mouse, while you draw catkins & piggies & pussybears with gorgeous happy frowns in the cold. No sleep, no flesh to rest in, for there is only day in the white irradiate city where the lamb lights hís terrible mercy in to worldis of worldis, forever & ever & hís government will never fail, for no glory is allowed but hís glory, no bone gouvernance but hís bone gouvernance, no prison camp but hís prison camp, hís plantations, hís will & techne, hís punishment beatings, hís censorship, hís textual criticism, hís forgiveness, hís rehabilitation, O ferdful men, & vnbileueful & cursid & manquelleris. Mouse, on that day, will you turn toward me & will I see in the insubstantial glass of your eyes the memory of these days; myself, father, authority, half chocolate & half steel, still carrying you at six up the hill & down the hill, still playing the Ticklepuss & Crocopotamus, the horn of plenty, salver, lessener of cries, bringer of swallows & dragonflies, the Emperor & Downy Emerald hovering over still waters in the valei of teeris, wolves in the mist in the hills above Antequera where the rocks bared themselves like teeth & you were asleep on my chest with fine alabaster eyelids & eyelashes plashed with droplets of dew? Where I said, “Shhhhhh, close your eyes & imagine that you’re a water reed, Mouse,” & I blew on you & that was the wind & then my hand was a snail wandering over your eyelids & the nape of your neck & last of all it rained & that was my fingers going pitter-pat upon the pinnacles of your head. The days fade through our slow parting; your mother grows ambivalent. Little accident, in the stillness of the earth there is no life; the harebell reaches its root into death & the waters flow down until the rock is dry. I wanted more than I was given, & found in betrayal a churning courage. Torchlight in the garden where we make our choice. The will that flickers. My loss. Our bliss. Mouse, on the last day, remember this.
 
•  Lying with you, Né, in the sun, in the (clouds) half-listening to the Senegalese preacher two mornings after the riots when they ran Mame Mbaye down to the gutter & wishing you would go buy your mutes & play again, here, in silence, —  for them & for me & yourself & the polis —  Bach’s Suiten für Violoncello No. 1. To watch in dumb show the formal motions that reify language & music — the flesh; your shoulder & forearm & wrist & lightly-draped fingers one continuous dependent assemblage flowing south to the river at Arganzuela & the chuckling magpies. There is an authority in you, when you play, that is different from the authority of the whap | whap of rotor blades overhead; control that is liberation, a concentration that is neither at one point nor diffuse, like the globes of light hovering over the lampposts in your myopia last night; wandering across the river, the madrileños also entonados swaying like palm fronds in the wind; then the dark, & our one body with its artifacts of pregnancy & loss. An authority that is different from the authority of the Lord in hís dead city, hís kingdom that has no contiguity with ours, no conformitá, the streets empty of opposition & neither wind nor rain; nor thunder, nor tears. Now a thin sun is dwelling in the wind. I wd like to reach out to you in its cold light & pull the shape of your body into mine; put my tongue against your eyes so I can taste what it is you see through them; the restaurant opening, the crisp cloths. Even the polis with their holsters & war clubs looking on carefully & asexually like angels come to lie with the daughters of men. A kestrel on a lamppost strips the bascinet from a cricket with slow, considerate motions: lovely rare flame. Have they buried Mame Mbaye? They are erasing a name from the wall & the quarter is pacified. Clouds rise above Guadarrama, Somosierra, above the meseta like kites. The picoletos shift from foot to foot in long black boots. Bells bleat — lambs; Alsatians on leashes. The bougainvillea —  glad to bring us at last the first trace of its colors — flaunts a breathless restraint.
 
•     


^^EOP^^

                             first and most important
                             dream our missing friends forward
                             burn their reflections into empty chairs
             we are less bound by time than the clockmaker fears
this morning all I want is to follow where the stone angels point
                      birdsong lashing me to tears
                              heterosexuals need to see our suffering
                   the violent deaths of our friends and lovers
       to know glitter on a queer is not to dazzle but to
  unsettle the foundation of this murderous culture
         defiant weeds smashing up through cement
                      you think Oscar Wilde was funny
                     well Darling I think he was busy
                             distracting straight people
so they would not kill him if you knew how many times I have been told you’re not like my gay best friend who tells me jokes and makes me laugh no I sure as fuck am not I have no room in my life to audition for your pansy mascot you people can’t kill me and think you can kill me again I met a tree in Amsterdam and stood barefoot beside it for twenty minutes then left completely restored
     yet another poem not written by a poet
                    sometimes we need one muscle to
                                     relax so the others follow
                                 my friend Mandy calls after a
                               long shift at the strip club to say                              while standing in line for death I am                         fanning my hot pussy with your new book                    will you sign it next week my fearless faggot sister


^^EOP^^

The hastily assembled angel wanders 
And has      through cities centuries of  cities 
And countries and millennia of  cities 
And countries and of  women and of men      there’s  
No hurry now though he was hurriedly 
Once brought to being      and bears the scars of  that 
Though slowly      in the Earth      though slowly he 
Eventually began to wonder what  
The hurry had been for      and if  he could 
Have been a better angel or have done 
Better the job he did if once 
They’d made him the      other angels had allowed  
Him to meet God      for he has been uncertain 
As people are uncertain he has nev- 
er been as certain      as dogs are      who sniff 
The wind that moves the curtain      and see behind the curtain


^^EOP^^

Except most things weren’t clouds      everything there 
Was clouds      the hastily assembled angel 
Before he knew the word      clouds was the last word 
He heard the other angels shouting as 
They shoved him      though he after he had fallen 
Too far to hear them he      saw their mouths mak- 
ing shapes that were not clouds      and when he saw that 
Thought That’s      something that isn’t clouds that      shouting   After I’ve fallen too far to hear them don’t  They know      I’ve fallen too far to hear them now   Or are we not together now before 
He knew the word      in those few minutes the oth- 
er angels were assembling him      he named 
The things he saw with words that seemed to fit them 
Nothing was heavenly a few things were  Ocean and hole and monkeyapple he 
Before the other angels shoved him      had 
Started combining words      but nobody 
Would name the things he saw the way he named them 
And to the other angels all his naming 
Was noise they shouted      as they shoved him It’s  All clouds      what difference could it make      to the angel 
Built to monitor the Earth      from the surface 
Of  the Earth      what was or wasn’t true in Heaven 
They shoved him then      they stared and then they shouted 
After the disappearing figure all 
The things they suddenly remembered      they had 
Forgotten to tell him      as they were hammer- 
ing him together as they hammered him 
Together and behind them      but above 
Behind      a pinkish light that was or was- 
n’t God pulsed      like the heart of  one of  the creatures 
God hadn’t yet created though the angels 
Had seen the creatures coming in the waves 
Then covering the Earth      the angels had 
Seen them      and didn’t want to be assigned 
To live with them      and so had voted to 
Build their own angel but they didn’t ask 
Permission first instead they built him quick- 
ly      and as Gabriel asked God      if  this 
New angel could be sent instead to Earth 
Fresh      eyes for a fresh world the other angels 
Shoved him the hastily assembled angel 
From the cloud and Heaven      he      the hastily 
Assembled angel could see      farther than 
The other angels though he couldn’t under- 
stand what he saw as well      as the other angels 
Might have      and as he fell he saw their mouths mak- 
ing shapes he saw the light behind them      pulsing 
And as he fell he watched the clouds becoming 
Abstract      as any other angel would 
From Heaven watch a species go extinct 
Even as dry land emerged from the waves below him


^^EOP^^

At the confluence of tea roses and Russian sage
we made a right at the curved iron fence,
one of my dead friends beside me explaining how trees communicated
but I couldn’t understand a thing because it was all blurry — 
the way it gets — and though I knew him well
I couldn’t say for sure now whether it was Larry or
Phil or Galway or Charlie until I realized it was me
talking in some kind of Hebrish they spoke
in my town by the Delaware and it was used
for code the way one of the Amerindian languages
was used in World War II the Germans couldn’t in a
million years break since they weren’t as pragmatic
irrational and in-your-face as the English and Americans were. 
I noticed the bees were digging in for a late lunch
of what for them was boiled beef and horseradish
or maybe it was just for me and they were bent over
guzzling madly while paying no attention to the two
of us or in any way tired of the nectars since it
ran the whole gamut from oysters to soup to — well — 
boiled beef to strawberry-rhubarb pie
and a little whisky after, some of it spilled on the
vanilla ice cream that underlaid the pie it had once overlaid,
all of this depending on the blossoms they circled over
and bent down upon, a cafeteria as good as the one
on Broadway called Stanley’s I circled and bent over
expending nickels dimes and quarters when the Dulles brothers
ran the country.  It was Larry, I’m sure now,
and what we talked about was cardboard
and we were amazed that in the open spaces
beside the hotel on 47th Street
there were four or five small cardboard “houses,”
both of us remembered,
the homeless had claimed to sleep in and provide
a safe place for their black plastic garbage bags,
the size of a room at the Sloane House on 34th Street
near the Pennsylvania Station where I put up
the price of a meal then for a clean pillowcase
with little or no stuffing and a cardboard
bed as stiff as metal and a cardboard
breakfast of cardboard bread and eggs and between us
we talked cardboard, shirts from the cleaners with sheets of
cardboard we drew on, cardboard soles in ruined shoes
we both wore when we were children, cardboard hats,
cardboard to lie on listening to outdoor concerts
and cardboard masks we made with scissors and crayon
for costume dances, balls is what we called them
as if we were art students in Paris about to
swim in the nearest fountain.  Though what I want to
say is the bees were too busy to do us any
harm and it was packs of wild dogs, not swarms
of bees, that terrified me (Larry, too) except for one
occasion when I pushed the wrong end of an old
broom into a hive of yellow jackets on the underside
of a low-lying garage roof and an angry swarm chased
me through the yard and over a fence hating
any form of criminal intrusion, urban renewal, or
gentrification, I who couldn’t resist intrusions,
who never could, omnivorous as I was, living on
apples and bananas as well as baby lamb chops,
who ran like hell that day (Larry, too)
for we in our separate ways didn’t want to be
paralyzed then eaten by larvae, none of us dead ones did.


^^EOP^^

I close my eyes and see him windmilling his arms as he plummets from
the Mystic Tobin Bridge, to prove me wrong, to show me he was good,
to atone for sins like seeds in the lopsided apple of his heart, but mostly
to escape from me in the back of his cab, a Puerto Rican lawyer in a suit and tie. 
I hated the 111 bus, sweltering in my suit and tie with the crowd in the aisle,
waiting to hit a bump on the Mystic Tobin Bridge so my head would finally
burst through the ceiling like a giraffe on a circus train. I hated the 111 bus
after eviction day in Chelsea District Court, translating the landlords and judges
into Spanish so the tenants knew they had to stuff their clothing into garbage
bags and steal away again, away from the 40-watt squint that followed them
everywhere, that followed me because I stood beside them in court. I would
daydream in the humidity of the bus, a basketball hero, flipping the balled-up
pages of the law into the wastebasket at the office as the legal aid lawyers
chanted my name. I hated the 111 bus. I had to take a taxicab that day.  What the hell you doing here? said the driver of the cab to me in my suit
and tie. You gotta be careful in this neighborhood. There’s a lotta Josés around here. The driver’s great-grandfather staggered off a boat so his
great-grandson could one day drive me across the Mystic Tobin Bridge,
but there was no room in the taxi for chalk and a blackboard. He could
hear the sawing of my breath as I leaned into his ear, past the bulletproof
barricade somehow missing, and said: I’m a José. I could see the 40-watt
squint in his rearview mirror. I’m Puerto Rican, I said. It was exactly
5 pm, and we were stuck in traffic in a taxi on the Mystic Tobin Bridge. 
The driver stammered his own West Side Story without the ballet,
how a Puerto Rican gang stole his cousin’s wallet years ago. You think
I’m gonna rob you?

^^EOP^^




After Jim Steinmeyer’s book “Hiding the Elephant: How Magicians Invented the Impossible and Learned to Disappear”



Over the years they hunted,
the wayward apprentice watchmakers,
the disappointing sons who transformed
their surnames, hunted over acres
of hinges, cogs, calluses, hidden whiskey,
mustaches a breath from feral,
poured an ocean of fortune
into fabrications of brass and iron,
spent entire seasons strumming
massive harps of wire into perfect
calibrations of invisibility,
prayed to the gods of adjustable mirrors,
cursed the gods of temperamental gaslights,
broke the legs of imitators and thieves,
chewed holes in each other’s pockets,
harnessed nightmares of giant silver hoops
making endless passes over the bodies
of the dead, hoisted high a cenotaph
for hundreds of sacrificed rabbits,
breathed miles of delicate thread
into the lost labyrinths of their lungs,
all to make a woman float
to make a woman float
and none of them ever thought
of simply asking her.


^^EOP^^

Six years ago, the big museum sold eight famous paintings
to purchase, for unspecified millions,
Gustave Caillebotte’s Man at His Bath.
Now it’s hip to have a print of it,
and whenever I see one hung for decoration,
I’m almost certain that this is what Caillebotte
had in mind when he broke out the oils
in 1884: some twenty-first-century bitch in Boston
catching a glimpse of a framed reproduction,
recollecting a study about how washing oneself may induce
a sense of culpability. What I remember 
is he insisted I clean before leaving. That, and he was
trying to be dreamlike. He took my jaw in his hand
and said in the next life, we’ll really be together,
and the clamp in his voice made me almost
certain he knew something I did not. Now I eat right,
train hard, get my shots. This life — I’m angling
to remain in this life as long as I can, being almost
certain, as I am, what’s after — 


^^EOP^^

like the lost car that a river knows
like the heat of an ointment in pinpoints of breathing
like the unknown western in mountains of tar
like a knot in each word for comfort
like a horse on a face with four hooves
like the knives that a heart squirms into
like the feel that the last day pushes, that a fire paints red
like the shower that a plain divides in snakes
like a frozen torso pining for food
like the ammunition that a pair of wings makes dry
like a shirt that plants seeds under worn out skin
like the clouds of mistakes, pouring through sleep
like the walls that crack open
like a wake in a spin
like the exits of oceans that a salmon knows
like the dust that is written with number
like a trust full of beacons of light
like the negative shade of a fungus
like the promise that a lie gives out
like the pulse of a trap
like the rainbow that cuts off a hand
like a psychic intent full of negative calls
like salt for the season that covers the fields with jail
like the round word that a star pisser pulls
like the plains that a crossed out calendar day will mourn
like the fate of the wrong side of talking
like hills under snow that a letter revolves
like the husky reflections of leeches that writhe
like a sword in Toledo
like the animals growing a vent in a cage
like the sequence of nights dropping straw for a cipher
like the trade in the fair full of cycles and ends
like the cattle that heat all the drains with green grass
like the nipples of outdoor intentions
like a wing on the door that a glass makes arise
like the underground fluid of digitized words
like the ice in a cavern
like a ride through the green light of dying
like the yellowish herd of relational cards
like the face that a wallet becomes
like the wrong line of radios making a rule
like the crust on the last day of hunger
like the rodeo riding the real for a cut
like the cells in the spread of the fall
like an ape for the circle of color
like reflections that turn on a wheel
like the freezer of sweethearts
like a change for the current that makes a return
like the pause on the shore full of rattles
like the oxygen tent making holes in a lung 
the face
of friendly fire
is knotted
for a smile 
deleted
for a smile
that saves
the executioner 
the face
intended
jail, by rocking
through the holes
that fear
the clear blue
family
of dots 
the face
resembles
next to nothing
in the network
full of incremental
touches
that a string
intends to limit
by the light 
the face
of arctic
evolutions, a hunt
that people came
to read
instead of mapping
all the flights
of sleep
without a sound 
the face
of terrible returns
will fade
outside the pouring
crowd
of animal
relation
in the mineral
of wealth 
the face
of providence
is making shores
for surfers
in the foam
of magnifying
eyes
that are the opposite
of winter calm 
the face
is never there
in each intention
that the worst
reliance
knows to ask
for heat 
the face
is after
every opening
that makes
a number
count
for all
of what is good 
like a robot that falls and makes good for a switch
like the breasts of a mop that soaks blood
like a magnifying glass for the sun
like the picture of radar in space
like a misery flood on the phone
like electrical laughter that the pointed shake
like enemies held in a double embrace
like extinctions returning
like a handshake of style for the heat
like the flower that bottles a fly for a mouth
like the still dunes of dust on a beautiful girl
like the crack in an oven
like a moon that gets brighter with age
 


^^EOP^^

I hustle upstream.
I grasp. I grind.
I control & panic. Poke
balloons in my chest,
always popping there,
always my thoughts thump,
thump. I snooze — wake & go
boom. All day, like this I short
my breath. I scroll & scroll.
I see what you wrote — I like.
I heart. My thumb, so tired.
My head bent down, but not
in prayer, heavy from the looking.
I see your face, your phone-lit
faces. I tap your food, two times
for more hearts. I retweet.
I email: yes & yes & yes.
Then I cry & need to say: no-no-no.
Why does it take so long to reply?
I FOMO & shout. I read. I never
enough. New book. New post.
New ping. A new tab, then another.
Papers on the floor, scattered & stacked.
So many journals, unbroken white spines,
waiting. Did you hear that new new?
I start to text back. Ellipsis, then I forget.
I balk. I lazy the bed. I wallow when I write.
I truth when I lie. I throw a book
when a poem undoes me. I underline
Clifton: today we are possible. I start
from image. I begin with Phillis Wheatley.
I begin with Phillis Wheatley. I begin
with Phillis Wheatley reaching for coal.
I start with a napkin, receipt, or my hand.
I muscle memory. I stutter the page. I fail.
Hit delete — scratch out one more line. I sonnet,
then break form. I make tea, use two bags.
Rooibos again. I bathe now. Epsom salt.
No books or phone. Just water & the sound
of water filling, glory — be my buoyant body,
bowl of me. Yes, lavender, more bubbles
& bath bomb, of course some candles too.
All alone with Coltrane. My favorite, “Naima,”
for his wife, now for me, inside my own womb.
Again, I child back. I float. I sing. I simple
& humble. Eyes close. I low my voice,
was it a psalm? Don’t know. But I stopped.


^^EOP^^

Looking out at a man’s name on a battered wingtip
in strong winds; was it planned that when
the cheap wing bends, the name stays steady?
What if it didn’t matter how much
you trod over the body of your mother, what happened
when you were younger, how you tried forgetting
and forgot to forgive. Something has to hold you: numbers, columns,
cards to swipe, books to shelve, 
pints to pour. A life filled with fixed wings, with hard grasps,
with the grateful. What’s worth keeping?
Not the sad boy who blamed you for all the ways he was broken.
Not the man’s name on the wing, but
why not the battered wing itself. Why not the woman thinking.
Why not the river below, its lips wet, footprints animal.
What forked tongues come when clouds crack open,
when this sky’s watched you sleep all day,
and now lets down its darkness. There’s all night to stay awake.


^^EOP^^

Up on the roof, waiting for the fireworks to begin
in warm winter rain, a moment ago I stepped
from the elevator into the black air
of an almost New Year
and need a minute to catch my breath
at the spread of city open to my eye.
I can't go to the edge; I never could.
The old fear of height still troubles me,
the sensation that nothing can be under me
if I am surrounded by mist and rain
and all of the dark night air we breathe.
Even a glimpse at the treetops in the park,
with its slick crisscrossing roads that plunge
into the jumbled panorama of East Side Manhattan,
hysterical tonight with its own incandescence,
gives me the willies. I feel as if
I were standing on the deck of a showboat of a cloud
as it drifts down some dark river, waiting for it
to bang into some other building's fifteenth floor.
How can these old people hunch the railing,
hoisting their plastic glasses of champagne
from under dripping umbrellas, as if
they drank the rain as they laugh
their analyses of the weather?
Maybe now, like me, they have nothing to lose.
I moved in three weeks ago; this is my first trip
to the roof. I don't want to die tonight,
the first fatality of 1990! There's too much of me
I left in pieces last year, oh, the whole last decade:
But I'm up here to distract myself, temporarily,
from what I don't want or can't have
in the way of love. . . . That must be
the Triborough Bridge, tied in its strings
of blue lights, and I can see in Central Park
the skating rink, like a scoured mirror below,
where some madman waves a red lantern; he
must be drunk. I have only sipped a speck of Drambuie,
which I didn't carry in my Coca-Cola glass
up to these festivities. This is the first New Year's
I've spent alone in twenty, twenty-two years.
I never could go to the edge; but I did.
Out there in the dark: my marriage, the woman
I loved badly, as she did me, or none too well;
the places we lived; the apartment I once half-owned;
the thousands of books I had to leave behind
(though I am to be granted library privileges)
and the black and white cat I really miss.
My wife's with her friends tonight somewhere in Brooklyn;
friends of mine out there, too, though I don't know
where. It's just like me to move in the middle
of a telephone company strike. Thus, no calls
from anyone—and I don't even have
a telephone yet, so who could call? Damp but trying
to smile, I eye the revelers. Two young men
and their enormous girlfriends have joined us,
really large women who carry balloons, all ready
to froth in merry champagne. We check
our watches to the screams from swarms
of apartment windows to the west
as the sky lights up with the first furious
bombardment of colored shells. I can see that
red lantern swinging toward the rockets—aha!
So it wasn't a drunk, but the fireworks engineer
preparing to blow the year's last sky
to smithereens for our delight!
I like to follow the tiny spurts of flame
from the launching pad in their heavenward trajectory
as much as I like the rockets' red glare,
the bombs bursting in air, which give proof
to the night that I am still here, hands
jammed in the pockets of my sodden raincoat,
face dripping with rain, hat soaked, wondering
if the skinny guy in the army jacket behind me
(who looks just like I did in the sixties)
is mumbling his way into a combat flashback
and ready to hurl me over the edge of the roof
and into kingdom come. I guess not yet. We've
survived the first blasts of spinning green,
corkscrews of spangled flame, buds of fireballs
spewed in arching gold sprays, the whistling fire-fish
that curl and howl as they flare, falling to ash.
Screaming its head off, the New York New Year enters.
I feel sad that beautiful things must die,
even shadows made of smoke and flame,
whatever I thought I had made out of my life—
music, poems, books, kisses, a little useless fame.
The army guy behind me grumbles at the haze
of rocket smoke that coils around the trees,
then tumbles up into the air toward Harlem.
That bump and thud and bump sound everywhere,
more clouds smacking each other head-on.
The flashes of the explosions are close enough
to touch if you wanted to burn your fingers
on the sky, and the glare rocks our shadows back
against the brick, as if chaos snapped
our pictures in the dark. I smile for my portrait,
curious at the New Year, smelling the acrid smoke
of the one we've just destroyed. Then I squeeze into
the tiny elevator car with the others, anonymous,
reconciled to be so, back to my little apartment
and the waiting glass of amber drink I'll raise,
only half in jest, to my new life.


^^EOP^^

One day we’re told to look at the sun 
through a hole in a cereal box     All there is to be seen 
is the rest of  the world disappearing     This 
somehow shadows aliveness but almost 
everyone who has ever lived is restlessly sleeping as dead 
For who     About what     The end is near over  
                    & over yet we insist on making dates to keep talking 
          Always about the last eclipse the next blood 
          flower buck worm strawberry ice wolf event 
          Then there’s a last constellation we might ever see 
          until there’s something else to look out for         
Gone are the frightening & gorgeous conspirators 
that I’m sure I will not see again     
Traces of sweat & mystery streaks 
some hells     communion & of course 
a few awkward goodbyes     The mattress is 
          gone forever like so many of the bodies I’ve worshipped  
Here we are left with impressions 
& a recollection of  my side of  the story     I cry 
w/ one eye all the time but the right one staid defiant  
                                                  What would you read to someone you 
                                                  love if you knew that they were dying  
If  it’s over again can we share more than black sites & 
drownings     skin turned confetti     blue turned coal 
& innards swept down sewers w/ brooms 
          We give way beyond what we know     So the gun 
          in my mouth made me a monster for a while 
          Coming back shoeless calloused me 
          everywhere but the bottoms of feet     Someone  
dressed like a traitor convinced me 
there are loyalties that deserve to be broken     Someone 
w/ death to the klan on the door 
let me know I already broke free  
          Hear them both     They’re dead & it’s tricky 
          since the decomposed & me are close but here 
          I am w/ you     The friend who is you 
          Impossible almost lover you     The us 
          we chose as family you & others in the fullness of  time  
None of us breed but someone will give 
birth behind bulletproof glass where life & 
the divide begin     This is a fabled event 
packaged as betterment     It will spawn someone 
who pays to spray us  
                                                  like invasive bugs in the street     Cops 
                                                  were children so we can look forward to 
                                                  good regime/bad regime during future 
                                                  questioning     Thanks for the theater 
                            but we’ve seen the play     Civil discourse is broken 
                            down in the destruction manual     They can have all 
                the orchestras     Classical music will never drown out the sins  
What would you write to someone you 
love if   you thought you might be dying  
          Maybe once I was someone who I’d love to see 
          punched in the face     But I am here & not yet dead so 
          a constellation of the imaginary is no imaginary 
          constellation     There is no sky w/o a dream of sky     You 
          who are family   fuck a grid & thanks to you I see 
          brightness independent of state-­sponsored power  
We talk about who threw that brick through 
the window     & how it’s now part of a path in a garden 
Broken glass is as old as glass     but the sound is 
more than fresh wounds     There are fresh worlds still to be heard  
                            Oh  & you my friend   I will fight anyone who says 
                  you’re not pretty     That is just ridiculous talk     Distant 
           impractical you     I believed we could be possible w/ translation 
                            software & hearts-for-eyes emojis     No dice 
                            but not before I entertained 
                            dressing in a tux as your husband     Look  
          I never thought when you said no more haircuts 
          until wars were over that you’d never have 
          short hair again     My beautiful barber 
                       brushes my face     I feel funny I 
          moan a weird prayer for peace     I guess it could happen 
          lol     after all we deserve a new start     Soon we’ll be dead & brag 
          about riches     We were here & looked right into the sun


^^EOP^^

What can I tell you? It was a summer that seemed to be
making history — their personal history — almost before
it began, and they stood back slightly, still in it, but
observing it, saying “the summer this,” “the summer that,”
all the while it was going on. They became obsessed with
a fountain, for example, one they walked past each day,
how abundantly it would reach upwards and yet be pouring
back down itself the whole time — all winter this fountain
had been dry, not saying a word. What more can I tell you?
Oh, everything — like how they would walk home in
the evenings when the light was soft, anything bad sliding
off them, and they would feel owned, completely owned,
in a good way, by the air, which would touch them constantly,
sometimes urgently, sometimes lightly, just to let them know
it was there, and they would think maybe this is what being
alive is, when they saw how complicated a tree was and how
it wanted them looking at it and saying this, how the color
of a particular flower at this particular moment was redder
even than the life force, whatever that is, if you could open
it up and get right down inside it, if you could put your mouth
to it and become as red as that rose even, it was still redder
than that, and they wouldn’t know what to do with themselves
so they wouldn’t do anything except listen to the songs in their
heads which were sad ones like nearly all good songs and watch
this feeling rolling in, sunshine or rain, we don’t know yet,
it’s a good one, it’s the best one, though it has no name.


^^EOP^^




When Mexico sends its people, they’re not sending their best.... They’re bringing drugs. They’re bringing crime. They’re rapists.
— Donald Trump, June 16, 2015



They woke him up by pissing in his face. He opened his mouth
to scream in Spanish, so his mouth became a urinal at the ballpark. 
Scott and Steve: the Leader brothers, celebrating a night at Fenway,
where the Sox beat the Indians and a rookie named Rodríguez spun
the seams on his changeup to hypnotize the Tribe. Later that night,
Steve urinated on the door of his cell, and Scott told the cops why
they did it: Donald Trump was right. All these illegals need to be deported. 
He was a Mexican in a sleeping bag outside JFK station on a night
in August, so they called him a wetback and emptied their bladders
in his hair. In court, the lawyers spoke his name: Guillermo Rodríguez,
immigrant with papers, crop-picker in the fields, trader of bottles
and cans collected in his cart. Two strangers squashed the cartilage
in his nose like a can drained of beer. In dreams, he would remember
the shoes digging into his ribcage, the pole raked repeatedly across
his cheekbones and upraised knuckles, the high-five over his body.  Donald Trump was right, said Scott. And Trump said: The people
that are following me are very passionate

^^EOP^^

I sit across the table from my partner
        in the atrium of the psychiatric holding facility 
                our hands churched into our laps. We are not allowed
to touch. The air between us thick as Perspex. 
                        They tell me all the ways this place resembles a prison.
 
•  
                Everything a sterile white
                        so clean it could almost disinfect
                                a memory.
 
•  
        In 1787,
                Jeremy Bentham conceived of what would become
                the most common prison design: 
                        the panopticon. 
                Intended to control prisoners through the illusion
                that they are always under surveillance.
 
•  
My partner tells their therapist
they are afraid of taking
their own life, 
                        that they balanced on a building’s edge,
                        & three officers escort them from the room.
 
• 
The first cop who ever handcuffed me
                                                                                [was my father]
left me bound
                           till my fingers blued. 
          On the days when I can’t remember
          his face,
                               he becomes the scent of
                                                                                vodka & zip ties
                                                 the sound of
                                                                                cuffs & a bottle
                                                 petaling into blades.
 
•  
                           At the booking office they remove my glasses
                           & the guards blur into a procession
                           of fathers.
 
•  
          I bring my partner clothes & pads
when the hospital decides to hold them longer, 
          shove each shirt that could mark them
as queer back inside the closet & shut it [like a mouth].
 
•  
                               The word faggot scrawls across
                               the jail guard’s lips like graffiti.
 
•
 
When I visit my partner
          they insist on staying inside 
                       the sky above
                       the patio cordoned
                       off  with chicken wire.
 
•  
I plead my sentence down
in exchange for: my face, my prints, my DNA
                             & ten years probation. 
When I see a cop, I fear
                     even my breath
                                                        criminal 
                     & when my therapist asks me
                     if  I’m suicidal
                                                               I lie.  
Perhaps
both are a kind
of  surveillance.
 
•  
Tear gas floods the street,
          sharpens water to a blade
          hidden in the orbit of my eye. 
                    & just like this, a squad car
                    remakes my sadness a weapon. 
If my partner snaps cuffs
          around my wrists 
                                 [& I asked for this] 
have they also weaponized
my desire?
 
•  
A woman in the facility
tells my partner:
                                 I know what you are.
Says:
                                 Sinner.
Says:
                                 Anti-christ. 
My partner goads her on,
babbles in false
                            tongues & is confined
                                         to their room for safety.
 
•  
Once, a cop dragged me
into an alley &
                                        beat me like he knew
                                        exactly what I was. 
          What does it say if sometimes
                                        when I ask my partner to hit me 
          I expect his fist
tightened in their throat, his voice
                                     bruising their tongue?
•  
I am arrested & placed
                                            [in the men’s jail]
in solitary confinement. 
           They tell me this is protective
                      custody. That they couldn’t afford
                                 the lawsuit if  I were killed. In this way,
                                            they tell me I am a woman 
                      only when I am no longer
                                                                                breathing.
 
•  
The origin of the word prison
is the Latin prehendere — to take. 
           It follows, then,
           that to take your life is to prison
           the body beneath dirt.
 
•  
[Historically,
           suicide is a criminal act].
 
•  
Balanced on a building’s edge, I imagine
some permutation of  this moment 
                                 where to fail at death
                                 would be a breach 
                                                                       of my probation.
 
•  
We both weep for the first time 
                                            upon release 
when we see the sky. 
                                            Pale blue 
sliced through 
                                            with a single helix 
of razor wire & bordered 
                                            in sterile white.


^^EOP^^

How to get close without going over.
How to feign lust for whatever’s on offer.
How the largest possible quantity
of anything is a lifetime. A lifetime
of oat bran. A lifetime of timing belts.
A lifetime of saying, sure, why not, i’m only on earth x number of years, and not knowing what
to make x. Sometimes I pick a number
I’ve already passed. I remember
the gambler’s credo — when you only
have fifty bucks left in this world,
you’d better get rid of it fast; the last
thing you want is money around,
reminding you every day of the money
you lost. The recommended
retirement plan is arabesque, then leap
and smash on the seawall. We made
a promise not to catch each other.


^^EOP^^

all the rain came down at once like a dropped bag
of aquarium pebbles. too much for the street to swallow:
all gravel & grit. i feel the saltwater rushing
in my mouth as i hit the shore — sand becoming rice.
the pot on the stove — put on the lid. we read the
back of the bag — bring the water to a boil — it
protests in the clouds. rainwater peeling open
car windows to fill the floor — make mobile your
lakes & the herons will come — don’t feed the birds rice.
my favorite summer storms are the ones
that come too fast. they remind me so much of myself:
gathering their gray hair in a bouquet to beat
against the highway. i think of the times the thunder
would toss geodes at the street until they cracked open,
about dad telling my brother & i to go upstairs
& shut the windows before the storm snuck inside.
the car prayed until it drove on water — ocean barreling
toward us like a great big whale: blueness open & mouth full
of salt. you ask if we should stir the rice & the water
hisses & spits. we often forget about the ghosts
who kneel in pots of water. there’s always a wooden spoon. i keep
mine in the glove box. taking it out, i park the car with
the four-ways on. other monsters slosh past.
we get out on the side of the road. kneeling i plunge
the spoon into the bank: chicken broth & rice.
rain warming our bodies until there’s no
mistaking us from the stove. i burn my feet getting
back into the car. our flesh turns chicken-white & tender.
somewhere in all of this i managed
to drive across the whole unknown ocean — the one
without a name that shows up only when it downpours.
makes tides that eat radar & sailors.
picks rice grains from her teeth.
the other side is not land, but soft rice steaming
& ready. our legs sink in. take a spoonful of me
before i drive home a second time. the sun emerging like
a quartered bell pepper. i’m thinking of
lying in a rain puddle with you & falling apart
into a palm full of cooked rice.


^^EOP^^

I live a small life, barely bigger than a speck,
barely more than a blip on the radar sweep
though it is not nothing, as the garter snake
climbs the rock rose shrub and the squirrel creeps
on bramble thorns. Not nothing to the crows
who heckle from the crowns of the last light’s trees
winterstripped of green, except for the boles
that ivy winds each hour round. See, the world is busy
and the world is quick, barely time for a spider
to suck the juice from a hawk moth’s head
so it can use the moth as a spindle that it wraps in fiber
while the moth constricts until it’s thin as a stick
you might think was nothing, a random bit
caught in a web coming loose from the window frame, in wind.
 


^^EOP^^




My only love sprung  from my only hate!
— Romeo and Juliet, Act I, Scene v



At forty, I studied the mirror. I poked my mouth to free a trapped grain
of hamburger, and a tooth broke off  between my fingers. I felt nothing.
The dentist said: The tooth is dead. The root is dead. The X-rays show signs
of trauma to the lower jaw. What happened here?

^^EOP^^




i.m. Denis Johnson, 1949–2017



the unified field 
It wasn’t that there was anything to say
that would stop him from feeling this way — the X
of himself splayed out in space 
where gravity was weakest. He and his father
and talkative mother
suffering tiny strokes that took away 
this syllable from this word, that syllable
from that, all this lay
in one pan of the balance scale 
while in the other there was nothing but dark matter
and the cosmic inconsequence
of his literal physical heart beating. 
And then the unified field, faced with its own emptiness,
bent down to his chest as if to listen. 
 
a toast to pavlov’s dogs  
Oh Leash held by a hand I can’t see, here
in the laboratory where nothing can change
and where yips and bites are fine-tuned to the pack’s mentality, 
am I one of his dogs, the three-legged one that knows nothing
of my lack except for how I bark, growl,
and whine to be let in? Am I the salivating triangle 
guided only by my nose that keeps me
on the move in my limping trot away from you, Leash, yanking
me back from all the filth I want to shove my nose in? 
Why won’t you let me go free? The sad gestures
of our growing intimacy is a reflex we
can’t escape or express: sometimes, emotion is just mange. 
So Leash, here’s a toast to my lab pals: August, Fast One,
Pretty Little Lady, Joy, Beauty, MiLord, Clown.  
 
the judgment after the last  
What would we like to see happen?
Would we like to drive nails into our hands?
Would the shame engulfing us like flame 
on a computer screen make us understand
that throwing a match into the Grand Canyon
while snapping a selfie, and never once thinking 
how far that match falls, is the original sin
that a donkey’s ears twitching
as we ride it to the bottom reveal as the truth 
about our consciences? How many nails
will we need? Go to the movies, do research,
be the Regulator forced to kill kill kill 
and that’s when we’ll find out just who we are
or if there’s anything like “who” anymore.  
 
mission  
It’s not simply that the palm trees are on fire
but that they waver up more fire than fire,
brighter and harsher and more intoxicating 
than the flames spreading ever thought of being — 
the thick black smoke turning noon to midnight
rears up in a wall that nobody can see 
over or around or through even as this nobody
comes crashing through the screen
right into my living room: poor nobody! In this loneliest of times, 
he tells me how much he loves me, how his lack
and mine feel somehow the same and that the flames
crawling over him have become his mission: 
burning, he erects a burning house of smoke
we can neither live in or abandon.  
 
sunday is never the last day of the week  
Using zip ties and Velcro to strap on a homemade bomb,
who is to blame, who should have told us
that on the far side of the screen in this Sunday calm 
our generation has had its time? In that corner
where we slept together so many nights, yes, in that corner where
the bed of the dead lovers has been put out with all the other 
Monday morning trash, there are always two doors
opening and closing as one of us goes out and the other comes in.
Why couldn’t we show our love for one another 
the way the void dissolves into the zero? Why did the animal
grafted to the human find such satisfaction in explosions? Darkness
to darkness, ashes to ashes, the animal to the human, 
why shouldn’t we take pleasure where and when we can — 
provided this is pleasure, provided that the body isn’t null.  
 
last rites  
Even if the suit they dress me in for my funeral
is dry-cleaned at Perfection Laundry, then washed
and washed in the blood of the lamb, the knees 
will still be muddy from kneeling down, the sleeves,
mismatched, will tell their own threadbare tale
about the breath of life breathed into tabletop dust. 
What would the naked man and woman and talking snake say
about the god who no longer remembers if they’re forgiven
or not? Listening as a kid to the old stories, 
there were never enough beanstalks and giants
and Jacks. Now, the pallbearers pick up my coffin,
they carry me out to the ruined cathedral where the saints’ 
wooden faces, frozen in their homely expressions of grace,
are shadowed by flocks of  blackbirds whirling past.  
 
coda: the hunger artist as a senior citizen  
Nowadays, in my cage
in old straw, where
my brother keeper 
forgets to come feed me anymore,
at last I’m fasting for its own sake,
not to break records I’ve broken 
a thousand times before.
Besides, nothing could be easier
than to starve forever 
if the food they keep on
giving you makes you sick.
This hunger is a moment’s 
vision that will persist
in a pillar of radiant house dust.


^^EOP^^

1  
Outside the room where you have lived a long time
Are other rooms, another building, just like yours. 
Each night a ship sails past, wider than the building, taller than the highest church.
And though the passengers would like to visit the city,
No one in the city ever boards the ship. Would you? 
Each night this spectacle is seen by you.
The street surveyed,
The air inhaled. 
Grapes from the west,
Cinnamon from the east —  
If I’ve employed too liberally the passive voice,
Remember it’s the thoughts,
The feelings that are of consequence here,
Not the one who feels them. 
 
2  
Shall we walk to the market?
You could walk there blind, like Gloucester, smelling your way. 
Shall we stop for coffee? Which café?
The one that’s commandeered by women, delicate cups?
Or the one where men preside, baristas in tuxedos, the coffee rich enough for rainy days? 
A window, the desk, a lamp, and a chair — 
You’ve liked the room, you like to rearrange it for winter,
Put things back for spring. 
But you’ve been young for a long time,
An embarrassingly long time.
Look what you wrote!
Remember how much, despite
Your ridiculous behavior, you’ve been loved. 
 
3  
The city never changes, it’s never the same.
Sometimes the inhabitants restore a building, patch it up,
But in a generation they’re dissatisfied, they try again,
Expose the old parts so you see them
Plainly, ruined or not. 
Who schooled you?
What made you scared of change? 
Vividly you remember a child’s body; likewise you remember a man’s.
You woke up one morning,
There you were, a stinking adult. 
What happened between? What will it be like,
You’ve seen the images, to watch your body spoiling
From the inside out, your lungs, your arms,
The muscles in your face —  
Look out the window,
Choose a single brick.
Once, a long time ago, the city was old. 
 
4  
Clouds desire the sky, the sky the sun. The wave
Desires the land on which it trembles,
Repeating the same question, day after day —  Am I allowed to ask for what I want? 
And every day the land responds, Of course you’re allowed. You’re allowed to be angry, to rail,
You’re allowed to curse the God who put you here. 
I’ve buried many people, old people, young people.
I’ve buried children while their parents wept beside the grave. 
But I’ve also seen miracles.
Remember when they told you
You might die? You didn’t, you’re alive.
And every month since then, each minute, every second is a miracle. 
What happens next you cannot know.
Is it better or worse to live longer?
Really the words better and worse do not obtain.

^^EOP^^




After Nadia Reid



This spirit she came upon me as I slept — in such a way
my life or yours could come to be so thoroughly owned — 
she was reckless — I knew she would make me run away
with her — I said spirit, slow down — but the spirit wanted
to ride — but I am so afraid, I said — I have all this tenderness
to impart — but the tenderness is not mine to give away — 
but all your tenderness is your own tenderness, said the spirit — 
it is not, I said — why then did you give it all away? — I did
not give it away — then it is yours to give away — the spirit
riddled like this — if in her arms I read a story — if out of her
arms I had the choice to write one but I chose not — chose not
because I did not know where I was going — because my path
broke down & I had this choice — stay or split — if I knew that
were I to split one part of me would become a ghost — if I did
not know yet which part — if the voice calling me out asked me
to describe the splitting & I did — if I said it was like smoke
spiraling outwards — it was like smoke lifting off me taking on
form & leaving me — if  it was like a delicate girl I never met
but dreamed of — if it was like the flags of my youth fluttering,
far out at sea — like breathing out a breath you will never take
back in — but you know you can never take any breath back in — 
if I saw her outside of myself & mourned her like I have mourned
no other loss — if I knew it was both a miracle & the most terrible
tragedy — to open up — release a flame — watch the flame go — 
have you seen it? A flame that can ride water — she was my
daughter & if I could I would send her to you, if I sent her to you
would you take her? Listen, I ran this out of me because I knew
it would burn me down — my trainers press the ground & lift up
again — I saw myself on my back in high grass in high summer
with everything coming to me — how this ghost left me & printed
a new person all over me — I could peel her off or live like this — 
I cried — one or both will destroy me! — the spirit called it fate but
I knew it was just drama — I will never know why a good person must die — 
fate does not exist I said, but every door I opened showed yes yes yes — I shut each one & locked it — checked the locks
three times — went back & checked them again — shook them to be
sure — drew hearts round the keyholes so the spirit would know
I loved her — it wasn’t — it was never — that I didn’t love her — 


^^EOP^^

Two men share
one tooth. From 
one tooth the men
predict the world. 
Thank you! or
we would not exist. 
Two men and one
tooth is not a problem. 
One man is wide
and one man is sober. 
Sometimes the men are
the same. Little tooth 
is the light of the
orchard. From 
it all things are
made up. Once 
the two men lost
the tooth and every 
one disappeared.
No one was angry 
because no one was
there. The men 
found the tooth
when the tooth 
started laughing.
The men said what 
is that noise and
the world came 
back on. They told
the tooth that’s not 
funny but it was
very funny. One 
man swallowed
the tooth and put 
on all the sad
knowledge. 
He wanted to
punish the tooth 
but the tooth
punished him. It 
lasted three hours
and then he threw 
up. The two men
live in a cave with 
bay windows. To
be in love is so 
solemn think the
two men once 
a year. The tooth
never thinks any 
thing. It is the
tooth of a goat.


^^EOP^^

Not long after you had told me, gently,
that you still grieved for your last love,
though that had ended almost a year before,
and that you could have no intimate relationship
with me, maybe not with anyone for a time,
I stopped my fork in the air with whatever hung
on the end of it that I was eating.
My throat wouldn't swallow.
I felt weak and sick, as if it were myself
that I devoured, piece by piece, as you talked away
the hopes that I had put in your lovely face.
It was the old story coming true for me once more,
though you were hardly mine. . . .
When we finished I walked you back to your car;
I don't remember having much to say.
Why would I? Buildings drifted by,
and cars, and faces. Then we arrived at the place
where, afterwards, I would never see you again,
at a parking lot near Times Square.
There I marked the sidewalk with X's
visible only to me: "At this place
I was lost again," they'd say to me
when I walked there in the future.
"Dig here and find what's left of me,
or what I left behind, where X marks the spot."
I felt like the death's-head and crossed bones
that surmount the treasure chest.
I only felt a little like gold coins and jewels.
I have signed the City with these sphinxes
—in parks, in streets, in bedrooms,
in my own apartments. And there we stood,
you and I, hemmed in by the stitches of X's
that could not hold you to me. But X's
mean kisses, I realized, as well as
what is lost: all the kisses I couldn't give you
chalked like symbols on the sidewalk.
After all, you yourself had been marked
by loss, even in your laughter that afternoon
at the show I had taken you to. Bright-eyed
and smiling in the seat beside me, you
stole my glances with your dark, dark eyes
and your long hair. I thought that I had not been
this happy in a long time with a woman
and was ready to become even more happy,
ready to do anything that you wanted
in order to please you, to see that smile come up,
not knowing what you were soon to say to me
as we dined. And when you spoke,
I felt life fall away from me. Again I felt
that I would never be happy. I felt the words
that I had wanted to say to you leaving me, rushing
out of my chest like dead air, until I had no more words
to say. I seemed to cut and swallow my food
as if it were me myself that stuck in pieces
on the end of the fork I had raised to my mouth.
Had I been chewing on my own flesh?
Self-Pity the Devourer took me by the hand
that held the fork, and once again I feasted
on all that was dark and hopeless in myself,
in lieu of all that was beautiful, desirable,
and unattainable in you. And then
I stood beside you in the lot where you
had parked your car, with the X's buzzing
in the air, sticking themselves to you
and me and the blacktop and the cars.
When you reached out to embrace me, I
moved to embrace you in return—and then came
the part that I don't want to remember,
the part I hate: I caught a glimpse of your
face as we put our arms around each other,
and your face said everything to me about
how you had wasted the afternoon, how eager
you were to speed away in your car, a mixture
of disgust and relief that the thing would soon
be over, that I would be crossed out forever
from your life—and everything that I hated
about myself, my stupid chin, my ugly nose,
my hopeless balded head, my stuck-out ears,
my wreck of a heart, crashed over me,
spinning me into the vortex of a palpable self-hate
that I have only ever let myself feel
a little bit at a time, though it is always there


^^EOP^^

The hastily assembled angel flies 
With patchwork wings red patches and white patches 
And yellow patches blood and emptiness 
And sun and usually      an angel’s wings would 
Be made of  only one of  these      but his 
Were made at the last minute and were almost 
Not made at all and wouldn’t have been made 
Had Azrael not seen      in the hastily 
Assembled angel’s eyes as Azrael 
Placed his white palm on the hastily assembled 
Angel’s chest fear      as Azrael placed his palm there 
To shove him from the cloud      and saw he had 
No wings      and paused and thought      then pulled him back 
And so the angels stitched together what was 
Near      blood      emptiness      sun      as what was near 
Was Heaven      and what else would Heaven be


^^EOP^^




For Rebecca Feldman and Brian Roessler



That's what the first line says
of the song I've been playing all summer
at the keyboard—trying to get my hands
around its dark, melancholy chords,
its story line of a melody that twists
up like snakes from melodic minor scales
that I've also been trying to learn, though
I'm no great shakes as a practicer of scales. 
Come to think of it, neither am I much
when it comes to love—no great shakes, I mean.
Not that I haven't had my chances.
Twenty years married, I made a lousy husband,
half asleep, selfish, more like a big baby
than a grown man, the poet laureate
of the self-induced coma when it came to
doing anything for anybody but me.
"Now and then he took his thumb
out of his mouth to write an ode to
or a haiku about the thumb he sucked all day." 
That's what I imagined my ex-wife said
to our therapist near the end. She did say:
"It's all about Bill." She was right.
And suddenly it frightens me, remembering
how, at our wedding, our poet friends
read poems of (mostly) utter depression
to salute us. I wondered if their griefs in love
had double-crossed our union, if strange
snakes in the grass of our blissful Eden
had hissed at us, and now I worry,
on your wedding day, if I'm not
doing the same damned thing . . . . 
I haven't come to spring up and put my curse
on your bliss. Here's what I want to say:
You're young. You don’t know what love is.
And as the next line of the song goes, you won't
—"Until you know the meaning of the blues."
Darlings, the blues will come (though not
often, I hope) to raise their fiery swords
against your paradise. A little of that
you unwittingly got today, when it rained
and you couldn't be married outside under
the beautiful tree in Nan and Alan's yard.
But paradise doesn't have to be structured
so that we can never reenter it. After
you've kicked each other out of it
once or twice (I'm speaking metaphorically,
of course), teach yourself how to say
a few kind words to each other.
Don't stand there angry, stony.
Each of you let the other know
what you are feeling and thinking 
and then it may be possible
to return to each other smiling,
hand in hand. For arm in arm,
you are your best Eden. Remember
the advice the old poet sang to you
on the afternoon of August 4, 2001,
the day you got married.
May you enjoy a good laugh
thinking of him and his silver thumb
now that you've turned the key
into your new life in the beautiful
Massachusetts rain and—hey, now—sun!


^^EOP^^

Years do odd things to identity.
What does it mean to say
I am that child in the photograph
at Kishamish in 1935?
Might as well say I am the shadow
of a leaf of the acacia tree
felled seventy years ago
moving on the page the child reads.
Might as well say I am the words she read
or the words I wrote in other years,
flicker of shade and sunlight
as the wind moves through the leaves.
 


^^EOP^^

Mother rain, manifold, measureless,
falling on fallow, on field and forest,
on house-roof, low hovel, high tower,
downwelling waters all-washing, wider
than cities, softer than sisterhood, vaster
than countrysides, calming, recalling:
return to us, teaching our troubled
souls in your ceaseless descent
to fall, to be fellow, to feel to the root,
to sink in, to heal, to sweeten the sea.
 


^^EOP^^


 
 
I didn’t want one child. I wanted a thousand. Because though you may try, you can’t kill all of them. My body couldn’t birth a thousand, so I didn’t even bring one here. I let you have them. One by one, and
 
 

 
 
I had my first surgery when I was eighteen. No, seven. No. I had my first surgery when I was thirty-five. No, when I was forty-seven. I almost had my first surgery today. The doctor drew an all-seeing eye around my wound to diagram the length and width of the scar with a purple magic marker. To be honest, I had my first surgery when they pulled me deadfirst headfirst from between my mother’s thighs. But I don’t remember that one; the separation of my flesh from the source of all I’d known. Muddy vessel, crumbling temple.
This carved body, overgrown garden, nest of the narcotic.
 
 

 
 
My first ten years were mostly marked by my relentless pursuit to not look pregnant when I went out in public. One of my goals each day was to not have someone ask me in public — hopeful look in their gesturing gaze, so excited by the prospect of a coming Christmas
miracle,
“Are you    ...?”
and to have to shatter their hopes of Dream Baby, and simultaneously begin the Emotional Labor of soothing their embarrassment after hearing, “No.” Because a woman with a swollen or distended abdomen can only mean one thing. And that thing is always joyous and awaited with excited anticipation. A woman with a distended abdomen couldn’t possibly be dealing on the daily with something gone terribly awry. Couldn’t possibly be engaged in an ongoing war for her body, a custody battle for her own self. A woman’s swollen belly is everybody’s Good News, everybody’s Business.
So that’s how I spent five years in my thirties: running around evading expectations my deceptive uterus induced in family, friends, and rank fucking strangers.
 
 

 
 
What they took from me:
What they scooped out of me:
What they carved from out of me:
What they excavated from me:
What they dug out of me:
What they released from me:
What they harvested from me:
What they pulled from me:
What they birthed from me:
 
          — a colony of tumors
          — an archive of NOs
          — a battalion of rogue dreams
          — an inheritance of heartbreaks
          — a lockbox of my foremothers’ molestations
          — a cedar chest of secrets
          — four generations of the miscarried and stillborn
          — a library of zeros
          — a ledger of names written in decimal points
          — my grandfather’s shriveled aspirations
          — a moldy cellar of witnessed whippings
          — a  jewelry box of swollen tongues
          — a Bible of abducted children
 
 

 
 
Everyone is invested in policing the Black body. Yes, even you. And there’s a particularly virulent investment in the surveillance and policing of the Black Woman (née “Female”) Body. In fact there are multiple systems, most of them economic, that hinge upon controlling, corralling, and commodifying the female body in general. Why do you suppose, in the Year of Our Lord Two Thousand and Seventeen, the ocean vomited up twenty-six dead Nigerian girls on the gorgeous Mediterranean coast?
 
Pussy and Blackness are two of the first moneymakers ever recorded. And if you got both, well then, you know what time it is, right?
 
 
 
[Bend over so I can swipe this credit card down your ass.]
 
 

 
 
What information is passed through a genetic line? What memories are housed in our cells? Are our memories the memories of some memories of some long-dead, unknown Ancestors along the line? What traumas do we carry that we picked up along the way, that were never ours to begin with?


^^EOP^^

Behind the house in a field
there's a metal box I buried
full of childhood treasure, a map
of my secret place, a few lead pennies
from 1943.
The rest I've forgotten,
forgotten even the exact spot
I covered with moss and loam.
 
Now I'm back and twenty years
have made so little difference
I suspect they never happened,
this face in the mirror
aged with pencil and putty.
I suspect even
the box has moved as a mole would move
to a new place long ago.


^^EOP^^

Even when they danced, Dad couldn't keep her
in his arms. She'd spin off, leave him to fade
 
back into the circle of others, clapping, hooting.
Days when the pond would freeze, mothers took
 
their children's hands and worried them around
in slow circles. Mom raced in uncharitable loops
 
past me and my brother like we weren't hers.
Same way she didn't see my report card Fs as Fs.
 
She'd take the matching color pen and glide
the ballpoint so it looked like the B was always there.
 
You could ask how she convinced the butcher
his scale was wrong, how she'd roll her cart away
 
with three-eighths of a pound of corned beef, paying
for only a quarter – fat trimmed, the way dad liked,
 
but she'd skim that question like she did all surfaces,
even air. Now she's given her own memory the slip.
 
Doctors say there's no reaching her.
 


^^EOP^^

I'm talking with Mike over coffee.
His wife recently left him. He's lonely.
We're both carpenters, a couple of old guys in baseball caps
plying the trade.
We can frame a wall and hang a door, we can
read a set of blueprints.
But when it comes to women . . .
 
I'm thinking about my mother, who is 91
and very frail. I'm thinking
about my wife, my daughters, my granddaughter,
my sister, old girlfriends, my ex-wife,
and the girl from Panama
in the reading room of the New Orleans public library
forty-five years ago
who slipped a note to me across the table, asking:
"Are you a philosophy?"
 
Rain splatters against the storefront
of the coffee shop. Mike and I are silent
for a long time
before going back to work.
 


^^EOP^^

I have scrawled audible lifelines along the edges
of the lint trap, dropping the ball of towel fuzz
in the blue bin lined with a thirteen-gallon bag.
My sons' wardrobes lounge on their bedroom floors,
then sidle down to the basement, where I look
forward to the warmth of their waistbands
when I pluck them from the dryer.
Sometimes I wonder why my husband
worries about debt and I wish he wouldn't.
Sometimes I wonder how high the alfalfa
will grow. Sometimes I wonder if the dog
will throw up in the night. Like my mother,
I'm learning not to tamper with anger.
It appears as reliably as the washing machine
thumps and threatens to lurch across the floor
away from the electrical outlet. Nothing's worth
getting worked up about, except for death.
And when I think of the people I have lost,
I wish them back into their button-down shirts,
their raspberry tights.


^^EOP^^

for Cora
 
Though she lives in a world of Velcro, snaps
and zippers, I'm showing my granddaughter how
to sew on a button. She's nine, same age I was
watching my mother pick my favorite one, shaped
like a flower a child might draw, color of sunshine.
Her homemaker hands held everything together,
needle and red thread lickety-splitting up, over,
down, up again attaching the blossom to grass-
green cloth: Colors no bee could pass by. Now, before
the last tug of thread through the button
my granddaughter brought me, I point out the pinch
of space—width of a scissor-blade—between it
and the fabric, a shaft of stitches with a half-dozen
twists of thread around it before tying off. Shank,
I tell her, same as Mother named it. It strengthens
the bond between button and garment, less
friction than ready-mades, fasteners that loosen
too soon. Like love, my mother said. Close, but not too close. A snip of thread and my granddaughter's ready
to go, fluorescent-pink button back on the nose
of her dog-faced school bag, the shank fixing us
together in this world my mother could trust
only so long as everything was done right, only
when she didn't forget to check I was buttoned up proper, buttoned up tight.


^^EOP^^

East will take me back. I drive
west. I wend between snowbanks,
until the road delivers me
to a sleeping boat launch.
 
They stand on the frozen ramp;
watch me with coats that are
better than mine. Ice houses
and snowmobiles edge the distance.
  I have to turn around, I say
to them, I went the wrong way. They stamp and chuff. No, they tell me, this is the way.


^^EOP^^

Bibiana: At night I dreamt that I belonged to a basement-flock of girls just as  terrified and feverish as me. We could communicate with each other by knocking on the walls. 
 


^^EOP^^

                    
                    
                    Will haul this gelatinous body, will lash forward this non-form, will push this organism of gas through the gray regions.
 
A sour wind tears through the thin white hair. A wind of vinegar and henbane tears in the rustling, discarded bird-shells that were abandoned empty and fragile when the throbbing bird-boils moved on toward so-called life. Now I see the cunning needle-trees sling these clumps of heavy pouch-flesh back and forth between them: small feather-birds “fly” above my heads.
 
I haul myself, I haul myself, I haul my dragging structure along the river furrow’s muddy, sloppily overlapping slopes. I am so bitter, so wet, so the mouth smears the inside with the sweetness of the chewed-up blood-chisel. Out of this blood I am going to suck my nourishment for some time.
 
I haul, I urge my dissolved substance, slowly forward across the metal of calm stones, the hovering thread-glue’s suction toward a point in the distant middle of the perspective. Where the river’s banks will meet and like the thinnest needle of silver of liquid will drill its dark tunnel-water straight into the heart of the dying image, this moistly broken-up surface of paper to which we cling.
 
I haul I haul I touch myself, touch the skin-rind with chafed-up viscous fingers. Little mermaid from ocean foam molded–I haul my long veils, layers of elastic cartilage, of slippery, shimmering membranes, chlorophyll. The gills shudder and glow deep down in this chasm of tissue–constantly rustling, squeaking, gasping for air. This whirling, howling, desperate lack of oxygen; the scream–if it had had enough oxygen to scream and a mouth with which to scream–the scream to swallow the entire lung full of clear wind.
 
Lizards play, glitter green, blue, and red between the skin membranes of the body dress. Where does this mass end? I search inward through strata to find the core of my plasma wet from juices, to find the core of body-flesh despite the outer, surrounding flesh, the naked body’s stable surface, a kind of human here inside the bluing, plant-becoming. Something to hold on to behind the spread of the sickness of mud, fermentation. But there is nothing to grasp beneath this mantle of slippery webbed skin, burst through by a pounding net of veins.
 
I now lick my tongue against the outer claws of the fingers to tear life into the ions, to make sores bitter in the tongue’s blue ventricles. A kind of pain therefore radiates against the inner glands, a faint spasm of cheers before this, the nervous system’s last chance to communicate with the dying I. The mists smart, shimmer, the lumps of blue cobalt from the mustard gas corrode through the otherwise red shroud-clouds that drag their bellies against the river’s surface. In one of the skin-folds between the pockets of the genital dress, lizards gather in heaps of glimmering scales.
 
But time runs on time and starvation and the weakness carries me in across the gray regions. And the soul’s dark night will slowly be lowered through me. That is why I now slowly fold myself like a muscle against the wet clay to press the flesh against the sleep-gland’s mouths. I will sleep now in my bird body in the down, and a bitter star will radiate eternally above the glowing face’s watercourse.
                

^^EOP^^

     AUTUMN 
gold of amber
red of ember
brown of umber
all September
       MCCOY CREEK
 
Over the bright shallows
now no flights of swallows.
Leaves of the sheltering willow
dangle thin and yellow.
 
     OCTOBER
 
At four in the morning the west wind
moved in the leaves of the beech tree
with a long rush and patter of water,
first wave of the dark tide coming in.
 
     SOLSTICE
 
On the longest night of all the year
in the forests up the hill,
the little owl spoke soft and clear
to bid the night be longer still.
 
     THE WINDS OF MAY
 
are soft and restless
in their leafy garments
that rustle and sway
making every moment movement.
 
     HAIL
 
The dogwood cowered under the thunder
and the lilacs burned like light itself
against the storm-black sky until the hail
whitened the grass with petals.
 
 


^^EOP^^

Bibiana: Wanting to get close to one’s abuser is no sickness. Wanting to create
a cocoon of normalcy when one is subjected to a crime is no syndrome.

^^EOP^^

at night you stumble, dreaming
cross-eyed of a chase scene
three yellow wasps on your chest
the city you turned around in
a chase that quickly lands into a fight
 
the nagging anxiety of a stain somewhere
a tickle at the back of the throat
a song’s bridge playing over and over in the head
maybe the stain is at the bottom of your lung
maybe this white crusting along the edge of the bed
 
I lay an icepack on your head
one of the old ones that look like a lazy waterdrop
unable to pop, I’m waiting for a more complete
courage, a peeled orange, a halogen lamp
 
believe it or not, we’re recreating someone
from the 19th century’s sin, by proceeding
mounted on the edge of our bed like
a permanent display, matching burdens
to caramels
 
the thin plant over the dresser is belonging here
you picture yourself with pedals removed
and ask why you were not born gracious
I do a different dance in the same mirror
 
in the ultra-rendering of these buildings
I could snap my fingers
and every window would close
an accordion we accompany
 


^^EOP^^

It will be windy for a while until it isn’t. The waves will shoal. A red-legged
cormorant will trace her double along glassy water, forgetting they are hungry.
The sea will play this motif over and over, but there will be no preparing for it
otherwise. Water will quiver in driftwood. Sound preceding absence,
a white dog trailing a smaller one: ghost and noon shadow, two motes
disappearing into surf. And when the low tide comes lapping and clear, the curled
fronds of seaweed will furl and splay, their algal sisters brushing strands
against sands where littleneck clams feed underwater. Light rain will fall
and one cannot help but lean into the uncertainty of the sea. Bow: a knot
of two loops, two loose ends, our bodies on either side of this shore where we
will dip our hands to feel what can’t be seen. Horseshoe crabs whose blue
blood rich in copper will reach for cover, hinged between clouds and
sea. It will never be enough, the bull kelp like a whip coiling in tender hands,
hands who know to take or be taken, but take nothing with them: I will marry you.
I will marry you. So we can owe what we own to every beautiful thing.
 


^^EOP^^

My economy is circular: I earn money from an institution that owns most of
the businesses where I tend to spend most of my money.
 
My economy is quasi-medieval, trade-centered, and guild-like.
 
My economy is not canonical.
 
My economy is a misfortune that recently befell me.
 
My economy admits foundational narratives.
 
My economy is language.
 
My economy is the executioner’s reversal of fortune.
 
My economy has no essential features.
 
My economy admits parallax critiques of ideology.
 
My economy owes something to over 4,136 dead soldiers.
 
My economy does not intimate and would rather not split hairs about what
belongs to whom.
 
My economy can’t stay out of things, but can’t make it into the thick of
things either.
 
My economy has questionable purchasing power.
 
My economy has no surrogate.
 
My economy has no interpretative skills but is rife with interpretative communi-
ties.
 
My economy is of trees chopped down in Brooklyn, and the gradual encir-
cling of brick.
 
My economy is the new red.
 
My economy thrives on shades of gray.
 
My economy is an unremarkable tuna sandwich that is missing the slices of
tomato that I had asked for.
 
My economy is a liter bottle of Poland Spring water coming not from
Poland but from Maine and bought at a university cafeteria in Uptown
Manhattan where there are quite a number of water foundations that deliver
water with a funky metallic aftertaste.
 
My economy is a poem called “First Purchase of the Month” consisting of
two stanzas with six eight-word lines each within a larger poem that could
be endless but won’t be:
 
                                 Could’ve been an outfit for the Whitney Biennial
                                  
                                 Couldn’t afford one, nor did I need it.
 
                                 Who cares how you look at the zoo;
 
                                 it’s about the animals, stupid. Which reminds me,
 
                                 could’ve been the trail mix I snacked on
 
                                 & which I managed not to purchase myself.
  
 
                                 It was tuna on whole wheat, lettuce, jalapeños;
 
                                 a one liter bottle of water (Poland Spring.)
 
                                 Asked for tomato too, which the lady forgot.
 
                                 You Puerto Rican, she asked? Don’t think so,
 
                                 said another one in Spanish. Let me answer.
 
                                 No, what made you think so? The peppers?
 
 
My economy needs contractions and abbreviations.
 
My economy is not fixed.
 
My economy is broken, mispronounced.
 
My economy has cold feet, even if there are plenty of socks at home.
 
My economy would like to be wholesome and sound.
 
My economy is a gift certificate that is not enough for what I’d like to have,
so I end up spending money at a store that I dislike in the first place and
will never visit again.
 
My economy is a business lunch where I end up paying the bill instead of
the person who’d like me to work with her.
 
My economy consists of performing tasks for which I receive no quantifi-
able pay.
 
My economy grows when it’s enough to buy someone else a drink, or a
meal.
 
My economy does not allow me to say no.
 
My economy pretends to be booming, but instead, is shaky and imploding.
 
It doesn’t matter, because my economy is predicated on virtue, and it posits
that it’s purer than yours.
 
My economy has no exchange value.
 
I’d like to think of my economy as one of resistance and tactical difference.
 
My economy is not a disposable good.
 
There are no surpluses in my economy.
 
I already owe what I just wrote.
 
My economy is derivative, parasitical, and residual.
 
My economy is a hand-me-down.
 
My economy is not environmentally friendly, although it’s not ravaging
non-renewable resources either.
 
My economy doesn’t force me to put my money where my mouth is. Were I
to pay for what I say, it would be a different story.
 
Thirteen cents a word is not fair trade.
 
My economy mistakes what it means to trade in futures.
 
In theory my economy is not the result of deliberate choice, it is makeshift
and a tag-along.
 
My economy has double standards.
 
My economy has attention deficit disorder.
 
My economy is the symptom of an incurable disease.
 
My economy is not even mine.
 
 
Word count: 682
 


^^EOP^^

Strange to remember a visit, really not so
Long ago, which now seems, finally, past.   Always, it’s a
Kind of obvious thing I guess, amazed by that
Cycle: that first you anticipate a thing & it seems
Far off, the distance has a weight you can feel
Hanging on you, & then it’s there – that
Point – whatever – which, now, while
It’s happening seems to be constantly slipping away,
“Like the sand through your fingers in an old movie,” until
You can only look back on it, & yet you’re still there, staring
At your thoughts in the window of the fire you find yourself before.
We’ve gone over this a thousand times: & here again, combing that
Same section of beach or inseam for that – I’m no
Longer sure when or exactly where – “& yet” the peering,
Unrewarding as it is, in terms of tangible results,
Seems so necessary.
 
Hope, which is, after all, no more than a splint of thought
Projected outwards, “looking to catch” somewhere –
What can I say here? – that the ease or
Difficulty of such memories doesn’t preclude
“That harsher necessity” of going on always in
A new place, under different circumstances:
& yet we don’t seem to have changed, it’s
As if these years that have gone by are
All a matter of record, “but if the real
Facts were known” we were still reeling from
What seems to have just happened, but which,
“By the accountant’s keeping” occurred years.
Ago.   Years ago.   It hardly seems possible,
So little, really, has happened.
 
We shore ourselves hour by hour
In anticipation that soon there will be
Nothing to do.   “Pack a sandwich
& let’s eat later.”   And of course,
The anticipation is quite appropriate, accounting,
For the most part, for whatever activity
We do manage.    Eternally buzzing over the time,
Unable to live in it…
 
“Maybe if we go upaways we can get a better
View.”   But, of course, in that sense, views don’t
Improve.   “In the present moment” (if we could only see
It, which is to say, to begin with, stop looking with
Such anticipation) what is enfolding before us puts to
Rest any necessity for “progression”.
 
So, more of these tracings, as if by some magic
Of the phonetic properties of these squiggles…   Or
Does that only mystify the “power” of “presence" which
Is, as well, a sort of postponement. 
 


^^EOP^^

No unclaimed, cremated mothers this year
 
Nor collateral white skin
 
No mothers folding clothes to a corporate park preamble
No sons singing under the bright lights of a lumber yard
 
Quantum reaganomics and the tap steps of turning on a friend
 
New York trophy parts among
            the limbs of decent people
 
                       Being an enraged artist is like
                       entering a room and not knowing what to get high off of
 
                                                      My formative symbols/My upbringing flying to an agent’s ears
                                                                                                          I might as well be an activist
 
                                                                                                 Called my girlfriend and described
                                                                All the bottles segregationists had thrown at me that day
 
                                                                   Described recent blues sites and soothing prosecutions
                                                                                                                     I feared for my poetry
 
You have to make art every once in a while
            While in the company of sell-outs
            Accountant books in deified bulk
            Or while waiting for a girl under a modern chandelier
                                               
                                                           Or in your last lobby as a wanderer
 
                                                                                                  The prison foot-races the museum
 
                                                                                                                        My instrument ends
 
                        I mean, what is a calendar to the slave?
                                               Also, what is a crystal prism?
 
                                                                                                                    “He bought this bullet,                                                                                                                                                              bought its flight,                                                                                                                                                        then bought two more”
 
 


^^EOP^^

Let the blood if your belly must have it, but let it
not be of me and mine. Let my momma sleep.
Let her pray. Let them eat. Let the reverend’s
devil pass over me. Let the odds at least
acknowledge us. Let the breasts be intact,
the insulin faithfully not far, and let the deep
red pinpoint puddle its urgency on a pricked
fingertip. Let the nurse find the vein the first time.
 
Let the kerosene flow and let my grandma praise
her bedside lord for letting her miss another winter.
Let me be just a little bit bitter so I remember:
Your columns and borders aint but the fractured,
the broke clean, the brownest gouges in the blades
of our great-great-great-shoulders. Let me leave
and come back when my chest opens for you wider
than your ditches did to engorge my placeless body.
 
The mosquito-thick breath in your throat coats my skin
and it almost feels as if you love me. Let the AC
drown out the TV. Let the lotion bottle keep a secret
corner til Friday. Let Ike, Wan, D-Block, all my brother’s
brothers ride through the weekend. Let the cop car
swerve its nose into night and not see none of them.
Let us smell rain. Let the breeze through an oak hymn
the promise that keeps us waking. Let the cicada
unwind while hushpuppy steam slips out the knot
of a tourist’s hand, and let him hear in it legends
of how hot grease kept the hounds and the lash at bay.
 


^^EOP^^

The first step is to stop just beyond the weight of organs.
The sense of gravity sitting in tissue is like the space between
carcass and curb, before the reek worms into rock pores:
a sleeplessness there, that continual niche-trash. You too
 
once knew what it was to feel impressive. As the bed dissolves
into the walls, the walls disrobe themselves of their edges
and your resolve is now acute in the locking jaw of darkness.
Beg to be let. You, like bravery, leave behind the breath-inflated
 
lump, its depths, and its refusal to lace the cells of scars over even
the metaphorical guttings. To manage the act exceeds the box-
and-whisker of lately’s along-going. You’ve grown so accustomed
to mereness that what you call a life no longer houses the sublime.
 
It seems easy to leave. It seems this easy to leave. After
a second you’ll want to consider the centimeters of resistance
stitching air between here and all of elsewhere. But, still,
inhabit the bodiless second. To possess it is a bearable joy.


^^EOP^^




after Tafisha Edwards



                    
                    To disappear Black girls at a low volume of sustained public panic is to insinuate the inconstancy of Black girls. The disposability of Black girls who are prone to disappearance. A body bag somewhere waits with little hoopla about its lot. Absence becomes the lot of Black girls.
 
_________ will eventually accept as fact that absence becomes a lot of Black girls. In what becomes the normal day-to-day, Black girls are harder to find, _________ would think first, not that there are few attempts to find them. The question isn’t whether Black girls often go missing. If no one else, Black girls miss each other.
 
_________  would be remiss to not recognize how everything is made less in the absence of Black girls, if _________ could miss what _________ have never been required to recognize, such as:
 
Unlike missing Black girls, taking Black girls is a Western custom. It seems likely that such a statement will soon appear inaccurate: the white space in new textbook editions will have nothing to say about it, if the white spaces behind those textbooks have anything to say about it. That Black girls are quintessential American palimpsests is not a question but an anxiety. _________ would rather forget that Black girls were made receptacles for what the authors of Liberty and Independence would not speak. That Liberty and Independence were imaginable only in the absent-presence of taken Black girls, enslaved Black girls, Black girls on whom a foundational economic system so depended that white men would kill each other and take taken Black girls.
 
The constancy of Black girls is someone’s anxiety. The soil is thick with hidden Black girls, the myth that only quiet Black girls are worthwhile Black girls. The soil turns as _________  turn away from loud Black girls and their cacophonic insistence on Black girls.
 
_________ have not insisted enough upon the fact of Black girls, are often loudly shocked to find Black girls disappeared. Loud, unsustainable shock has a way of disappearing Black girls. Outrage, too, has a way of being disappeared.
                

^^EOP^^

Tagus, farewell, that westward, with thy streams,
Turns up the grains of gold already tried,
With spur and sail for I go seek the Thames,
Gainward the sun that show'th her wealthy pride,
And to the town which Brutus sought by dreams,
Like bended moon doth lend her lusty side.
My King, my Country, alone for whom I live,
Of mighty love the wings for this me give.


^^EOP^^

I am forced to sleepwalk much of the time.
We hold on to these old ways, are troubled
sometimes and then the geyser goes away,
time gutted. In and of itself there is
no great roar, force pitted against force that
makes up in time what it loses in speed.
The waterfalls, the canyon, a royal I-told-you-so
comes back to greet us at the beginning.
How was your trip? Oh I didn’t last
you see, folded over like the margin
of a dream of the thing-in-itself. Well, and
what have we come to? A paper-thin past,
just so, and ‘tis pity. We regurgitate
old anthems and what has come to pass, and why
dwell on these. Why make things more difficult
than they already are? Because if it’s boring
in a different way, that’ll be interesting too.
That’s what I say.
 
That rascal, he jumped over the fence.
I’m wiping my pince-nez now. Did you ever hear from
the one who said he’d be back once it was over,
who eluded me even in my sleep? That was a particularly
promising time, we thought. Now the sun’s out
and it’s raining again. Just like a day from
the compendium. I’ll vouch for you,
and we can go on scrolling as though nothing had risen,
the horizon forest looks back at us. The preacher
shook his head, the evangelist balanced two spools
at the end of his little makeshift rope. We’d gone too far.
We’d have to come back in a day or so.


^^EOP^^

    “A skeleton’s mouth makes few concessions to prettiness.”
                                                                             —Jacques Joubert  
Because your mouth is violet and you cannot speak 
Because maybe I like Thursdays the way I used to hate baths, and  
baths are boundaries whose sharpness will be blurred with more information 
Because movement itself is a form of currency  
Frozen in articulations 
Because don’t indulge yourself in the idea of restraint  
The blackened patches could have been pubic hair on dead bodies, or simply
the wildness of neglect 
without horizons or spaces  
Because it’s a comfort to know waste is the fuel of contradictions 
a knife rusted before its first use  
Because in the barest of rooms, nothing is comprehensible 
Neither fanatic nor mystic  
Because the first weeks of September came and went and the weather held  
Not woven by innocent hands 
Because this stasis is preparation  
Because you’re deceased, maimed or in Philadelphia 
 


^^EOP^^




For Judy Williams Fraser 



1963-69 I lived on
the corner of Yew & York
on the 2nd floor
above  a corner store
with my sister Leni  & boyfriend soon to be husband Neap  Hoover
her friend Jo-Ann Huffman & her boyfriend Mike Sawyer
then  Elsa Young  (just left Robert who was with Maxine)
who met her lover Jack Wise next door
then my sister Mary
and my boyfriend  soon to be (later to unbe) husband Cliff Andstein
below us
bill bissett & martina & oolya  then painter-jogger  Gordon Payne
& Merrilyn  (who becomes my friend later)  then bill again then Gordon again
next to us
Bing Thom, Jay Bancroft & often Marian Penner, Rick Clarke
across the landing
John and Susan Newlove & children fathered by gerry gilbert
later the Ridgeways
and next to them directly opposite us:
Gerry Geisler (New Design Gallery)
and Helen Sturdy & children 
our kitchen faced theirs
apple pies in my oven & stew or toast in theirs
we cd smell everything like the time we fell asleep as pork hocks
simmered in my big red pot
charred and burned almost caught on fire
would have if Gerry hadnt woken us up
and that building a total tinderbox
always worried bill wd start one 
my bedroom / study faced
the Molson’s sign and Burrard Street Bridge
and I could watch the west end and highrises and planetarium grow
and white sheets on a clothesline across the street dry
as I’d sit at my bay window
and write and mark
on a smooth board cut to fit exactly the sill 
I’d glance up and see
people like  you  &  Jamie  &  Carol  &  Joan  &  Marcia  & the Trumans
and the Gadds  and the Lathams  and Lanny Beckman
walking up and down Yew Street
open the window & shout
drop by on your way back 
dropping by
everybody did it
days filled with coffee, tea, poetry, cigarette smoke
crises, trips, talkedy talk talk 
painting hard edged  strong coloured
also  intricate silver point mandalas
and collages 
a gallon of Calogna Red
one summery Saturday night
became a party
of 100 or even more
dancing in my bedroom to one music on a tape recorder
dancing in the other to another
drumming in the kitchen
talking in the room with the blue-tile fireplace
so many bodies I couldnt hear the music
from  inside the  hallway
just saw the taller heads
moving together to different beats
in almost darkness 
that crazy night at the Wahs’ place
if that wasnt a party of this kind
everybody landing on that bed
everybody kissing everybody
we had to go outside to pee
because the lineup for the can so long 
somehow to do with that small space
that it was so tight that everybody had to rub every
body simply to go anywhere
It was gorgeous 
after the Vancouver Poetry Conference (1963)
Roy Kiyooka started
dropping by   when he left his studio
there’d always be a light on
somewhere in our building
and he could visit  any of us
separately or clustered 
one time
he told me he had a painting he wanted to give me
but it was big and heavy
he borrowed a truck and someone helped him
up the dusty always dirty long stairs
with Hoarfrost
which we hung on a wall in a room just big enough to hold
my round oak table
(used to be Bowerings’ they bought a whole household of furniture for $80 and
when they moved they gave it to Joan and then when she moved she stored it
with me)
a wall that later Elsa and I tore apart with a screwdriver and hammer
shouting angry hexes at Robert all the way 
after and during that conference--
Olson, Creeley, Duncan, Levertov, Avison, Whalen, Ginsberg--
Roy and I became friends
and there were readings in my room
every second Sunday
red cast iron pot full of bean soup, corn chowder, spicey meatball vegetable stew
simmering and then cheese scones in the oven
people would come and read their new work one week
and the next week there’d be a Tish meeting
with Daphne Marlatt, Dan MacLeod, Pete Auxier, David Cull & David Dawson 
rent $60 a month didnt change
and some years it was cold
the wind so cold on side facing the North Shore
that Hydro was $60 per month
and that wall frozen behind my pillows 
the police were something else
they felt they had a right to question anybody so
Cliff would be up at the laundromat on 4th or
at Jackson’s to get some hamburger and be walking back with an
economics book in one hand and meat wrapped in brown paper in the other
and they’d stop him and ask him what he was doing and my friend Ray Wargo
would get stopped almost every second time he’d drop in to visit
where are you going and why and how long will you be 
someone was always getting busted
someone was always tripping out
someone was always visiting from   or going to  Europe or Japan 
here is a journal entry on June 9:
evening of the first ever national leaders debate on TV
“I am looking forward to seeing Trudeau--hope he gets pushed into/onto
answering more directly than he has in the past. I, like many others including
every gay man I know, do have a crush on him: he has much more style than
any Canadian politician so far. I mean style in the true sense of the word, it is
him, not affected… Cliff, of course, doesn’t trust him at all and thinks he’s a sell-
out. I don’t go that far, yet. But I do think that compromising is the only way a
politician can work this country and I do not like all the PR, razzmatazz,
fundraising, and allegiances that go into just getting elected: our system seems
to be based on gullibility…”  
coming home at night up Yew Street
whether from downtown or the beach or Paul the butcher’s or Elsie the baker’s
I loved looking up at my North-facing windows
goldy  gold  mesh curtains
light filtering through
so warm  and so inviting 
 


^^EOP^^

The earth shakes
just enough
to remind us. 


^^EOP^^

Stop playing. You do remember the card tables,
Slick stick figures like men with low-cut fades,
Short but standing straight
Because we bent them into weak display.
What didn’t we want? What wouldn’t we claim?
How perfectly each surface was made
For throwing or dropping or slamming a necessary
Portion of our pay.
And how could any of us get by
With one in the way?
Didn’t that bare square ask to be played
On, beaten in the head, then folded, then put away,
All so we could call ourselves safe
Now that there was more room, a little more space?


^^EOP^^

But Mary kept all these things, and pondered them in her heart.
A strategy of continence, avoidance, mule-headedness, and hope. 
The next assassin, brush fire, or virus swerves this way, head-on collision;
We see it coming and can’t divert — the path too crowded with pilgrims. 
By the side of the road to Calvary blooms a mustard bush.
It never means to do anything but propagate. 
It sees the centuries winnow themselves in and out,
And hears itself appropriated for a parable. 
It keeps all these things, and ponders them in its heart
While casting savior seeds generation after generation.


^^EOP^^




An erasure of  Laura Redden Searing’s “My Story”



Generous instinct, were you
My hand I must
Think. The later brain.
My hands craving every
Learned heart. Nature, art,
World. In my memories
I thought of trust
Then all fear. I
Fell on my pain.
Hope shall in loss
Throb. My, my, my
Stand for the release.
A nation’s groan beneath
Dear night. All right.   
 


^^EOP^^

A Deaf Blind poet doesn’t like to read sitting up. A Deaf Blind poet likes to read Braille magazines on the john. A Deaf Blind poet is in the habit of composing nineteenth-century letters and pressing Alt+S. A Deaf Blind poet is a terrible student. A Deaf Blind poet does a lot of groundbreaking research. A Deaf Blind poet is always in demand. A Deaf Blind poet has yet to be gainfully employed. A Deaf Blind poet shares all his trade secrets with his children. A Deaf Blind poet will not stop if police order him to. A Deaf Blind poet used to like dogs but now prefers cats. A Deaf Blind poet listens to his wife. A Deaf Blind poet knits soft things for his dear friends. A Deaf Blind poet doesn’t believe in “contributing to society.”


^^EOP^^




An erasure of Henry Wadsworth Longfellow’s “Palingenesis”



I, sobbing in the rolling mist,
Started for peopled days. In dreams
A faded, lonely promontory shed petals.
Belief exists. Cunning with its perfume
Working from youth, defiance. A phantom
Vanished. The swift surrenders, leap into
The old dead heart of lies.
I will give, remembering my turns
Into foliage. Of what light unseen!
What, what, what, what, what, what
Will hold still without its end?


^^EOP^^

Gravel path stirred by the rain
fallen hard through the sweetgum trees,
path that leads to the bend
where the trail splits open in air: 
Everything is lighted evenly.
It is a queer hour. The difference
between light and shadow
is the jealousy turn in the eye. 
The sun is all in the bottle cap
that glints in the silt like a djinn’s brass hilt,
in the way some lea  is frozen unto the air,
some warm leaf heavywet here, and in how, just there: 
The strangeness strangely passes.
And evening mounts.
I can’t get the life out of my head. 
There is no glamour on this path
but if I return I will find it
in the thought of how I looked for some. 
I stoop to look at the veins that sweep
like Latin roots in the satin of things, dream:
The difference between something and nothing,
which is nothing. 
The gravel lies on itself like dust lies on water.
No, no, there are no mothers here.
I bend to see it all, the little stones cast-wise.
Things chase themselves away from the mode of things. 
I find a quartz, milked clear:
I could not hear its accent if it sang,
no matter how far off it formed.
What dead hand I should feel if I lifted it.


^^EOP^^

the drone was once a scrap of metal     the drone looks as if it might be a toy     the drone is not a toy     the drone could have been something other than a killing machine     the drone could have been a house      the drone could have been a spoon     the drone could have been a swing     the drone does not know who it is going to kill next     the drone is going to kill next     the drone has learned to disguise itself as a shard of sky     the drone’s soft hum is a disembodied echo    the drone was mistaken for a star once     the drone renders itself celestial     the drone scoffs at sovereignty     the drone asks what is a border if you can fly right over it?     the drone was built by a man     the drone killed a man     & a woman     & a child     the drone killed a child     & did not see her face     the drone does not see a face     the drone sees a body     & then the body is gone.


^^EOP^^

Has it turned out we’ve wasted our time?
We’ve wasted our time. 
Our magnificent bodies on the dissecting table.
Our day after tomorrow.
Our what to do now. 
The stink of us so undignified.
The end game of bloom. 
We will lose the sun
struck and disassembled
lightly down and crawling like a worm. 
This earth it is a banquet and laid on its table we.
A puncture in the wound room, crude and obvious. 
The raving lunatics they are upon us,
but we are raving too.


^^EOP^^

You recount the history of the French garden. 
From above, I see tight rows of trees beside threadbare grass. 
When the language teacher talks about le capitalisme: 
the gesture of three fingers rubbing imaginary fabric. 
I’m a tourist, vulnerable and stupid, 
my legs showing, shoes practical, face red. 
Together, we try to reconstruct an anecdote 
whose contents have scattered. A motorcycle passes, a French police siren 
you say sounds innocuous then we both laugh sourly. 
I hadn’t seen a woman slap a child in some time. 
A truck reversing, and the alarm that continues for hours one morning. 
Porn on a handheld device, its tinny echo in a room 
with bare floors and very little furniture. 
Across the courtyard, this T-shirt on a hanger out the window 
turns in the light breeze as if trying to look behind itself. 
I’m consumed with not knowing where to buy paper, safety pins, stamps. 
The window frames of that building are red, emerging from gray gables. 
Enormous bumblebee at the threshold investigates the doorway, doesn’t enter. 
The flies do; they’re promiscuous; they leave. 
I don’t know the word for because. 
So each act is disconnected from another. 
I can almost imagine there are no consequences, 
the days just pass, one sunny, one cloudy, someone unseen shouts, sirens 
every few hours, clouds move in a solemn procession across 
a wide sky staggered with chimneys, 
people wait to cross the street, a large tree tosses its wig a little. 
Other small trees in the courtyard flicker. 
They are responsive. 
The sun heats the pavement; le pavé répond. 
You send me a short erotic video, you’re naked, propositioning me. 
Do you act more like the coin or the water? 
Across the narrow street this bird 
sipping from roof puddles 
seems more dove than pigeon. 
Pacing, grandmotherly, she stops to look at me. 
Do you just know how to love another person 
like someone knew to paint those window frames red? 
Most of the architecture looks floral, like a boring math problem. 
The crosses that reach and reach. 
Why does the scrape of the furniture when I rearrange it 
sound like crass American English to me? 
I slept late, now I’m watching the clouds, like clouds 
in an eighteenth-century painting. Overly articulate. 
Except these clouds are not trying to symbolize anything. 
Where’s my dove. 
I always want to go look at people. 
A booth selling copies of copies of Louis Vuitton. 
The small shadow the roof makes on another roof right next to it. 
When my friend came to Paris she wanted to break everything. 
Impeccable shoes on the impeccable feet. 
Clothes so new they’re creamy, and to seem to never have to  compromise. 
I feel tattered when I’m actually not. 
I’m an American, I eat. 
A huge decorative basket of citrus snugged beside me in the upscale bistro. 
The woman from a building opposite comes down, indignant: 
Who threw a pomelo into my window? 
You read to me about the history of the barricade. 
I picture the drab suburbs. 
The shoulders and elbows of people in the museum evoke more reaction 
in me than most of the paintings. 
A young lithe person with live eyes tends bar, gender trouble tattooed up their arm. 
I count twenty-nine sleeping bags lined up beneath the overhang 
and each one inhabited. 
I read to you about the history of enclosure. 
Two people talking on a balcony, their black hair blowing. 
One leaning over into the courtyard. 
Behind the cathedral, vulgar black felt stapled in the raised flowerbeds 
to mask their frames. 
The river stinks, allures, as a specific person can. 
A repository, a consequence, a long sentence, an ongoing story. 
The generous current cut through by a party boat shouting 
wooo! wooo! wooooooo! wooo! 
emitting an obscene light 
waving at whatever will wave back.


^^EOP^^

1  
 
A pepper of  bees opens the pupils. An ensemble of aromatics Chorus aphrodisia, mariner’s root, bright sky and night star, heavenly rainbow. Amethyst, azure, blue flower-de-luce. Flowering ring.   • 
White archangelic the bee nettle,
the dead nettle. A hide of nettle cloth,
of finely-nerved sedge. Take heed
the edges, the pipes, the passages,
the petal corridor, the corolla tube.
 
• 
A blossom is a throat. Rose oil and hip.
A ripped rose is a voice organ, time-cut
and curt. Royally red and confidence-
keeping, redder than Mars, redder than
hot days and parched, Venus on the lips.  
 
2  
 
Muscle rose. Flesh rose. A verge toward red Then rustling redshank rose. Vines ascend the arch of aorta. Mercurial, the climbing nightshade, the bundle-branched bittersweet.  
 

• 
White-spotted hellebore under Jupiter
and wind. Oak lungs, jovial lungs.
Sea rush blows the lungs with sweet rose,
carmine and sanguine, flaming red.
Candleberry fires the blood.
 
• 
Red is antispasmodic, cardiovascular.
Great garden patience of Mars.
May-blossom, hawthorn. Spring
gushes red-veined with sorrel, bloodwort
below Jupiter, red dock for longevity.  
 
3  
 
Venus stokes the throatwort. Ringing with wasps The good leaf. The rose noble. L’herbe du siège slackens the isthmus of the fauces. Gash-red and choking rose.  
 

• 
Double tongue. Bay laurel.
Daphne of the sun.
Yarrow charms wasps,
snuffs the inveterate headache.
Daphne sings the bees from the ears.
 
• 
The voice reeds are a Queen Anne’s lace
of wasps. Mercury abounds with buzz
and wild carrot, jump-starts speech
with hoar-strange words, a gargle
of hog’s fennel and brimstone wort.  
 
4  
 
Under Leo, composure. Touchwood and rue Herb of grace. Anti-magical. Vinegar of the four thieves. Poison against poison. Rue before regret. Touch wood Ruta sets the garden free.  
 

• 
Lightning sulfur the garden prone
to primrose and paroxysm. Pellitory-
of-the-wall quells old hacking. An old cough.
A new moon courtesy of wild clary.
Eyebright. Clear eye (en toute bonne foi).
 
• 
Sweep away the broom, the burdock,
the beastly antipathy between ash tree
and adder. Snakeweed. Dragon’s blood.
Devil’s bit. Serpent’s tongue. Wickedness
(a weak moon) licked & licked & licked.  
 
5  
 
What a commotion! Wild rocket, a racket Flesh and blood of wake robin, cuckoo point, the clear caroling rise & fall. Volatile dog’s mercury. Dog’s-grass. Dog rose. Hot fits and cold metallic blue. The indecisive indigo.  
 

• 
So the garden bellyaches. So what
the gripes? Rows rife with tormentil,
gallant herb of the sun. Five fingers,
flesh and blood. Stamina, life’s long
thread, root-red, the unhindered heart.
 
• 
Leaves respire and rain returns blood-veined
and blood dock, blood-colored juices. Red poppy
a headache. Heartichoke the downhearted.
Loosestrife calms the fugitive scarlet.
Sweet slumber. The fleshy rootstock.  
 
6  
 
Enlist imagination under the banner of science. Erasmus Darwin, Flora attired by the elements. his Botanic Muse Sea lavender, sea holly, sundrops. Jacob’s ladder reaching ether. Wind rose. Sun rose. Water grass.  
 

• 
The loves of the plants. (The economy of vegetation.) Root, pith, lobes, plume, calyx, coral, sap.
Air distributes the seeds of names.
Windflower, digitalis. Tipsy and ethereal.
Trade winds, vital light. Seeds within seeds.
 
•  Start from the soil, and win their airy way.
The fifty-seeded heart’s delight, saturnine
and doting wild. Heart’s-ease. Herb constancy. Pensée    ...    An opening. Call-me-to-you. Kiss-her-
in-the-buttery. Meet-me-in-the-entry.  
 
7  
 
The yard wants what the yard wants. Rose Bloom of Ruth. Breath of life. Blush. Charisma. Compassion. Imagination. Ebb Tide and Nostalgia. Ground cover and climbers. Floribunda. Abundance.  
 

• 
A hybrid of bruise and steep, petal and dreg.
Lungfuls of lamp flower, rose campion,
rose of heaven. The moon shoulders roseroot,
rosy-colored stonecrop. The neck laced with
French rose, common rose, pomander of roses.
 
• 
At the center of the garden the heart. Red as any rose. Pulsing
balloon vine. Love in a puff.
Heartseed, heart-of-the-earth.
A continuous flow of red.  
 
8  
 
Nosebleed, staunchweed, sanguinary. List Thousand-leaved root of yellow. Thousand weed with leaves like feathers. Small birds flirt herb-of-Venus’ tree. If my love love me, nosebleed and yarrow.  
 

• 
Feverfew-profuse June and July.
Agueweed, sweating-plant,
boneset with yellow thrum.
Venus yields to water.
Boneset breaks the sun.
 
• 
Past mudwalls and molehills,
where the cowslips and the lungs moss,
hedge bells, morning glory and the hundred-leaved
rose, all the livelong organs rose — 
a catalogue, a desire, a wish.  
 
9  
 
Chaffweed whups the chin-cough. Life everlasting Venus hiccups dry wind and sandy rows. The garden ruminates cudweed, creeping roots June through September. Pearl-flowered. Eternal flower.  
 

• 
Take flower-gentle.
Take knitbone and knitback.
Ass ear. Blackwort. Slippery root.
Saturn’s orbit comfrey-picked and sea-goat-prickly.
Take sea wrack, knobbed wrack, bladderwrack.
 
• 
Paralysis and palsywort the garden
supplants fool’s parsley with imperatives! Forget-me-not. Forget-me-not. Forget-me-not.
Mouse-ear to the ground. Borage for courage.
Self-heal. All-heal. By crook or by hook-heal.  
 
10  
 
La voilà! Horsetail and paddock-pipes. Viola organista A hurdy-gurdyish drone. Pansy-meek with cattail and fretted tension. (Love-in-idleness.) The over-thinking viola.  
 

• 
Liverwort, liverleaf, liverweed. A low sun
and Jupiter presumes three-lobed hepatica.
Water hectors wind and wind blows sound
into lungwort, bladderwort, kidneywort,
the kidney-leaved sower weed, the hartwort.
 
•  Dame de coeur. The crowning heart.
The garden wants it all: leaf, stem, root,
the whole shooting match shoot system,
timbre, pitch, fully chromatic rows,
heart trefoil and arssmart under sun.


^^EOP^^

there’s nothing in my face. There is nothing in yours. What we have are called heads. They are nothing unless we kiss. Lips are wonderful. They are full of mechanoreceptors. In the Old World we all used to kiss and kiss. It was then that we did have faces. We had noses and cheeks and foreheads and soft, downy hair. In the New World we stopped kissing. Those who were already here stopped. Those who came stopped. Now there are only four people who have heads that are also faces. They are an artist and three children for whom I have a face other than my hands.


^^EOP^^

It’s summer, and just the sunniest
of afternoons. 
Outside the sanatorium,
in the arboretum, the attendees 
are served their teas.
The strudel is toothsome 
when Herr Stumpf, from the lectern,
contradicts the consensus 
that I is for ice cream. No, now
he’s proposing that I’s for spaghetti, 
all spaghetti, he avers,
being once alphabetti, 
all spaghetti being once that capital I
that it is when it’s dry, 
not the maddening doodle that it is
when it’s done and awry. 
His audience listen,
but once he has spoken, 
then beneath their applause
that’s not fulsome but token, 
they don’t soften, no rather, they stiffen.


^^EOP^^




After Alejandra Pizarnik, after Fernando Pessoa



i 
Comic screen to change what came to notice           Even though sky
at first was the same blank slate     So literal. The value of  it  
You make your own lion’s teeth sink in, slowly
 
ii 
                                                    The insects claim you don’t belong here then bite & bite  
                                                    Virtue the undulant yards as penance
 
iii
 
Hordes of animals without teeth crash the window in a dream & it means you are not hungry enough
 
iv 
                                                                                    The capuchin stays silent in the void 
                                                                               You feel the sun of  unknown experiments
 
v 
Once a choice comes to full & the act carries the joy of struggle                       The winter mother
severs only a chance at restarting. Could you sorrow 
the one unchosen thing infinitely so it feels occasional, the act is itself
 
vi 
              If  I write a texture I could make it stucco like childhood
              Aloe or cactus spines                      To cut is to heal 
              the rough of a cut             All dark blue against good skin like leather
 
vii 
Imagine the root of oppositional archetypes Next to me chrysanthemums the rust of  blood when it dries but
in front of me So much blue & a broken white  
I can’t see myself on purpose
 
viii 
                                   What rocks itself  out of  time on a wingbeat Is not a name or a silence 
                                    As in sanity’s
                                    meager gestures. Downriver, the unruly sound turned
                                    C-shaped / Real secrets as fragrant and familiar as what’s under the smoke
 
ix 
                                                                                                        I stand next to the rocks
                Where you choose to return without choosing / Some black, some silver 
                The lines of ash & passage A neon swig of enlightenment
 
x 
Don’t be exceptional in this false.
All fluent in nothing, hiding where your debt grows   Be aggressive or do not mind, you say 
I feel like a chicken after boiling Or like you do now — smooth from the pain  
                                            (I love how you love promises because they are lies)
                                            (I love the honesty of cheap rings)  
             Like a ripened plum or two, pitted — Now a flat middle ground, now another
             interior to hold the ruin
 
xi 
Your hair grows in eighths on alternate days but you pretend not to count What rains in it
What grandiose adornment hasn’t happened but will happen Also a lie — in color
 
xii 
The grunting you hear on the other side of the wall might be music Or the disaster of a concrete floor 
The western cities, the eastern cities / that inscrutable skin I chose
The high ground of resurrection Discursive — 
falling soft / I witness the guilt planted for others 
I practice by moving my legs I am a bracket
You are the conquering seawall  
Nothing earth about you except what clean is visible Also your hands


^^EOP^^

In a crumpled shirt (so casual for a god) 
Bow tucked loosely under an arm still jittery from battle 
He balanced himself on a flat boat painted black. 
Each wave as I kneel closer a migrant flag 
A tongue with syllables no script can catch.  The many births you have passed through, try to remember them as I do mine 
Memory is all you have.

^^EOP^^

All the new birds
are made of nothing. 
They have nothing inside
(for anti-ballast) 
and those insides
are surrounded 
in an outside nothing
that has its own 
flibberti hole.
The birds, 
they’re nothinging
up there 
in the nothing trees,
or on nothing roofs 
under a nothing sky.
They fly of course, 
but what is flying
if not nothing?


^^EOP^^

Once, we were coming back
From a  fête votive in Goudargues
When, sticky with pink barbe à papa,
And queasy because
The hairpinning road through St Marcel de Careiret
Resembled the crazy-maze passage of our caroming bumper car,
We were met by a stream of sangliers — 
Wild boars — 
Dashing across the D9 near the Forêt de Cavillargues. 
They pelted in a single ribbon, as I recall,
So how could we even tell what they were,
How distinguish that ruche of  shadow and wind
From any other ghost of  the district? 
That year I came across
A theory about the suffix –argues
That trails behind village names all around here.
(Vallérargues, St André d’Olérargues, Goussargues, Foussargues.)
It may refer to an area of  land
Given to Roman soldiers after service in North Africa
By the praetor in Nîmes.
Cavillargues. The acres of Cavillus, perhaps. 
The hairy pigs had emigrated, perhaps from the Caucasus,
And no doubt had settled the Val de Tave long before Cavillus
Arrived to begin gentrification.
He wandered from the marble steps of the Maison Carrée,
Perhaps having paid obeisance to Roman gods and governors,
Perhaps uncertain from an encounter with the local plonk,
And les sangliers came out to give him a thrill,
And to tell him  that this is not yet the Forêt de Cavillargues you can’t run through it as if you were a ground-level mistral with your feet like bound clumps of asparagus and your eyes on the Perseid meteor showers all roads lead to Rome except ours

^^EOP^^

On occasion, when the mood takes him
as it so often does, he will put down 
his papers, get up from his kindly old chair,
and leave for a while the sweeping beam 
to sow its charitable seed — that seed which,
when falling on the ground 
of a helmsman’s fertile consciousness,
ought germinate in it a cautious vigilance. 
He descends then, the long corkscrew of
the stairs and opens at their base the metal door 
so that he may take a closer look at what might
be beyond his tower’s environs. There he always 
finds the churning world, she laps at him from
every side with no respite, and spatters him 
with spray. Thanks to a certain modulation,
a tone which he adopted long ago 
when he still wore shorts and buckled shoes,
there is no danger here from neither shark 
nor crocodile, not in this sea stuffed as it is
like a dressing-up box with whimsy. 
Indeed, were there such creatures hidden
neath the sliver-thin surface of the waves, 
they’d have no teeth but only soft gray gums
and goofy grins, and they’d be giggling 
knowingly at the whole thing. And so it is
that as he gazes out, he cannot help 
but wonder what it is he might be warning of
with the light that turns atop his tower, 
because that tower is itself in fact the only
hazard anywhere on which a ship might rip her 
wooden skin and haemorrhage her lumpy
blood that’s made of all the gasping sailormen.


^^EOP^^




National Portrait Gallery



I have a need to see the painting when no one is looking. The god-
thought if there was such a thing, inconsolable, of Saturday
reaching for Sunday to ride out onto the Indian Ocean like
an argument of starched waves in their coffin-white lace I might
finger as I pass. There are hands in the paintings: raised, pointing,
folded, reaching, reaching    ...    there’s a leporello book intended for
my ex-lover’s breathing, weather balloons like colored severed heads
laughing their way up the sky’s fever-continuing threshold of three
miles withholding this formula for desire. Beside the one body and its
skying figures of speech, night’s impressionist-flecked mask captured
by singing: try to inhale. And again, please. Cough up cadmium twice,
suddenly. Carry the caraway seed page away, fill your sea purse head
with the tiny unborn. Painting, like digging up your garden in the dark,
isn’t spring. Isn’t daddy root, mama bud pullulating for some creation.
Isn’t spring. Isn’t season’s salt measure for your worth. Whoever
told you that lied about what’s to be framed next.


^^EOP^^

In Exodus
Moses is hidden 
in a cleft, behind God’s hand,
begging, 
and he sees — rushing past him — 
God’s back, diminishing. 
Moses stops begging.
God’s back is black fog. 
I know. He, we guess,
means to do it,
to do all of this. 
The brute center part
of an iridescent moth. 
The carnation
against the man.


^^EOP^^

The aftermath always happening like an airplane falling, or a man
midair falling from a horse, and an arrow, a gun, many guns
pointing away, at us, our all bull’s-eye-on-the-mark. This is what he
sees when he sees. Maybe Wrong or not, the appropriation, the film
clip, chase, pressed lips over lips, photo moment on the minute-drawn
breath in, the over, the under, bodies in black and white cut to pose,
the way a kiss can pose, dispose of everything around it for another,
dispose of thinking. It’s like waving good-bye. Mouth to mouth seeing
as saying. Inside. Resuscitation back to the brain saying yes as the mouth
makes an O. Circles for the digital age, colored dots for faces already
made for erasing. Hurry, come, he, 6’7”, sees fifteen minutes from the
Mexican border, cremates his old paintings up close. But the ashes were
kept in a book urn, not so afloat in the ocean with my parents, Above,
On, and Under (with Mermaid)

^^EOP^^

She says she had a baby
but I don’t believe her
Let me tell you the feeling
of relief when I started to believe her
baby wasn’t real
“What’s she getting out of it?”
I surrender without a fight
Ok, you can have your baby
 
Sometimes all you can do is reify your worst fears
What if I can’t have healthy relationships
Ever
With anything
Even your cat
 
Undressing in the open window
Like being in public
Is it not knowing or not caring?
 
I’m offended reading memoir advertised as essay
I give a mini-lecture on insecure attachment
from the living room
As if to ask
Is that what you wanted?
Who you think I am
Improving my senses
You see I was siding with the baby


^^EOP^^

Choice by extinction sounded ominous
to Yanks like us — we all remembered the war.
But that was just Herr Schreiff’s personal English.
We were on the same side now, building the thing,
the thing,
the VTOL fighter. What’s today? There must be
some big dates coming up, historic dates.
He’d say, Cold hands frog heart, and it became a gag
among the engineers: Soft hands wombat heart,
Sweaty hands lawnmower heart. The docs in this place
want to put in a pacemaker; I said no,
I’m not in this for the long run. 
On his birthday Schreiff brought in three bottles of schnapps
and we sat around half pickled trying to do the
do the
debug the navigation. What a fright?
Patty —     Debbie —    Susan called, wanted to know
could she bring me anything. I told her, My old brain.
I used to be smart, you know? I’m assuming someone
is in charge of the dates, the historic dates. 
Schreiff had worked for Heinkel during the war,
on those last-ditch plywood jet fighters
that kept disintegrating in midair
and killing their precious test pilots.
Ah Christ, look at this mess! Where’s the thing,
the thing
to call the nurse? Someone needs to deal
with those important dates, it’s all so disorganized.


^^EOP^^




An erasure of Lydia Huntley Sigourney’s “On Seeing the Deaf, Dumb, and Blind Girl, Sitting for Her Portrait”



Guide, passion, catch what
Hath no speech. Unknown
Joys, power, and meditation’s
Unfolding sky. Feeling draws
Heart and wildering language
Still without speech to
Mind. Philosophy fails to
Sway this future child.


^^EOP^^

Sybaritic afterlife I don’t crave you.
I like daylight. I like crowds.
I don’t think it will be charming underground.
The silence will be sudden then last. 
What’s chic will shrink.
There won’t be any pretty, pity.
Will never peaches there, or air.
We’ll be so squashed and sour there. 
I don’t want a cold place.
Don’t want a threadbare
clamp and consequence all old.
Our loneliness will be prolonged then go too far. 
Oh fuck it’s true.
Then nothing left of you.


^^EOP^^

When a hurricane sends
Winds far enough north
To put our power out,
We only think of winning
The war bodies wage
To prove the border
Between them isn’t real.
An act of God, so sweet.
No TV. No novel. No
Recreation but one
Another, and neither of us
Willing to kill. I don’t care
That I don’t love my lover.
Knowing where to stroke
In little light, knowing what
Will happen to me and how
Soon, these rank higher
Than a clear view
Of the face I’d otherwise
Flay had I some training
In combat, a blade, a few
Matches. Candles are
Romantic because
We understand shadows.
We recognize the shape
Of what once made us
Come, so we come
Thinking of approach
In ways that forgo
Substance. I’m breathing —
Heaving now —
In my own skin, and I
Know it. Romance is
An act. The perimeter
Stays intact. We make out
So little that I can’t help
But imagine my safety.
I get to tell the truth
About what kind
Of a person lives and who
Dies. Barefoot survivors.
Damned heroes, each
Corpse lit on a pyre.
Patroclus died because
He could not see
What he really was inside
His lover’s armor.


^^EOP^^




After Hieronymus Bosch, “The Garden of Earthly Delights,” triptych right panel



But all dark notes are dismantled 
there from the middle ear 
downward. Voyaged mind, cauldron skin. 
Can you claim anything is yours? 
The burning salt hour 
throws its black broken-glass frame skyward. 
Left behind 
the mum orchestra, body parts in peril 
and animals dizzy for 
lust past all lost 
astronomy and wipeout, 
this naked edible overjoy, a kind 
of suicide in syllables, fifth 
panic, fourth stall’s birds-fermata, this 
half ocean’s susurrus is coming over us in the picture. 
Can you akin? Can you 
hear it, pinned to the unseasonable underearth, 
an option for music and water 
constantly changing shape, an answer 
in dissonance? To hear desire 
is to wake yourself inside, upturned, 
long enough to know 
tomorrow is exile. Chaos, body harp, 
and painted butt music, crowd-crawl, rose 
crowned to the chest, rabbit 
call and playing cards    ...    listen, 
I’m hell-humming in 
your direction, giddy, I am too taken 
to leave it alone, the will 
locked in as if it is already 
inside of me now: to fall. 
Let’s be clear, 
my darling, in the reeling 
crave, spilled gut-platter 
of enclosed bones, in 
the final flesh-clean drop, it sounds 
like fire rising 
with the cliff’s updraft.


^^EOP^^

War the war, the sorry edge
of us, because we stacked nice 
clean plates for days, we were
sure things when love broke 
across the headland, leaving
conch shells in ditches, 
five fish slapping on the steps
of the old town hall, it was winter, 
we were bonfires unattended,
our bodies litigating, agreeing 
and writing it all down, the law
of legs, the law of how we sleep, 
the law of shoulders killing me,
and now we fold clothes without 
thinking my clothes your clothes
and war the war o happy war 
what love we are so badly bitten
in this long-term necessary chapel 
with all attendant relics, citronella
candle, junior hacksaw, 
a box of miscellaneous wires,
our headland way-way underwater, 
no one else beside us
but ourselves beside ourselves.


^^EOP^^




                               Where are the days of Tobias,
when one of you, veiling his radiance, stood at the front door,
slightly disguised for the journey, no longer appalling.
— Rainer Maria Rilke, tr. by Stephen Mitchell



The fresco cracks cooperatively over time. Not to give a secret away
but gradually to break off keeping it. In the sky you make birds
like this, one wing longer than the other, an asymmetrical v
wedged against wind, one stroke longer than another,
never the bodies turned the same direction, each finding
its own angle, and one, in the distance,
a dot. These are the Deadly Birds of the Soul
Rilke was forced to call terrifying.
Migratory, weighing no more than a pencil.
Because every flying thing is passionate, and every flight
a posture torn from stone.
There was a time it was a theme
parents would pay an artist to realize — the face of a beloved son,
a Luca or Piero, painted onto the shoulders of Tobias,
painted into the company of Raphael. You tell yourselves
and your quiet house
no harm will come to the boy
as he goes out. A guardian, though, is not a guard. To keep safe
is subtly different from confining. Radiance can strategically
direct itself to seem like us, ready, as it were, to walk.
As a mirror goes through the appearance of requiring
subsistence, goes through the motions of a meal
whose food appears to be food.
Radiance, we know, is never quite as warm as light.
Who has not tasted the silver in sea mist?
Whosever they are, angels are the first to surface there.
You know a guardian by the silver of a river-crossing,
of a father’s filmy eyes, in gall, heart, fire,
and mostly smoke. In smoke and mostly mirror.
As, wedged between forward and backward being,
rehashing and planning ahead, presence will be specked again
with being erased, a reusable writing surface
calling down to the life without rest, the self-propelled
surveillances of sharks.


^^EOP^^

It was winter. The opposite of burning,
which is also burning.
My banner displayed clock parts,
a cup of wine, a worm eating its opposite head.
My motto was Try to Be Responsible,
but every new moon was a sacrificial moon.
Thirteen paving slabs were flipped into the river. 
The extra light of spring threw our business
into relief. My banner displayed a sunburst,
a bloodied hand dropping a knife, and
in the other hand an avocado withholding
its stone. War would soon come but not
for us, and this became our motto, Not for Us.
Then a crime in our community led to anger.
Gossip gathered the truth into a ball;
paperwork was spoiled; a man was removed
from the yellow light of the barn.
We heard his sobs coming from the orchard,
and these were a source of comfort. 
Summer roused lanterns of dust under doorways,
though a vinegar taste kept the air difficult.
Antifa angels bathed their eyes in milk,
as horses refused riders. The timid among us
signed petitions swearing that when the time came
we would know it by the rocks in our hands.
I made a banner for the protests to come
depicting the planting of milk teeth,
the burning of a noose, a stadium left empty. 
Autumn was just my luck. I could not stomach
the broth I boiled, and slept badly.
Arguments I won in my head lost direction
when formed out loud. The riots continued
but quietly now, indoors.
It was a time for manifestos, though the wrongs
were too many for anything less than a lake.
Friends kept the counsel of friends.
In the yellow light of the barn we tried to write
sentences each other would like, or not desire
to alter. Together we designed a quilt depicting
the wolf taking scent, water moving quickly,
the sign of the errant cloud and alphabet,
a baby resisting sleep, a worm eating
its opposite head, only this time surrounded
by snow, which hasn’t stopped falling since
Thursday, the name we gave to our child.


^^EOP^^

i 
Waves smack the body,
Nayeli, seven, drowning.
Spring: crossing season.    ii 
Summer indicates
the migration will be “safe.”
Yej Susen, three, sprints.    iii 
Inda Jani, one,
knows to crawl under the fence — 
she was trained all fall.    iv 
At four ai-em, Yao,
twelve, is sewn inside car seat;
winter will protect.    v 
Itzel, five, plays dead.
Border patrol agents see
her body — they leave.


^^EOP^^

To map the consequences of regardless, of underestimate,
   Of feverish faith, of the mechanical modernism of your false terrain. As if
Port Sulphur remained nominal, its slick globules merely figurative
      Between territories of wait and wetlands of trust.
 
To etch the shallow-water horizon— a techno-utopian tribute
         To shrimp estuaries, bird rookeries, oyster bays,
To tube worms & sea turtles. To watercolor these pelican grasses,
            Oxidized, unapologetic executive marshes, roseated spoonbills.
 
For you who longed to smear concentric circles,
            To have trusted you with longitude and latitude,
To blur this sargassum border between mourning,
               Fighting, and willful denying of objects and subjects. As if
 
Generations of fishermen, scaling orders of magnitude,
                  Navigated oily streaks of miles in a legend of inches,
Skeletal, ghostly swarms of now-opaque, milky jellyfish. As if
                     to bury the blowout, rescind the rig. To fortify, to intone.
 
If naming were not violence, to witness an active verb:                      Top kill, junk shot, top hat, dance dance revolution.
These wayward scripts a frontier province palimpsest.
                        Offshore yet another beacon, another account. Explosive violet iridescent.
 


^^EOP^^

At sunrise the deer eat
pieces of the quiet, they eat spaces
between the quiet
    & the sounds—;
         & the numbers on the calendar
lie flat in their boxes,
      they leak through tiny holes
             in the minutes,
            evenly so, so evenly,
 an active sense, before
         the sense was made…
 
There, now, opposite to set down,
            the agreed-upon, the shape
                 of the obvious
        drawn by an earlier
           enchantment before the new
                        anxiety set in:
         the workers are safe;
 the terror stilled for an hour;
a lover’s outline, dreamed or imagined,
       before you read the one-page book
     again, what was that book,
 it had no copyright—
 
& what was before?
         a life, the dazzler, the dark,
             the singing dust, it turned
when you turned, it orpheus-knew
what you forgot when you took the bowl
        of burning time across the room—
      & if the previous is closer
   to you now, should you
look, doesn’t matter if you do,
    you carry the some of it
with it, out into it—
 
                                                for LG 
 


^^EOP^^

It was Adolphe Sax, remember,
not Saxo Grammaticus, who gets the ovation.
And by the time he had brought all the components
together–the serpentine shape, the single reed,
the fit of the fingers,
the upward tilt of the golden bell–
it was already 1842, and one gets the feeling
that it was also very late at night.
 
There is something nocturnal about the sound,
something literally horny,
as some may have noticed on that historic date
when the first odd notes wobbled out of his studio
into the small, darkened town,
 
summoning the insomniacs (who were up
waiting for the invention of jazz) to their windows,
but leaving the sleepers undisturbed,
evening deepening and warming the waters of their dreams.
 
For this is not the valved instrument of waking,
more the smoky voice of longing and loss,
the porpoise cry of the subconscious.
No one would ever think of blowing reveille
on a tenor without irony.
The men would only lie in their metal bunks,
fingers twined behind their heads,
afloat on pools of memory and desire.
 
And when the time has come to rouse the dead,
you will not see Gabriel clipping an alto
around his numinous neck.
 
An angel playing the world’s last song
on a glistening saxophone might be enough
to lift them back into the light of earth,
but really no further.
 
Once resurrected, they would only lie down
in the long cemetery grass
or lean alone against a lugubrious yew
and let the music do the ascending–
curling snakes charmed from their baskets–
while they wait for the shrill trumpet solo,
that will blow them all to kingdom come.
 


^^EOP^^

In a crumpled shirt (so casual for a god) 
Bow tucked loosely under an arm still jittery from battle 
He balanced himself on a flat boat painted black. 
Each wave as I kneel closer a migrant flag 
A tongue with syllables no script can catch.  The many births you have passed through, try to remember them as I do mine 
Memory is all you have.

^^EOP^^

All the new birds
are made of nothing. 
They have nothing inside
(for anti-ballast) 
and those insides
are surrounded 
in an outside nothing
that has its own 
flibberti hole.
The birds, 
they’re nothinging
up there 
in the nothing trees,
or on nothing roofs 
under a nothing sky.
They fly of course, 
but what is flying
if not nothing?


^^EOP^^

Once, we were coming back
From a  fête votive in Goudargues
When, sticky with pink barbe à papa,
And queasy because
The hairpinning road through St Marcel de Careiret
Resembled the crazy-maze passage of our caroming bumper car,
We were met by a stream of sangliers — 
Wild boars — 
Dashing across the D9 near the Forêt de Cavillargues. 
They pelted in a single ribbon, as I recall,
So how could we even tell what they were,
How distinguish that ruche of  shadow and wind
From any other ghost of  the district? 
That year I came across
A theory about the suffix –argues
That trails behind village names all around here.
(Vallérargues, St André d’Olérargues, Goussargues, Foussargues.)
It may refer to an area of  land
Given to Roman soldiers after service in North Africa
By the praetor in Nîmes.
Cavillargues. The acres of Cavillus, perhaps. 
The hairy pigs had emigrated, perhaps from the Caucasus,
And no doubt had settled the Val de Tave long before Cavillus
Arrived to begin gentrification.
He wandered from the marble steps of the Maison Carrée,
Perhaps having paid obeisance to Roman gods and governors,
Perhaps uncertain from an encounter with the local plonk,
And les sangliers came out to give him a thrill,
And to tell him  that this is not yet the Forêt de Cavillargues you can’t run through it as if you were a ground-level mistral with your feet like bound clumps of asparagus and your eyes on the Perseid meteor showers all roads lead to Rome except ours

^^EOP^^

On occasion, when the mood takes him
as it so often does, he will put down 
his papers, get up from his kindly old chair,
and leave for a while the sweeping beam 
to sow its charitable seed — that seed which,
when falling on the ground 
of a helmsman’s fertile consciousness,
ought germinate in it a cautious vigilance. 
He descends then, the long corkscrew of
the stairs and opens at their base the metal door 
so that he may take a closer look at what might
be beyond his tower’s environs. There he always 
finds the churning world, she laps at him from
every side with no respite, and spatters him 
with spray. Thanks to a certain modulation,
a tone which he adopted long ago 
when he still wore shorts and buckled shoes,
there is no danger here from neither shark 
nor crocodile, not in this sea stuffed as it is
like a dressing-up box with whimsy. 
Indeed, were there such creatures hidden
neath the sliver-thin surface of the waves, 
they’d have no teeth but only soft gray gums
and goofy grins, and they’d be giggling 
knowingly at the whole thing. And so it is
that as he gazes out, he cannot help 
but wonder what it is he might be warning of
with the light that turns atop his tower, 
because that tower is itself in fact the only
hazard anywhere on which a ship might rip her 
wooden skin and haemorrhage her lumpy
blood that’s made of all the gasping sailormen.


^^EOP^^




National Portrait Gallery



I have a need to see the painting when no one is looking. The god-
thought if there was such a thing, inconsolable, of Saturday
reaching for Sunday to ride out onto the Indian Ocean like
an argument of starched waves in their coffin-white lace I might
finger as I pass. There are hands in the paintings: raised, pointing,
folded, reaching, reaching    ...    there’s a leporello book intended for
my ex-lover’s breathing, weather balloons like colored severed heads
laughing their way up the sky’s fever-continuing threshold of three
miles withholding this formula for desire. Beside the one body and its
skying figures of speech, night’s impressionist-flecked mask captured
by singing: try to inhale. And again, please. Cough up cadmium twice,
suddenly. Carry the caraway seed page away, fill your sea purse head
with the tiny unborn. Painting, like digging up your garden in the dark,
isn’t spring. Isn’t daddy root, mama bud pullulating for some creation.
Isn’t spring. Isn’t season’s salt measure for your worth. Whoever
told you that lied about what’s to be framed next.


^^EOP^^

In Exodus
Moses is hidden 
in a cleft, behind God’s hand,
begging, 
and he sees — rushing past him — 
God’s back, diminishing. 
Moses stops begging.
God’s back is black fog. 
I know. He, we guess,
means to do it,
to do all of this. 
The brute center part
of an iridescent moth. 
The carnation
against the man.


^^EOP^^

The aftermath always happening like an airplane falling, or a man
midair falling from a horse, and an arrow, a gun, many guns
pointing away, at us, our all bull’s-eye-on-the-mark. This is what he
sees when he sees. Maybe Wrong or not, the appropriation, the film
clip, chase, pressed lips over lips, photo moment on the minute-drawn
breath in, the over, the under, bodies in black and white cut to pose,
the way a kiss can pose, dispose of everything around it for another,
dispose of thinking. It’s like waving good-bye. Mouth to mouth seeing
as saying. Inside. Resuscitation back to the brain saying yes as the mouth
makes an O. Circles for the digital age, colored dots for faces already
made for erasing. Hurry, come, he, 6’7”, sees fifteen minutes from the
Mexican border, cremates his old paintings up close. But the ashes were
kept in a book urn, not so afloat in the ocean with my parents, Above,
On, and Under (with Mermaid)

^^EOP^^

She says she had a baby
but I don’t believe her
Let me tell you the feeling
of relief when I started to believe her
baby wasn’t real
“What’s she getting out of it?”
I surrender without a fight
Ok, you can have your baby
 
Sometimes all you can do is reify your worst fears
What if I can’t have healthy relationships
Ever
With anything
Even your cat
 
Undressing in the open window
Like being in public
Is it not knowing or not caring?
 
I’m offended reading memoir advertised as essay
I give a mini-lecture on insecure attachment
from the living room
As if to ask
Is that what you wanted?
Who you think I am
Improving my senses
You see I was siding with the baby


^^EOP^^

Choice by extinction sounded ominous
to Yanks like us — we all remembered the war.
But that was just Herr Schreiff’s personal English.
We were on the same side now, building the thing,
the thing,
the VTOL fighter. What’s today? There must be
some big dates coming up, historic dates.
He’d say, Cold hands frog heart, and it became a gag
among the engineers: Soft hands wombat heart,
Sweaty hands lawnmower heart. The docs in this place
want to put in a pacemaker; I said no,
I’m not in this for the long run. 
On his birthday Schreiff brought in three bottles of schnapps
and we sat around half pickled trying to do the
do the
debug the navigation. What a fright?
Patty —     Debbie —    Susan called, wanted to know
could she bring me anything. I told her, My old brain.
I used to be smart, you know? I’m assuming someone
is in charge of the dates, the historic dates. 
Schreiff had worked for Heinkel during the war,
on those last-ditch plywood jet fighters
that kept disintegrating in midair
and killing their precious test pilots.
Ah Christ, look at this mess! Where’s the thing,
the thing
to call the nurse? Someone needs to deal
with those important dates, it’s all so disorganized.


^^EOP^^




An erasure of Lydia Huntley Sigourney’s “On Seeing the Deaf, Dumb, and Blind Girl, Sitting for Her Portrait”



Guide, passion, catch what
Hath no speech. Unknown
Joys, power, and meditation’s
Unfolding sky. Feeling draws
Heart and wildering language
Still without speech to
Mind. Philosophy fails to
Sway this future child.


^^EOP^^

Sybaritic afterlife I don’t crave you.
I like daylight. I like crowds.
I don’t think it will be charming underground.
The silence will be sudden then last. 
What’s chic will shrink.
There won’t be any pretty, pity.
Will never peaches there, or air.
We’ll be so squashed and sour there. 
I don’t want a cold place.
Don’t want a threadbare
clamp and consequence all old.
Our loneliness will be prolonged then go too far. 
Oh fuck it’s true.
Then nothing left of you.


^^EOP^^

When a hurricane sends
Winds far enough north
To put our power out,
We only think of winning
The war bodies wage
To prove the border
Between them isn’t real.
An act of God, so sweet.
No TV. No novel. No
Recreation but one
Another, and neither of us
Willing to kill. I don’t care
That I don’t love my lover.
Knowing where to stroke
In little light, knowing what
Will happen to me and how
Soon, these rank higher
Than a clear view
Of the face I’d otherwise
Flay had I some training
In combat, a blade, a few
Matches. Candles are
Romantic because
We understand shadows.
We recognize the shape
Of what once made us
Come, so we come
Thinking of approach
In ways that forgo
Substance. I’m breathing —
Heaving now —
In my own skin, and I
Know it. Romance is
An act. The perimeter
Stays intact. We make out
So little that I can’t help
But imagine my safety.
I get to tell the truth
About what kind
Of a person lives and who
Dies. Barefoot survivors.
Damned heroes, each
Corpse lit on a pyre.
Patroclus died because
He could not see
What he really was inside
His lover’s armor.


^^EOP^^




After Hieronymus Bosch, “The Garden of Earthly Delights,” triptych right panel



But all dark notes are dismantled 
there from the middle ear 
downward. Voyaged mind, cauldron skin. 
Can you claim anything is yours? 
The burning salt hour 
throws its black broken-glass frame skyward. 
Left behind 
the mum orchestra, body parts in peril 
and animals dizzy for 
lust past all lost 
astronomy and wipeout, 
this naked edible overjoy, a kind 
of suicide in syllables, fifth 
panic, fourth stall’s birds-fermata, this 
half ocean’s susurrus is coming over us in the picture. 
Can you akin? Can you 
hear it, pinned to the unseasonable underearth, 
an option for music and water 
constantly changing shape, an answer 
in dissonance? To hear desire 
is to wake yourself inside, upturned, 
long enough to know 
tomorrow is exile. Chaos, body harp, 
and painted butt music, crowd-crawl, rose 
crowned to the chest, rabbit 
call and playing cards    ...    listen, 
I’m hell-humming in 
your direction, giddy, I am too taken 
to leave it alone, the will 
locked in as if it is already 
inside of me now: to fall. 
Let’s be clear, 
my darling, in the reeling 
crave, spilled gut-platter 
of enclosed bones, in 
the final flesh-clean drop, it sounds 
like fire rising 
with the cliff’s updraft.


^^EOP^^

War the war, the sorry edge
of us, because we stacked nice 
clean plates for days, we were
sure things when love broke 
across the headland, leaving
conch shells in ditches, 
five fish slapping on the steps
of the old town hall, it was winter, 
we were bonfires unattended,
our bodies litigating, agreeing 
and writing it all down, the law
of legs, the law of how we sleep, 
the law of shoulders killing me,
and now we fold clothes without 
thinking my clothes your clothes
and war the war o happy war 
what love we are so badly bitten
in this long-term necessary chapel 
with all attendant relics, citronella
candle, junior hacksaw, 
a box of miscellaneous wires,
our headland way-way underwater, 
no one else beside us
but ourselves beside ourselves.


^^EOP^^




                               Where are the days of Tobias,
when one of you, veiling his radiance, stood at the front door,
slightly disguised for the journey, no longer appalling.
— Rainer Maria Rilke, tr. by Stephen Mitchell



The fresco cracks cooperatively over time. Not to give a secret away
but gradually to break off keeping it. In the sky you make birds
like this, one wing longer than the other, an asymmetrical v
wedged against wind, one stroke longer than another,
never the bodies turned the same direction, each finding
its own angle, and one, in the distance,
a dot. These are the Deadly Birds of the Soul
Rilke was forced to call terrifying.
Migratory, weighing no more than a pencil.
Because every flying thing is passionate, and every flight
a posture torn from stone.
There was a time it was a theme
parents would pay an artist to realize — the face of a beloved son,
a Luca or Piero, painted onto the shoulders of Tobias,
painted into the company of Raphael. You tell yourselves
and your quiet house
no harm will come to the boy
as he goes out. A guardian, though, is not a guard. To keep safe
is subtly different from confining. Radiance can strategically
direct itself to seem like us, ready, as it were, to walk.
As a mirror goes through the appearance of requiring
subsistence, goes through the motions of a meal
whose food appears to be food.
Radiance, we know, is never quite as warm as light.
Who has not tasted the silver in sea mist?
Whosever they are, angels are the first to surface there.
You know a guardian by the silver of a river-crossing,
of a father’s filmy eyes, in gall, heart, fire,
and mostly smoke. In smoke and mostly mirror.
As, wedged between forward and backward being,
rehashing and planning ahead, presence will be specked again
with being erased, a reusable writing surface
calling down to the life without rest, the self-propelled
surveillances of sharks.


^^EOP^^

It was winter. The opposite of burning,
which is also burning.
My banner displayed clock parts,
a cup of wine, a worm eating its opposite head.
My motto was Try to Be Responsible,
but every new moon was a sacrificial moon.
Thirteen paving slabs were flipped into the river. 
The extra light of spring threw our business
into relief. My banner displayed a sunburst,
a bloodied hand dropping a knife, and
in the other hand an avocado withholding
its stone. War would soon come but not
for us, and this became our motto, Not for Us.
Then a crime in our community led to anger.
Gossip gathered the truth into a ball;
paperwork was spoiled; a man was removed
from the yellow light of the barn.
We heard his sobs coming from the orchard,
and these were a source of comfort. 
Summer roused lanterns of dust under doorways,
though a vinegar taste kept the air difficult.
Antifa angels bathed their eyes in milk,
as horses refused riders. The timid among us
signed petitions swearing that when the time came
we would know it by the rocks in our hands.
I made a banner for the protests to come
depicting the planting of milk teeth,
the burning of a noose, a stadium left empty. 
Autumn was just my luck. I could not stomach
the broth I boiled, and slept badly.
Arguments I won in my head lost direction
when formed out loud. The riots continued
but quietly now, indoors.
It was a time for manifestos, though the wrongs
were too many for anything less than a lake.
Friends kept the counsel of friends.
In the yellow light of the barn we tried to write
sentences each other would like, or not desire
to alter. Together we designed a quilt depicting
the wolf taking scent, water moving quickly,
the sign of the errant cloud and alphabet,
a baby resisting sleep, a worm eating
its opposite head, only this time surrounded
by snow, which hasn’t stopped falling since
Thursday, the name we gave to our child.


^^EOP^^

i 
Waves smack the body,
Nayeli, seven, drowning.
Spring: crossing season.    ii 
Summer indicates
the migration will be “safe.”
Yej Susen, three, sprints.    iii 
Inda Jani, one,
knows to crawl under the fence — 
she was trained all fall.    iv 
At four ai-em, Yao,
twelve, is sewn inside car seat;
winter will protect.    v 
Itzel, five, plays dead.
Border patrol agents see
her body — they leave.


^^EOP^^

To map the consequences of regardless, of underestimate,
   Of feverish faith, of the mechanical modernism of your false terrain. As if
Port Sulphur remained nominal, its slick globules merely figurative
      Between territories of wait and wetlands of trust.
 
To etch the shallow-water horizon— a techno-utopian tribute
         To shrimp estuaries, bird rookeries, oyster bays,
To tube worms & sea turtles. To watercolor these pelican grasses,
            Oxidized, unapologetic executive marshes, roseated spoonbills.
 
For you who longed to smear concentric circles,
            To have trusted you with longitude and latitude,
To blur this sargassum border between mourning,
               Fighting, and willful denying of objects and subjects. As if
 
Generations of fishermen, scaling orders of magnitude,
                  Navigated oily streaks of miles in a legend of inches,
Skeletal, ghostly swarms of now-opaque, milky jellyfish. As if
                     to bury the blowout, rescind the rig. To fortify, to intone.
 
If naming were not violence, to witness an active verb:                      Top kill, junk shot, top hat, dance dance revolution.
These wayward scripts a frontier province palimpsest.
                        Offshore yet another beacon, another account. Explosive violet iridescent.
 


^^EOP^^

At sunrise the deer eat
pieces of the quiet, they eat spaces
between the quiet
    & the sounds—;
         & the numbers on the calendar
lie flat in their boxes,
      they leak through tiny holes
             in the minutes,
            evenly so, so evenly,
 an active sense, before
         the sense was made…
 
There, now, opposite to set down,
            the agreed-upon, the shape
                 of the obvious
        drawn by an earlier
           enchantment before the new
                        anxiety set in:
         the workers are safe;
 the terror stilled for an hour;
a lover’s outline, dreamed or imagined,
       before you read the one-page book
     again, what was that book,
 it had no copyright—
 
& what was before?
         a life, the dazzler, the dark,
             the singing dust, it turned
when you turned, it orpheus-knew
what you forgot when you took the bowl
        of burning time across the room—
      & if the previous is closer
   to you now, should you
look, doesn’t matter if you do,
    you carry the some of it
with it, out into it—
 
                                                for LG 
 


^^EOP^^

It was Adolphe Sax, remember,
not Saxo Grammaticus, who gets the ovation.
And by the time he had brought all the components
together–the serpentine shape, the single reed,
the fit of the fingers,
the upward tilt of the golden bell–
it was already 1842, and one gets the feeling
that it was also very late at night.
 
There is something nocturnal about the sound,
something literally horny,
as some may have noticed on that historic date
when the first odd notes wobbled out of his studio
into the small, darkened town,
 
summoning the insomniacs (who were up
waiting for the invention of jazz) to their windows,
but leaving the sleepers undisturbed,
evening deepening and warming the waters of their dreams.
 
For this is not the valved instrument of waking,
more the smoky voice of longing and loss,
the porpoise cry of the subconscious.
No one would ever think of blowing reveille
on a tenor without irony.
The men would only lie in their metal bunks,
fingers twined behind their heads,
afloat on pools of memory and desire.
 
And when the time has come to rouse the dead,
you will not see Gabriel clipping an alto
around his numinous neck.
 
An angel playing the world’s last song
on a glistening saxophone might be enough
to lift them back into the light of earth,
but really no further.
 
Once resurrected, they would only lie down
in the long cemetery grass
or lean alone against a lugubrious yew
and let the music do the ascending–
curling snakes charmed from their baskets–
while they wait for the shrill trumpet solo,
that will blow them all to kingdom come.
 


^^EOP^^

In a crumpled shirt (so casual for a god) 
Bow tucked loosely under an arm still jittery from battle 
He balanced himself on a flat boat painted black. 
Each wave as I kneel closer a migrant flag 
A tongue with syllables no script can catch.  The many births you have passed through, try to remember them as I do mine 
Memory is all you have.

^^EOP^^

All the new birds
are made of nothing. 
They have nothing inside
(for anti-ballast) 
and those insides
are surrounded 
in an outside nothing
that has its own 
flibberti hole.
The birds, 
they’re nothinging
up there 
in the nothing trees,
or on nothing roofs 
under a nothing sky.
They fly of course, 
but what is flying
if not nothing?


^^EOP^^

Once, we were coming back
From a  fête votive in Goudargues
When, sticky with pink barbe à papa,
And queasy because
The hairpinning road through St Marcel de Careiret
Resembled the crazy-maze passage of our caroming bumper car,
We were met by a stream of sangliers — 
Wild boars — 
Dashing across the D9 near the Forêt de Cavillargues. 
They pelted in a single ribbon, as I recall,
So how could we even tell what they were,
How distinguish that ruche of  shadow and wind
From any other ghost of  the district? 
That year I came across
A theory about the suffix –argues
That trails behind village names all around here.
(Vallérargues, St André d’Olérargues, Goussargues, Foussargues.)
It may refer to an area of  land
Given to Roman soldiers after service in North Africa
By the praetor in Nîmes.
Cavillargues. The acres of Cavillus, perhaps. 
The hairy pigs had emigrated, perhaps from the Caucasus,
And no doubt had settled the Val de Tave long before Cavillus
Arrived to begin gentrification.
He wandered from the marble steps of the Maison Carrée,
Perhaps having paid obeisance to Roman gods and governors,
Perhaps uncertain from an encounter with the local plonk,
And les sangliers came out to give him a thrill,
And to tell him  that this is not yet the Forêt de Cavillargues you can’t run through it as if you were a ground-level mistral with your feet like bound clumps of asparagus and your eyes on the Perseid meteor showers all roads lead to Rome except ours

^^EOP^^

On occasion, when the mood takes him
as it so often does, he will put down 
his papers, get up from his kindly old chair,
and leave for a while the sweeping beam 
to sow its charitable seed — that seed which,
when falling on the ground 
of a helmsman’s fertile consciousness,
ought germinate in it a cautious vigilance. 
He descends then, the long corkscrew of
the stairs and opens at their base the metal door 
so that he may take a closer look at what might
be beyond his tower’s environs. There he always 
finds the churning world, she laps at him from
every side with no respite, and spatters him 
with spray. Thanks to a certain modulation,
a tone which he adopted long ago 
when he still wore shorts and buckled shoes,
there is no danger here from neither shark 
nor crocodile, not in this sea stuffed as it is
like a dressing-up box with whimsy. 
Indeed, were there such creatures hidden
neath the sliver-thin surface of the waves, 
they’d have no teeth but only soft gray gums
and goofy grins, and they’d be giggling 
knowingly at the whole thing. And so it is
that as he gazes out, he cannot help 
but wonder what it is he might be warning of
with the light that turns atop his tower, 
because that tower is itself in fact the only
hazard anywhere on which a ship might rip her 
wooden skin and haemorrhage her lumpy
blood that’s made of all the gasping sailormen.


^^EOP^^




National Portrait Gallery



I have a need to see the painting when no one is looking. The god-
thought if there was such a thing, inconsolable, of Saturday
reaching for Sunday to ride out onto the Indian Ocean like
an argument of starched waves in their coffin-white lace I might
finger as I pass. There are hands in the paintings: raised, pointing,
folded, reaching, reaching    ...    there’s a leporello book intended for
my ex-lover’s breathing, weather balloons like colored severed heads
laughing their way up the sky’s fever-continuing threshold of three
miles withholding this formula for desire. Beside the one body and its
skying figures of speech, night’s impressionist-flecked mask captured
by singing: try to inhale. And again, please. Cough up cadmium twice,
suddenly. Carry the caraway seed page away, fill your sea purse head
with the tiny unborn. Painting, like digging up your garden in the dark,
isn’t spring. Isn’t daddy root, mama bud pullulating for some creation.
Isn’t spring. Isn’t season’s salt measure for your worth. Whoever
told you that lied about what’s to be framed next.


^^EOP^^

In Exodus
Moses is hidden 
in a cleft, behind God’s hand,
begging, 
and he sees — rushing past him — 
God’s back, diminishing. 
Moses stops begging.
God’s back is black fog. 
I know. He, we guess,
means to do it,
to do all of this. 
The brute center part
of an iridescent moth. 
The carnation
against the man.


^^EOP^^

The aftermath always happening like an airplane falling, or a man
midair falling from a horse, and an arrow, a gun, many guns
pointing away, at us, our all bull’s-eye-on-the-mark. This is what he
sees when he sees. Maybe Wrong or not, the appropriation, the film
clip, chase, pressed lips over lips, photo moment on the minute-drawn
breath in, the over, the under, bodies in black and white cut to pose,
the way a kiss can pose, dispose of everything around it for another,
dispose of thinking. It’s like waving good-bye. Mouth to mouth seeing
as saying. Inside. Resuscitation back to the brain saying yes as the mouth
makes an O. Circles for the digital age, colored dots for faces already
made for erasing. Hurry, come, he, 6’7”, sees fifteen minutes from the
Mexican border, cremates his old paintings up close. But the ashes were
kept in a book urn, not so afloat in the ocean with my parents, Above,
On, and Under (with Mermaid)

^^EOP^^

She says she had a baby
but I don’t believe her
Let me tell you the feeling
of relief when I started to believe her
baby wasn’t real
“What’s she getting out of it?”
I surrender without a fight
Ok, you can have your baby
 
Sometimes all you can do is reify your worst fears
What if I can’t have healthy relationships
Ever
With anything
Even your cat
 
Undressing in the open window
Like being in public
Is it not knowing or not caring?
 
I’m offended reading memoir advertised as essay
I give a mini-lecture on insecure attachment
from the living room
As if to ask
Is that what you wanted?
Who you think I am
Improving my senses
You see I was siding with the baby


^^EOP^^

Choice by extinction sounded ominous
to Yanks like us — we all remembered the war.
But that was just Herr Schreiff’s personal English.
We were on the same side now, building the thing,
the thing,
the VTOL fighter. What’s today? There must be
some big dates coming up, historic dates.
He’d say, Cold hands frog heart, and it became a gag
among the engineers: Soft hands wombat heart,
Sweaty hands lawnmower heart. The docs in this place
want to put in a pacemaker; I said no,
I’m not in this for the long run. 
On his birthday Schreiff brought in three bottles of schnapps
and we sat around half pickled trying to do the
do the
debug the navigation. What a fright?
Patty —     Debbie —    Susan called, wanted to know
could she bring me anything. I told her, My old brain.
I used to be smart, you know? I’m assuming someone
is in charge of the dates, the historic dates. 
Schreiff had worked for Heinkel during the war,
on those last-ditch plywood jet fighters
that kept disintegrating in midair
and killing their precious test pilots.
Ah Christ, look at this mess! Where’s the thing,
the thing
to call the nurse? Someone needs to deal
with those important dates, it’s all so disorganized.


^^EOP^^




An erasure of Lydia Huntley Sigourney’s “On Seeing the Deaf, Dumb, and Blind Girl, Sitting for Her Portrait”



Guide, passion, catch what
Hath no speech. Unknown
Joys, power, and meditation’s
Unfolding sky. Feeling draws
Heart and wildering language
Still without speech to
Mind. Philosophy fails to
Sway this future child.


^^EOP^^

Sybaritic afterlife I don’t crave you.
I like daylight. I like crowds.
I don’t think it will be charming underground.
The silence will be sudden then last. 
What’s chic will shrink.
There won’t be any pretty, pity.
Will never peaches there, or air.
We’ll be so squashed and sour there. 
I don’t want a cold place.
Don’t want a threadbare
clamp and consequence all old.
Our loneliness will be prolonged then go too far. 
Oh fuck it’s true.
Then nothing left of you.


^^EOP^^

When a hurricane sends
Winds far enough north
To put our power out,
We only think of winning
The war bodies wage
To prove the border
Between them isn’t real.
An act of God, so sweet.
No TV. No novel. No
Recreation but one
Another, and neither of us
Willing to kill. I don’t care
That I don’t love my lover.
Knowing where to stroke
In little light, knowing what
Will happen to me and how
Soon, these rank higher
Than a clear view
Of the face I’d otherwise
Flay had I some training
In combat, a blade, a few
Matches. Candles are
Romantic because
We understand shadows.
We recognize the shape
Of what once made us
Come, so we come
Thinking of approach
In ways that forgo
Substance. I’m breathing —
Heaving now —
In my own skin, and I
Know it. Romance is
An act. The perimeter
Stays intact. We make out
So little that I can’t help
But imagine my safety.
I get to tell the truth
About what kind
Of a person lives and who
Dies. Barefoot survivors.
Damned heroes, each
Corpse lit on a pyre.
Patroclus died because
He could not see
What he really was inside
His lover’s armor.


^^EOP^^




After Hieronymus Bosch, “The Garden of Earthly Delights,” triptych right panel



But all dark notes are dismantled 
there from the middle ear 
downward. Voyaged mind, cauldron skin. 
Can you claim anything is yours? 
The burning salt hour 
throws its black broken-glass frame skyward. 
Left behind 
the mum orchestra, body parts in peril 
and animals dizzy for 
lust past all lost 
astronomy and wipeout, 
this naked edible overjoy, a kind 
of suicide in syllables, fifth 
panic, fourth stall’s birds-fermata, this 
half ocean’s susurrus is coming over us in the picture. 
Can you akin? Can you 
hear it, pinned to the unseasonable underearth, 
an option for music and water 
constantly changing shape, an answer 
in dissonance? To hear desire 
is to wake yourself inside, upturned, 
long enough to know 
tomorrow is exile. Chaos, body harp, 
and painted butt music, crowd-crawl, rose 
crowned to the chest, rabbit 
call and playing cards    ...    listen, 
I’m hell-humming in 
your direction, giddy, I am too taken 
to leave it alone, the will 
locked in as if it is already 
inside of me now: to fall. 
Let’s be clear, 
my darling, in the reeling 
crave, spilled gut-platter 
of enclosed bones, in 
the final flesh-clean drop, it sounds 
like fire rising 
with the cliff’s updraft.


^^EOP^^

War the war, the sorry edge
of us, because we stacked nice 
clean plates for days, we were
sure things when love broke 
across the headland, leaving
conch shells in ditches, 
five fish slapping on the steps
of the old town hall, it was winter, 
we were bonfires unattended,
our bodies litigating, agreeing 
and writing it all down, the law
of legs, the law of how we sleep, 
the law of shoulders killing me,
and now we fold clothes without 
thinking my clothes your clothes
and war the war o happy war 
what love we are so badly bitten
in this long-term necessary chapel 
with all attendant relics, citronella
candle, junior hacksaw, 
a box of miscellaneous wires,
our headland way-way underwater, 
no one else beside us
but ourselves beside ourselves.


^^EOP^^




                               Where are the days of Tobias,
when one of you, veiling his radiance, stood at the front door,
slightly disguised for the journey, no longer appalling.
— Rainer Maria Rilke, tr. by Stephen Mitchell



The fresco cracks cooperatively over time. Not to give a secret away
but gradually to break off keeping it. In the sky you make birds
like this, one wing longer than the other, an asymmetrical v
wedged against wind, one stroke longer than another,
never the bodies turned the same direction, each finding
its own angle, and one, in the distance,
a dot. These are the Deadly Birds of the Soul
Rilke was forced to call terrifying.
Migratory, weighing no more than a pencil.
Because every flying thing is passionate, and every flight
a posture torn from stone.
There was a time it was a theme
parents would pay an artist to realize — the face of a beloved son,
a Luca or Piero, painted onto the shoulders of Tobias,
painted into the company of Raphael. You tell yourselves
and your quiet house
no harm will come to the boy
as he goes out. A guardian, though, is not a guard. To keep safe
is subtly different from confining. Radiance can strategically
direct itself to seem like us, ready, as it were, to walk.
As a mirror goes through the appearance of requiring
subsistence, goes through the motions of a meal
whose food appears to be food.
Radiance, we know, is never quite as warm as light.
Who has not tasted the silver in sea mist?
Whosever they are, angels are the first to surface there.
You know a guardian by the silver of a river-crossing,
of a father’s filmy eyes, in gall, heart, fire,
and mostly smoke. In smoke and mostly mirror.
As, wedged between forward and backward being,
rehashing and planning ahead, presence will be specked again
with being erased, a reusable writing surface
calling down to the life without rest, the self-propelled
surveillances of sharks.


^^EOP^^

It was winter. The opposite of burning,
which is also burning.
My banner displayed clock parts,
a cup of wine, a worm eating its opposite head.
My motto was Try to Be Responsible,
but every new moon was a sacrificial moon.
Thirteen paving slabs were flipped into the river. 
The extra light of spring threw our business
into relief. My banner displayed a sunburst,
a bloodied hand dropping a knife, and
in the other hand an avocado withholding
its stone. War would soon come but not
for us, and this became our motto, Not for Us.
Then a crime in our community led to anger.
Gossip gathered the truth into a ball;
paperwork was spoiled; a man was removed
from the yellow light of the barn.
We heard his sobs coming from the orchard,
and these were a source of comfort. 
Summer roused lanterns of dust under doorways,
though a vinegar taste kept the air difficult.
Antifa angels bathed their eyes in milk,
as horses refused riders. The timid among us
signed petitions swearing that when the time came
we would know it by the rocks in our hands.
I made a banner for the protests to come
depicting the planting of milk teeth,
the burning of a noose, a stadium left empty. 
Autumn was just my luck. I could not stomach
the broth I boiled, and slept badly.
Arguments I won in my head lost direction
when formed out loud. The riots continued
but quietly now, indoors.
It was a time for manifestos, though the wrongs
were too many for anything less than a lake.
Friends kept the counsel of friends.
In the yellow light of the barn we tried to write
sentences each other would like, or not desire
to alter. Together we designed a quilt depicting
the wolf taking scent, water moving quickly,
the sign of the errant cloud and alphabet,
a baby resisting sleep, a worm eating
its opposite head, only this time surrounded
by snow, which hasn’t stopped falling since
Thursday, the name we gave to our child.


^^EOP^^

i 
Waves smack the body,
Nayeli, seven, drowning.
Spring: crossing season.    ii 
Summer indicates
the migration will be “safe.”
Yej Susen, three, sprints.    iii 
Inda Jani, one,
knows to crawl under the fence — 
she was trained all fall.    iv 
At four ai-em, Yao,
twelve, is sewn inside car seat;
winter will protect.    v 
Itzel, five, plays dead.
Border patrol agents see
her body — they leave.


^^EOP^^

To map the consequences of regardless, of underestimate,
   Of feverish faith, of the mechanical modernism of your false terrain. As if
Port Sulphur remained nominal, its slick globules merely figurative
      Between territories of wait and wetlands of trust.
 
To etch the shallow-water horizon— a techno-utopian tribute
         To shrimp estuaries, bird rookeries, oyster bays,
To tube worms & sea turtles. To watercolor these pelican grasses,
            Oxidized, unapologetic executive marshes, roseated spoonbills.
 
For you who longed to smear concentric circles,
            To have trusted you with longitude and latitude,
To blur this sargassum border between mourning,
               Fighting, and willful denying of objects and subjects. As if
 
Generations of fishermen, scaling orders of magnitude,
                  Navigated oily streaks of miles in a legend of inches,
Skeletal, ghostly swarms of now-opaque, milky jellyfish. As if
                     to bury the blowout, rescind the rig. To fortify, to intone.
 
If naming were not violence, to witness an active verb:                      Top kill, junk shot, top hat, dance dance revolution.
These wayward scripts a frontier province palimpsest.
                        Offshore yet another beacon, another account. Explosive violet iridescent.
 


^^EOP^^

At sunrise the deer eat
pieces of the quiet, they eat spaces
between the quiet
    & the sounds—;
         & the numbers on the calendar
lie flat in their boxes,
      they leak through tiny holes
             in the minutes,
            evenly so, so evenly,
 an active sense, before
         the sense was made…
 
There, now, opposite to set down,
            the agreed-upon, the shape
                 of the obvious
        drawn by an earlier
           enchantment before the new
                        anxiety set in:
         the workers are safe;
 the terror stilled for an hour;
a lover’s outline, dreamed or imagined,
       before you read the one-page book
     again, what was that book,
 it had no copyright—
 
& what was before?
         a life, the dazzler, the dark,
             the singing dust, it turned
when you turned, it orpheus-knew
what you forgot when you took the bowl
        of burning time across the room—
      & if the previous is closer
   to you now, should you
look, doesn’t matter if you do,
    you carry the some of it
with it, out into it—
 
                                                for LG 
 


^^EOP^^

It was Adolphe Sax, remember,
not Saxo Grammaticus, who gets the ovation.
And by the time he had brought all the components
together–the serpentine shape, the single reed,
the fit of the fingers,
the upward tilt of the golden bell–
it was already 1842, and one gets the feeling
that it was also very late at night.
 
There is something nocturnal about the sound,
something literally horny,
as some may have noticed on that historic date
when the first odd notes wobbled out of his studio
into the small, darkened town,
 
summoning the insomniacs (who were up
waiting for the invention of jazz) to their windows,
but leaving the sleepers undisturbed,
evening deepening and warming the waters of their dreams.
 
For this is not the valved instrument of waking,
more the smoky voice of longing and loss,
the porpoise cry of the subconscious.
No one would ever think of blowing reveille
on a tenor without irony.
The men would only lie in their metal bunks,
fingers twined behind their heads,
afloat on pools of memory and desire.
 
And when the time has come to rouse the dead,
you will not see Gabriel clipping an alto
around his numinous neck.
 
An angel playing the world’s last song
on a glistening saxophone might be enough
to lift them back into the light of earth,
but really no further.
 
Once resurrected, they would only lie down
in the long cemetery grass
or lean alone against a lugubrious yew
and let the music do the ascending–
curling snakes charmed from their baskets–
while they wait for the shrill trumpet solo,
that will blow them all to kingdom come.
 


^^EOP^^




The soul descends once more in bitter love…
                                                                          —Richard Wilbur
 



The eyes
open to the cries
of police.
 
Skirting sleep,
the soul
industrial
 
as laundry—
realities
like bad checks,
 
burning
like new sex.
Dinner
 
is the better half
of someone’s
lunch. Someone’s
 
playing
a guessing
game:
 
Psychosis
or Handsfree.
Local fame.
 
Praying
to a calf,
or debt ceiling,
 
keeps
us grounded.                                                                                      
You can take
 
the kid
out the food court,
but child support 
won’t upgrade
from buy
to buy—
 
outbid,
I am my
financial aide.
 
Astounded,
we wake
and take.
 
Let every boy
Tolstoy
with disease
 
have a chance.
Liabilities,
let’s dance.
 
We’re clean—
or rather, not
unclean—
 
doxycycline
our balance
sheet.
 
Our spirits, neat.
 


^^EOP^^

a tiny blue metal race car grandma
gave to me when I was 32.  There’s
an obelisk now in Skeleton Canyon.
Maybe you’re too close to the speaker.
Tell the Arthur Lee of Love confrontation
story. The tender does not approve of our
vulgarity. Double vocal for airports,
weekends and holidays. Numb grids
that represent human inaction. An incidental
arrival? Why that landing? The speaker of
the poem seems baffled to be in his/her
time continuum. Blind Willie McTell, Blind
Willie Johnson, playing together on the street corner.
Turn down the harp and make it feel more
distant. The next few minutes could hardly
be identified as words. A few fireman later,
the benefit of a lifelong love was clear. A locus
Of abnormal sensation. Harder to keep an
indiscriminate man from slaughter. Off state
extemporaneous crushed weight. Consulting
the at-bats for ideas of speed. I will be home
when my shirt is too dirty to wear.


^^EOP^^

Born again on a Monday
under a broken zodiac.
 
My father the woodman, a surgeon among snags,
could read the living trail of blades rebounding
in the field, the mopped-matte passage through the dew.
 
He woke a brush pile with fire
throwing shadows on the child, I was
thrown over.
 
Father, it was a pleasure to meet you
on this luminous route between two lives.
 
In this impromptu pool reaped from rain
where mosquitos multiply.
 
Though survival, I’m told, is impersonal
and without teleological purpose.
Malaria is just trying to maximize its own fitness
 
as are the corporations who, for palm oil set
the peatlands ablaze and drained the water table.
 
 
Dense haze from the sea
     choked the light from day
 
           suffused our mountain
in a numinous red corona.
And as for the getting over
 
there will be no ascension,
no circumambulation,
there is only going through.
 
We must go through it.


^^EOP^^




St. Joseph’s Hospital, Tacoma WA, 1969-74.



A headache makes your mouth plunge, then it pulls away. The smell of diesel or the smell of rain. Now you are a thick suburb. Under the pressure of a credit card. Your body is a box of mirrors, a mercury mine. You have blossomed and spread, white mystery of spring. All your blood and treasure is spent. O rose, you are sick. The morning rain does not nourish you. Your mouth is caught in a rigid O. Where only deficit is at home. You stand beneath a white hospital, almost drunk. You cannot say why your sense is drenched: exhaustion or debt. What’s the difference again? A braid of eyes. Curtains the color of a dove’s wing. Ceramic lips framed against seismic shatter. “Soft zone.” Meanwhile your uncle is dying in San Francisco and you do not know it. You are standing in front of another hospital whose patients are strangers. You unwind a rope of carbon so that you can post pictures of it on the internet. How much damage does your life do and how can you refuse? O rose, you are sick. Only injury sustains you.


^^EOP^^

as the early morning light reflected off leaves against my window I called you to say I was moving back and I cried so deeply the way I cried for weeks after I moved losing my breath hovering between waking and sleep on the day I left I stood on your balcony facing the Pacific Ocean watching the sea stretch past a gauze of power lines into a green horizon this summer I began to awaken with my body covered in a cold sweat a whippoorwill calling from beyond the ramshackle fence kept me calm through the darkness and earlier this spring my dear friend Charlie had mysteriously died and like so many secrets we shared he loved to tan turning a tone the color of a young Toni Tennille he loved to dance he loved to pray every night I lie and recite the Act of Contrition to settle my head I am sorry for my sins with all my heart in choosing to do wrong and failing to do good I have sinned against you whom I should love above all things and almost every night I’ve dreamt of Charlie reading by candlelight he is old his skin sags like the arms of a tulip tree how easy it is to listen to his voice I cradle my chin into his neck our beards brush together now as you answer the phone I hear the discordant steam of cargo ships murmur in the distance there is no reason to lie to you I have been dying since we met


^^EOP^^

It's all like a bad riddle, our widow friend
said at the time.  If a tree falls in the woods and kills your husband, what can you build from it?
That she was speaking quite literally
we did not know until the day months later
the bench arrived, filling that foyer space
in the house the neighbors pitched in to finish.
 
She'd done it, she said, for the sake of the boys,
and was never more sure of her purpose
than when they were off, playing in the woods
their father loved, somewhere out of earshot
and she would be struggling in with groceries.
For her, it was mostly a place to rest
such a weight, where other arms might have reached
 
to lift what they could.  Or like the time we knocked
at her door, and finding it just ajar,
cautiously entered the sunstruck hallway,
and saw her sitting there staring into space,
before she heard our steps and caught herself,
turning smiling toward us, a book left
lying open on the bench beside her.


^^EOP^^

What will I miss when I'm gone?
The squeak of the wheelbarrow's wheel,
Grace note that strikes with every slow
Revolution, and then the hushed, rusty
Answer in triplets from the invisible
Bird in the lackluster maples.
 
Branches, weeds, last autumn's leavings
Raked from the moss-eaten pads, beds,
Borders, still untrimmed hedges.
Also the silent pale blue bells
Of my half dozen borage, ringed,
Self-seeded from the woods.
 
Daylilies my mother liked to set
Roadside in June. Pale Greek anemones
She never traveled far enough
To find wild, as I did once or twice, but
Maybe I'll bring her some, if over there
Windflowers blow beside a cloudy sea.
 


^^EOP^^

       Most have been plowed up or paved over
but you can still find them, tracks cut
      deep into the earth by prairie schooners
crossing that great green ocean, pitching
      waves of pasture out where there's nothing
else to do but live. Concealing their detritus—
      a piece of sun-bleached buffalo skull, a button
from a cavalry soldier's coat—the ruts wind
      their way beneath leafy suburban streets, lie
buried under a Phillips 66 and the corner
      of a Pizza Hut where a couple sits slumped
in their booth. Yet here and there, like a fish
      head breaking the surface of the water, they
emerge in a school teacher's back yard or a
      farmer's field, evidence of wagons packed
with hardtack and hard money, thousands of
      draft animals tended by traders with blistered
feet, their journey both bleak and romantic.
      That's the kind of proof I like, a scar I can put
my hand to, history that will dust my fingers
      with a little bit of suffering, a little bit of bone.


^^EOP^^

Each night after reading three books to my two children—
we each picked one—to unwind them into dreamland,
I'd turn off the light and sit between their beds
in the wide junk-shop rocker I'd reupholstered blue,
still feeling the close-reading warmth of their bodies beside me,
and ask them to talk about the day—we did this, we did that, sometimes leading somewhere, sometimes
not, but always ending up at the happy ending of now. Now, in still darkness, listening to their breath slow and ease
into sleep's regular rhythm.
                                            Grown now, you might've guessed.
The past tense solid, unyielding, against the acidic drip
of recent years. But how it calmed us then, rewinding
the gentle loop, and in the trusting darkness, pressing play.


^^EOP^^

That field nag, old-penny
swayback. Low hawk, to
ducks in train to a quad of geese,
in case. Last night, the long
 
moon lay it seemed a tissue
of snow, but then dawn told
that wasn't so. Late morning, now,
the fire, the hearth, eggs
 
sitting for the mute plate
and fork, this pen making
a thing of them. Two more nights—
waterfowl safe and noisy
 
in the dusk, the low rails
running flank to the river
at midnight—find what they'll
make of that river, this moon.
 


^^EOP^^

The place we lived was only an idea,
Nothing to do with the failed cotton mill town
Where a record shop, some bars, and a pizzeria
Were all we ever cared to call our own.
 
From nightmares of a happy life with kids
We'd wake in boozy sweat to find the floor
Still cobbled with bottle caps and take-out lids,
Our twenties crumpled safely in a drawer,
 
Unspent like all the hours ahead that night
We met each other in the common room
And found somehow without the help of light
Our way across the river by the time
 
Dawn spilled down from the campus to the banks
We'd come to, single, sobered-up again,
To see the morning glories give their thanks
For things we had, and hardly noticed, then.
 


^^EOP^^

I read a Korean poem
with the line “Today you are the youngest
you will ever be.” Today I am the oldest
I have been. Today we drink
buckwheat tea. Today I have heat
in my apartment. Today I think
about the word chada in Korean.
It means cold. It means to be filled with. 
It means to kick. To wear. Today we’re worn.
Today you wear the cold. Your chilled skin.
My heart kicks on my skin. Someone said
winter has broken his windows. The heat inside
and the cold outside sent lightning across glass.
Today my heart wears you like curtains. Today
it fills with you. The window in my room
is full of leaves ready to fall. Chada, you say. It’s tea. 
We drink. It is cold outside.
 


^^EOP^^

Not by hammering the furious word,
Nor bread stamped in the streets,
Nor milk emptied in gutter,
Shall we gain the gates of the city.
 
But I am a prophet without eyes to see;
I do not know how we shall gain the gates
                  of the city.  August, 1943
 


^^EOP^^

my school teacher          asked me     if I wanted         
             to go to Japan      do something good for the Emperor
we were led to a harbor
a cargo ship    a train
           to a factory in Doyamaki             where
Food was so scarce    we pulled grass, roots anything we could eat
girls died of hunger    some went crazy
I ran away   was found   by a Japanese soldier 
             Kobayashi
              took me
              to a hut            Every evening
              soldiers
countless soldiers        on the wild mountainside
             Kobayashi
An unusually quiet day
             I found Japan had lost the war
I sailed to Korea
jumped from the crates   hit my stomach with fists
I failed            I named him Young-ju
                        left him at an orphanage
met him every Sunday
             one Sunday
I saw another boy in his clothes
Young-ju had died of pneumonia
             already buried
I thought of Kobayashi bringing me rice
in his drunken stupor                         I thought of the piece of steel
I took    at the factory
I found some of the steel            so attractive
I still believe      he is alive
somewhere                 I want to believe
that all was just a terrible       fate
But then,
              But then
 


^^EOP^^

                    
                    
                    There was a man. A Japanese soldier. One that did not believe in old superstitions. One that did not believe in sex before battle as charm against harm. He was an odd man. One that did not carry an amulet with pubic hair of a comfort woman. Or any piece of her. His comrades said, Be a man. The equation is, an odd man out is not man. There is no reason for logic in war. There is no reason. There was a man. His comrades said, Come raid, come pillage. Pushed him into the station. Their eyes on the holes in the wall. Watched as he came. Became. What is the equation here. There is a no equation. There was a man. One who said weeping, I am not a man, I am not a man.


^^EOP^^

Now you are strong
And we are but grapes aching with ripeness.
Crush us!
Squeeze from us all the brave life
Contained in these full skins.
But ours is a subtle strength
Potent with centuries of yearning,
Of being kegged and shut away
In dark forgotten places.
 
We shall endure
To steal your senses
In that lonely twilight
Of your winter’s grief.


^^EOP^^

We are spendthrifts with words,
We squander them,
Toss them like pennies in the air–
Arrogant words,
Angry words,
Cruel words,
Comradely words,
Shy words tiptoeing from mouth to ear.
 
But the slowly wrought words of love
and the thunderous words of heartbreak–
Those we hoard.
 


^^EOP^^

    Upon reading PM newspaper’s account of Mr. Roosevelt’s statement on the recent race clashes: “I share your feeling that the recent outbreaks of violence in widely spread parts of the country endanger our national unity and comfort our enemies. I am sure that every true American regrets this.” 
What’d you get, black boy,
When they knocked you down in the
   gutter,
 And they kicked your teeth out,
And they broke your skull with clubs
And they bashed your stomach in?
What’d you get when the police shot
  you in the back,
And they chained you to the beds
While they wiped the blood off?
What’d you get when you cried out to
  the Top Man?
When you called on the man next to
  God, so you thought,
And asked him to speak out to save
  you?
What’d the Top Man say, black boy?
“Mr. Roosevelt regrets. . . . . . .”
 


^^EOP^^


Let America be America again.
Let it be the dream it used to be.
Let it be the pioneer on the plain
Seeking a home where he himself is free.
 
(America never was America to me.)
 
Let America be the dream the dreamers dreamed—
Let it be that great strong land of love
Where never kings connive nor tyrants scheme
That any man be crushed by one above.
 
(It never was America to me.)
 
O, let my land be a land where Liberty
Is crowned with no false patriotic wreath,
But opportunity is real, and life is free,
Equality is in the air we breathe.
 
(There's never been equality for me,
Nor freedom in this "homeland of the free.")
  Say, who are you that mumbles in the dark?
And who are you that draws your veil across the stars?

^^EOP^^

The calm, 
Cool face of the river
Asked me for a kiss. 


^^EOP^^

He sees through stone
he has the secret eyes
this old black one
who under prison skies
sits pressed by the sun
against the western wall
his pipe between purple gums
 
the years fall
like overripe plums
bursting red flesh
on the dark earth
 
his time is not my time
but I have known him
in a time gone
 
he led me trembling cold
into the dark forest
taught me the secret rites
to make it with a woman
to be true to my brothers
to make my spear drink
the blood of my enemies
 
now black cats circle him
flash white teeth
snarl at the air
mashing green grass beneath
shining muscles
ears peeling his words
he smiles
he knows
the hunt    the enemy
he has the secret eyes
he sees through stone


^^EOP^^

                    
                    
                    She is girl. She is gravel. She is grabbed. She is grabbed like handfuls of gravel. Gravel grated by water. Her village is full of gravel fields. It is 1950. She is girl. She is grabbed. She is not my grandmother, though my grandmother is girl. My grandmother’s father closes the gates. Against American soldiers, though they jump over stone walls. To a girl who is not my grandmother. The girl is gravel grabbed. Her language is gravel because it means nothing. Hands full of girl. Fields full of gravel. Korea is gravel and graves. Girl is girl and she will never be a grandmother. She will be girl, girl is gravel and history will skip her like stone over water. Oh girl, oh glory. Girl.
 
                

^^EOP^^

 Exchange in greed the ungraceful signs. Thrust
The thick notes between green apple breasts.
Then the shadow of the devil descends,
The violent space cries and angel eyes,
Large and dark, retreat in innocence and in ice.
(Run sister run–the Bugga man comes!)
 
The violent space cries silently,
Like you cried wide years ago
In another space, speckled by the sun
And the leaves of a green plum tree,
And you were stung
By a red wasp and we flew home.
(Run sister run–the Bugga man comes!)
 
Well, hell, lil sis, wasps still sting.
You are all of seventeen and as alone now
In your pain as you were with the sting
On your brow.
Well, shit, lil sis, here we are:
You are I and this poem.
And what should I do? should I squat
In the dust and make strange markings on the ground?
Shall I chant a spell to drive the demon away?
(Run sister run–the Bugga man comes!)
 
In the beginning you were the Virgin Mary,
And you are the Virgin Mary now.
But somewhere between Nazareth and Bethlehem
You lost your name in the nameless void. “O Mary don’t you weep don’t you moan” 
O Mary shake your butt to the violent juke,
Absorb the demon puke and watch the white eyes pop,
(Run sister run–the Bugga man comes!)
 
And what do I do. I boil my tears in a twisted spoon
And dance like an angel on the point of a needle.
I sit counting syllables like Midas gold.
I am not bold. I cannot yet take hold of the demon
And lift his weight from you black belly,
So I grab the air and sing my song.
(But the air cannot stand my singing long.)


^^EOP^^

The summer everyone left for the moon
even those yet to be born. And the dead
who can’t vacation here but met us all there
by the veil between worlds. The number one song
in America was “In the Year 2525”
because who has ever lived in the present
when there’s so much of the future
to continue without us.
How the best lover won’t need to forgive you
and surely take everything off your hands
without having to ask, without knowing
your name, no matter the number of times
you married or didn’t, your favorite midnight movie,
the cigarettes you couldn’t give up,
wanting to kiss other people you shouldn’t
and now to forever be kissed by the Earth.
In the Earth. With the Earth.
When we all briefly left it
to look back on each other from above,
shocked by how bright even our pain is
running wildly beside us like an underground river.
And whatever language is good for,
a sign, a message left up there that reads: here men from the planet earth first set foot upon the moon july 1969, a.d. we came in peace for all mankind.
Then returned to continue the war.


^^EOP^^

Something so light
almost nothing  Not a list of violences nor reports from beauty 
One person looks up
& then another after
another looking
up in the same direction 
Who took this picture of Fight ghost town
this is Palestine

^^EOP^^

1 
Where am I from? 
In black basilicas
dragged incessantly
down a cross
is a man
who here resembles
a dress snatched from a hanger,
there: thick clouds of muscles —  an overcast body — 
embodied weather
of one hardly-known country. 
(A country where I am from?) 
Dragging him,
they stick their hands under his armpits.
How cozy their hands are in such a warm place! 
Through a cut in his chest
Eve watches
with her one bloody eye. 
Of a cut in the chest — a red eyelash! 
But
where am I from?   2 
Yes, a man
resembles
a dress snatched from a hanger. 
Inside black alphabet
dragged incessantly down
each letter
is a man.   3 
To a telephone in a long hallway
as if to a well for water.
(Well, where am I from?) 
(Neither mama’s
nor papa’s,
my round face
takes after
a rotary phone.) 
A rotary phone is my gene pool.
My body rings as it runs
to put my head
on the strong shoulder of the receiver. 
Blood is talking! Blood connection is weak.
Inside the receiver I hear crackle
as if fire were calling.
Who is this? 
It’s me, fire receiver. 
But where am I from?   4 
Days of merciless snow behind the kitchen window — 
snow got deposited like fat under our skin. 
How large we’ve grown on those days!
So much time spent at the kitchen table
trying to decide where to put commas
in sentences about made-up lives, 
yet no one bothered to tell us
that words, uttered once,
crowd in the brain like in a hospital lobby. 
That time is supposed to heal
only because once
it was seen with a scalpel in its hands. 
You’ve made a mistake, you’d say mysteriously,
pointing at lines written by a child. Think 
of another word with the same root.
As if words can have roots. 
As if words didn’t come from darkness,
cat-in-the-bag words,
as if our human roots were already 
known to us. 
Here’s Grammar, here’s Orthography,
here’s a paper rag “bread, milk, butter.”
What roots? What morphology? What rules 
of subjugation? How is it even possible 
to make a mistake? Here’s Physics, Chemistry, Geometry with its atlas, now, 
where are Vaclav’s letters, 
1946? 
What to do about the etymology of us? Our etymology? 
1946 crowds my hospital lobby. 
The face of a rotary phone,
the face of a clock,
the face of a radio on the wall — 
these are my
round-faced
progenitors.
But Vaclav’s face —  
where? 
(Again a man
resembles
a dress snatched from a hanger.) 
And where are the letters? One
per week, in his best Sunday
handwriting? 
Inside the receiver — fire.
(How cozy are my ears in such a warm place!)
But where am I from?   5 
A postwar city, barracks —  the joy of a first apartment — 
a coat, a jacket, a leather purse
fat with pills, but where are
the where-letters
from the where-face? 
Evacuated face,
de-evacuated face,
sick not sick, stuck through face,
vacuum face,
lab rat face. 
This country was tested on Vaclav’s face.
Now we can live in peace. 
So,
where am I from? 
A postwar city, barracks —  the joy of a deactivated face,
vacated face. 
A face snatched from a hanger.
Absence as an inner organ.   6 
In a village known for a large puddle
where all children fall between the two categories 
of those who hurt the living things
and those who hurt the nonliving things, 
in a village known
for being unknown
(where am I from?),
a graveyard around an old church,
the frightening alphabet
around the village,
an alphabet on gravestones,
marble letters under the moth-eaten snow. 
Under the moth-eaten snow
my motherland has good bones.   7 
My motherland rattles its bone-keys.
A bone is a key to my motherland.   8 
My motherland rattles its bone-keys.
Eve watches with her one red eyelash. 
Under the moth-eaten snow
my motherland has good bones. 
In my motherland people kneel before wells.
In my motherland people pray to the crosses of flying birds. 
A bone is a key to my people. 
Among my people, only the dead
have human faces. 
Still,
where am I from?   9 
Women saints in berets of golden threads,
who are they by your feet, seated like pets? 
An angel with wings of a peacock,
an angel with a human face.
But who are they by your feet, seated like pets? 
Now, if you wear such golden berets,
if you tame children and angels,
if your white boneless fingers leaf through a book
while I gnaw on this wooden verse, 
would you, holy women who wear golden berets,
put the hairs on my tongue  into a pigtail?   10 
A mouse-tail of a word for a word-loving rodent! 
Inside my alphabet
dragged incessantly down
each frightening letter
is a man. 
My frightening alphabet in his best Sunday handwriting. 
A letter addressed to lost letters,
phone-face, clock-face, radio-face — face as an inner organ. 
Where are Vaclav’s letters as an inner organ. 
On the borderlines of my motherland — wet laundry claps in the wind like gunfire. 
Have you heard of my motherland? 
My motherland is a raw yolk inside a Fabergé egg.
This yolk is what gives gold its color. 
This face is a fire-receiver.
This face is an inner organ.
A bone as a key to my people. 
Where am I from?   11 
The golden bones of my motherland are ringing!


^^EOP^^

Dress like you care!
Eat like you care!
Care like you care! 
You don’t think
apples just grow on trees,
do you?  • 
A fish taps a clam
against a bony knob
of coral
to crack its shell —  
which demonstrates intelligence
yes, but
is the fish
pleased with itself?  • 
Alone in your crib,
you form syllables. 
Are you happy when one
is like another? 
Add yourself
to yourself. 
Now you have someone.


^^EOP^^

Acts of love have
material effects. For a woman 
tending the sacred fire, these include
the risk of becoming 
an extinguisher
of flames essential 
to civic life. It is a burden
to put out 
what others hold as central
to faith in coherence. Acts of faith 
have material effects — a Vestal
Virgin touched by encounter 
must be buried alive,
a beautiful metaphor 
for shame itself, which squirms
even under all that dirt. Thus, the dead 
learn too late
that devotion should be 
unidirectional, a straight line
from here to suffocation. Love must not 
bleed at the edges, must not meet
others in the banal spaces 
of civic life. It is a burden
to personify. If Vesta’s hearth is the site 
of the sacred, its material effects
are destruction: burning, consumption, 
constant hunger
for more wood. Acts 
of destruction have
fantasmatic effects. For a body 
surviving encounter, these include
civic life, shame; 
the risk of being
a proxy — tender 
of the hearth belonging
to the public, by way 
of the goddess, who embodies a dream
of faith in coherence. Material effects 
extinguish themselves, eventually,
as when a woman 
touched in the correct way
undoes the burden 
of love and puts out, taking
the goddamn city in and under.


^^EOP^^

in the blackest recesses of Bistro Malatesta entre les heures du quatre à cinq
(forgoing his liaison with Odette for the third time in as many days) Prudhomme
observes a snailfish 
undulating round the hat stand’s spine, the stalagmites of candles (its sad, small
eyes, its cryptic lack of scales) 
wants to cleave to it 
wants to shake the dipsomaniac in the corner, hiss Ay caramba! Have you seen it? Here on the Rue Mouffetard — so far from deep-sea canyons, so far from home? 
considers eating it flavored with rosemary, flavored with dill 
whiskery thing 
sees it, loses it in Gauloise furls, catches it again, its curl/uncurl progression along a
velveteen banquette 
it stirs him — its decision in oblivion to be a thing of  light and so gelatinous 
thinks of turtles nibbled at by surgeonfish 
wonders if perhaps he’s lost his grip, and if  he has,
likes it


^^EOP^^

I’ve been thinking about the anatomy
of the egg, about the two interior membranes, 
the yolk held in place by the chalazae, gases
moving through the semipermeable shell. 
A curious phrase, the anatomy of the egg,
as if an egg were a body, which it is, 
as if the egg could be broken then mended,
which, depending on your faith, broken yes, 
but mended? Well. Best to start
again, with a new body, voided 
from a warmer one, brooded and turned.
Better to begin as if some small-handed 
animal hadn’t knocked you against a rock,
licked clean the rich yolk and left 
the albumen to dry in the sun — as if a hinged
jaw hadn’t swallowed you whole. 
What I wanted: a practice that reassured
that what was cracked could be mended 
or, at least, suspended so that it could not spread.
But now I wonder: better to be the egg or scaled 
mandible? The small hand or the flies, bottle black
and green, spilling their bile onto whatever’s left, 
sweeping the interior, drinking it clean?
I think, something might have grown there, though 
I know it was always meant to be eaten,
it was always meant to spoil.


^^EOP^^

I am not land or timber
nor are you
ocean or celestial body, 
but rather we are
the small animals
we have always been. 
The land and the sea
know each other
at the threshold 
where they meet,
as we know something
of one another, 
having shown,
at different times,
some bit of flesh, 
some feeling. 
We call the showing knowing instead of practice.
We seem to say, 
at different times, A feeling comes. 
What is the metaphor
for two animals
sharing the same space?  Marriage? 
We share a practice,
you and I,
a series of postures. 
Here is how I
become a tree
[                            ] 
and you
[                            ]
a body in space.


^^EOP^^

It is eighty degrees in December.
It is he, on one of his furloughs,
bringing himself — and hell — up to date. My Don Juan, the better climber
(as the mercury yo-yos), is in a newly roused state,
the world circumcised away
from an out-of-season bud
leaving at the scrupulous rim, as it unfurls, a darker appliqué,
like O-positive frozen solid at the sight of one’s resuscitated victim. 
This rosebush assiduously forks over
its works where most grandifloras falter,
thriving as far into the year as Capricorn. While named after a lover,
it decorates its own altar and wields an extraordinary thorn:
once I saw it catch a football
in those semiquaver quasi-teeth;
it is three-headed, like Cerberus, a hybrid drawing bloodlines from a root-ball
on hands all that’s impure lies beneath. Hands can train it, barbarous 
as it is, on an arbor, and I might like
to take its thick canes in harness,
first pouring cement as a base (so it would know I meant business).
Always poised to strike, they eventually undo their stays,
baying out like a window
of garnet, as at Chartres
(torture chamber in its basement, or so I hear). I wonder how
such a daemon rose got its start, what fairy tale explains its scent    ...     
And then I go out tonight
and find him, swiping right
on every pretty face in candlelight. It is almost Christmas. Stacks
of square plates. (It’s an open plan.) Racks of bottles. The whites and blacks,
clear glass, and stainless steel sieves
denote compliance with standards.
A wire basket of freckled pears is transparency; sterilized knives
give full disclosure; and as regards the stemware, due diligence dares 
a slip, especially on chanteuses like these
salting down from state-of-the-art speakers.
(Or is it sugar?) Does the chorizo flambé not deter him? Gold as all hell, Valkyries
stand tall with beer to the brim. Beakers in Siren form flush with Chianti, if not ambi-
valence. Recalling the steel meshes
belting Monterosso’s
cliffs against the vox Dei of the sea, the myth refleshes:
ordering, in the manner of heroes, an Andromeda on the rocks.


^^EOP^^

if i said baby you might think a certain thing but nah.
that’s only maybe what i mean, perhaps i’ll say ma 
& your mind says Cam’ron, women creeping up
but i’m a changed man, & that’s not game ma. 
it’s practice in high school & THOT isn’t out yet.
we’re classic Chicago & bustdowns bloom in our mouths. my Ma 
spits Too $hort & the line i catch the first time
is b*tch b*tch b*tch make me rich but Ma 
puts me on punishment when i whisper Ludacris
& tells me sex shouldn’t hurt. i say nothing & Ma 
lets it go until a few years later when i get becky
or brain or top or dome by a white girl & Ma 
tells me everything i’ve risked for this escapade.
i can’t fix my mouth to say                     but Ma 
what i got i didn’t ask for

^^EOP^^

He snapped his lighter shut, placed it beside the metronome
on his nightstand. We’d just made love and I was
sitting naked on the edge of his bed, watching the stars
appear. He told me my skin was chatoyant
in the window light, like wet fiddleback maple. I asked him
what chatoyant meant. He grinned and explained
growth distortion, how it could pattern the wood fibers
into flames of alternating tones. I told him
that was nice and he said he could take me to the workshop
for a look around. Show me what he was talking
about. I rolled my eyes. It sounded so boring. But then
he bit into my thigh and said he wanted to
fashion me into a beautiful cello. He drove with both hands
on the wheel and told me he thought of everyone
as instruments. He said his father was filled with knots
like a burl and only good for music boxes
but his mother was quilted beneath her surface, like rippled
river water. Then he just stared ahead at the road
and kept quiet the rest of the way. When we got inside
he felt along the wall and flipped a switch
so I could see the three white torsos, each with a headstock
and fretboard attached to the sternum. They were
displayed on hangers like guitars. I covered my mouth
with a shaking hand, backed away and ran
out to the parking lot. He stood at the door and watched me
squeal away in his pickup. The sky clouded over
as I drove to the police station, all the millions of stars
like birds’ eyes. Like the darkness was sawn
off the trunk of a black walnut tree, then sliced into a veneer.


^^EOP^^

i be but i don’t is. i been & i
am one who be on my own biz. i love
not a b____. but see know i been loved. i’m
one who been that & then not deserved much 
cuz i been on my own dirt. i don’t know
love. i been a lie but don’t be a lie
i be fly sometimes but don’t be a fly
sometimes i be addict-like but not high 
like an addict’s like. just scratching low stones
like an addict might. stop? not an option.
i be getting mine. been getting over.
been over this but be caught in a cycle. 
but you be what you be & it be good.
& i be moved & making new habits.


^^EOP^^




If I beg and pray you to set me free, then bind me more tightly still.
— Homer



I’m striving to be a better astronaut,
but consider where I’m coming from, 
the exosphere,
a desk where the bluest air 
thins to a lip. Impossible
to know the difference 
from where I sit and space.
I promise I still dream 
of coming back to you, settling
on your yellow for the kitchen. 
We won’t fight. Let it not manifest. 
Not over the crumpled bodies
of laundry. Let us not row
over the nail polish, its color, 
the spilled sun. Inspiration
is the deadliest radiation.
It never completely leaves the bones. 
You know. From here, 
there are no obstructions
but the radiant nothingness. An aurora 
borealis opens 
like a fish. This. To the pyramids, yes,
to a great wall. And there you are, 
moving from curtain to curtain. O, to fantasize
of having chosen
some design with you. 
But the moons over Jupiter. But
asteroids like gods
deadened by the weight of waiting. I remember 
you said pastel 
for the cabinet where the spice
rack lives. That I ought’ve picked you 
up flowers when I had a chance. Daisy, iris, sun.
Red roses. Ultraviolet,
the color of love
(what else but this startles the air open 
like an egg?).
I’m really trying 
to be better, to commit
to memory the old songs about the ground,
to better sense your latitudes, 
see the corona of your face.
Take your light 
as it arrives. Earth is heavenly
too. But know that time is precious
here. How wine waits years and years to peak. 
What is there to do: I’ve made love
to satellites in your name. 
I’m saying I can’t say
when I’ll return. Remember me, for here are 
dragons and the noble songs of sirens.
Stars that sway
elysian. Ships that will not moor, lovers 
who are filled with blood and nothing
more. Who could love you
like this? Who else will sew you in the stars? 
Who better knows your gravity and goes
otherwise, to catastrophe? 
I’ve schemed and promised
to bring you back a ring 
from Saturn. But a week passes, or doesn’t 
manage. Everything steers impossible
against the boundless curb of light. 
Believe I tried
for you. Against space. Time 
takes almost everything
away. To you. For you.
A toast to the incredible. I almost wish 
I’d never seen the sky
when always there was you. Sincerely,


^^EOP^^

Attending to verbal constructs
makes care long-term,
not acute, 
which is for the best
because, though flawed,
each one is salvageable 
or replaceable
unlike my flesh.
Words can be compared 
with moments,
houses, trees, wires,
wires, trees, houses. 
All stand
on their marks.
Still, 
there’s a lot of overlap.
I move my eyes
to make time. 
I take their measure
and create a duplicate.


^^EOP^^

i 
Dear A. — Nailing crockery to the walls
was not something I ever understood,
but Simonetta’s maiolica falls,
like this sideboard, painted wood,
under the enchantment of a freehand look — 
a curling script, a loose grape tendril,
the forms that hecatomb smoke took
purling to a Roman god’s nostril    ...     
Because geranium is crinkled
in the spillage from the wishing well,
now outdated and backfilled,
this whole place evinces the nature
of a souvenir plate. Another tell:
the mosquito flourish in its signature.   ii 
The rustic bicycle, like a pen
that spent its ink, wrote an invisible sentence
to the ramparts and back, now and again
rolling through the arches of an aqueduct
dowsing with its sixth sense
across the hillsides. Locals tucked
plastic water bottles under spouts
chiseled into lions’ pouts 
stationed at intervals, like shrines.
Their cars idled while they stooped,
and on Sundays even formed lines.
They trust this water more, Lorenzo whooped,
than what comes out of their taps?
The sources snake beneath the maps.   iii 
The little terrier Amore, they warned me,
had eaten the seat belts; so there I was,
my friend, fearing whiplash in the back seat
(no headrest either!), in all respects afloat — 
Simonetta on alert for signs of gallantry,
like the wives of those diminished Casanovas
who dream they’ve merely grown discreet.
And the dissertation she once wrote 
on courtesan-poetesses, fancying herself
of that ilk (“Like me!” — a phrase she’d strew
among her compliments) gathers dust on a shelf.
When I think of Boccherini’s metacarpals
interred beneath the soppressata marbles
of the duomo, I think: Casa del Diavolo. Those two.


^^EOP^^

there are more Ss in possession than i remembered /
my name hinges on the S / is serpentine / has sibilance /
is simple / six lettered / a symbol / different from its sign /
sound shapes how we think about objects / the mouth
shapes how sound spills out / how the speaker’s seen /
a sigmatism is the homosexual mystique / my parents
sought treatments / i was sent to a speech / pathologist /
sixth grade / a student / she gave me exercises / i was
schooled / practiced silence / syllabics / syntax / my voice
sap in the high branches / my voice a spoonful of sugared
semen / i licked silk when i spoke / i spilt milk when i sang /
when i sang sick men tore wings from city birds / so
i straightened my sound / into a masculine i / the S
is derived from the semitic letter shin / meaning
my swishiness is hebraic / is inherited / it’s semantic / no
matter what was sacrificed / the tongued isaac / a son
against the stone of my soft palate / still i slipped /
my hand inside my neighbor’s / waistband & pulled back
pincers / sisyphus with the sissiest lips / parseltongued
assassin / sassy & passing for the poisoned sea / now
when i say please / let me suck your cock / i sound
straight / as the still secondhand / on a dead watch.


^^EOP^^

He said he buried
his right eye in South Georgia —  
on a dare, he said,
when he was little, beneath 
one green ash of two
that mark the end of a road 
whose name he’s
by now forgotten: Lonesome 
something, maybe Dog
or Cricket. He said 
he couldn’t love me, not
really, not without 
his old right eye,
and anyway he’d left 
his tongue as a tip
slid under a mug 
at a small North Florida diner,
would collect it too 
along the way, seeing
as he’d asked the server 
to save it, and she had kindly
agreed. Three of his ribs 
were further gone — one in Wisconsin,
where he’d planted it like a tree 
though he believed even then
nothing would bloom on it. 
Another he pawned in Manitoba
for a silver bracelet, 
which he wore only
when he was very sad, 
and his last rib
he’d been keeping 
in a safe deposit box
in a credit union 
on the alien Oregon coast
where he’d visit sometimes, 
stopping often at vantages
to take in expanses of pines 
covered in moss
and something else, like brine, 
and the pines were tall,
tall and uncommunicating, 
as if they had been designed
only to listen. His ears 
he’d left with me,
I told them 
everything — words
I had invented for the color 
of new moons, city names
I had given to four slender 
ant colonies that had since
emerged on the lawn. 
I told the ears Come back to me,
but they were unable to 
relay these types of things,
and anyway there was nothing 
else to do. I took all
my littlest veins 
and pitched them
as a woven tightrope 
out of the kitchen window
and hooked, with 
a makeshift grapple, the cheek
of the visible moon, which 
carried me away, and I was sorry
to have wounded it like that 
and I was sorry to be carried
by what I had wounded.


^^EOP^^

For the time being
an ampersand is a boy
clutching his knees
to his chest as art. 
On high, the god of form
wears a face on each wrist.
Only a god can take and give
time, but the one in front of
the gun lasts forever

^^EOP^^

To love is to tell the story of the world.     There was
an ocean with a boat     mountains     a meadow     too painful to stare
at directly. Haven’t I been here before? Yes.     No:     not quite here. 
“It is not as if,” the philosopher writes, “an I exists
independently over here and then simply loses a you over there.”
In the mist, a man rigs the Suzelle, little red boat. Loved labored for months, learning to tie the right knot. The exact 
and only knot that will keep the vessel tethered. She rehearsed
for the worst possible thing. “The attachment to you,” it is written,
“is part of what composes who I am.” I know/knew
those hands, hers. I watched her dust the sourdough with flour 
at midnight a moon between her fingers.     Gone
went Loved. But the half-world of her in me
was me.     It was lit by the moon.


^^EOP^^

1 
No one knows where I’m going,
not even me. Although that owl
I heard outside last night might
lead me to the terrain and call out
the custodians so they can
surround and welcome me, or
do whatever they want to do. I won’t
speak, won’t say my name even if
they try to coerce me, or play
unearthly music, such as sailors
hear far out on the Atlantic, in fog
so thick they venture to climb it
to reach clear sky. Some do and speak
of large blue birds that glide there
silently as ghosts, but those men
return too damaged to speak much
or stay above ground very long.
The owl could tell more, if he wanted,
but he won’t. And not only that,
he’s decided he will never be seen.   2 
I’m happy to honor that, but I’d like
to know what kind of owl he is.
I mean, is he blue, or is he striped
so he can blend with the forest?
Is he tall and white, from the Arctic,
or a pygmy, from further south?
Is he long-eared or spectacled? I want
to hear again the noise he made,
was it a screech, or a staccato huhuhu
followed by a deep-drawn whoo,
or did it sound like wood being sawn?
I am ashamed I paid it no attention.
I did not know then he was a messenger,
albeit a taciturn one. How does he know
me, and why is he so interested? Once
a parrot took stock of me, learnt to speak
my name in exactly the tones I said it in,
mimicked it endlessly and so loudly
that I ran from my laughing friend’s house
with my shrill-voiced name hurling after me.   3 
Where does the owl go during the day?
How can he know I’ll still be here
when he surfaces? I do take trains — 
I go north sometimes, pulled by my past.
I fly to places. Will he know all this
and follow me everywhere? When can I
expect his sounds to morph into spoken
words that I understand and act on,
if I agree with him? But if I decide
to stay put, never leave the bedroom,
will he get fed up standing there
and row away through the night air,
hooting a farewell? I don’t think so,
no, this fellow is here for the duration
of my stay on this enormous ball
and could tell right now how long that
will be, and what messy adventures
are still ahead of me, but his trick is
to keep as schtum on such stuff as
the wooden owl on my bedside table.   4 
I’ve heard stories about owls, how they
appear from nowhere at the edge of things
to sit watching, usually staying silent,
but sometimes uttering a few words in
their night language we don’t understand.
That’s my fellow, although I don’t know him.
Should I leave the house and hold my
right arm out for him to land on and turn
his big eyes on me? As if he’d be so compliant.
Or should I try to forget him, pretend
he’s not there in the dark, like a tree
I hadn’t noticed growing? Oh, at least
I should stop mentioning him here, but what
else can I write about? Not the journey
I’m taking that I know nothing of, not yet,
and when I do I mightn’t feel like writing.
I think the solution might be to buy
a T-shirt with an owl printed on it,
a blue owl, on a yellow shirt, and write
about that small fellow to begin with.   5 
What I want to learn is this: do owls
ever venture inside, to stand on a corner-
table, cock their heads to one side,
and take in completely what’s going on?
There are mice here that may be welcome,
but I know my owl would be suspicious.
He’d assume I want him inside to see
what he looks like, to make friends with him,
so he’ll be kind to me. I could promise
to wear a blindfold and say nothing,
act like I don’t know he’s there, but I will
know and that’s enough. I think I hear
his thoughts and I’m sure he hears mine.
I feel his big eyes on me all the time.
Maybe I should start carrying the wooden
owl around with me, and practice owl noises.
When is he going to tell me what he has to?
I’m not asking for a map, but I’d like to know
where I’m headed, if not where I’ll end up.
And I’d like to know it as soon as I can.   6 
When I say I hear his thoughts, I hear some,
not the important ones. And here’s one
of mine — if he ventured inside this house
he’d see something that might intrigue him,
a hand-knitted toilet roll cover, in rings of
purple, red, and white. Like an unknown planet
hanging in the sky. I’d let him have it, take it
back to his nest, or his hollow tree trunk, or his
half-sunken boat. I know he’ll assume this
is another example of special pleading,
and I accept that. Would I do better to ignore
him, let him stay out there, like a pinecone
that remains unobserved? I saw my doctor
yesterday, he spoke of the deterioration,
and I felt the owl was hiding in a cupboard,
agreeing with every word. After that I went
to my sister’s grave and the owl flew back
to wherever he’s been ordered to lurk
while observing me. Maybe I should feel
privileged to have his full-time attention.   7 
This morning I captured a beetle climbing
the parsley. I put him in an empty matchbox,
wondering what the owl thought of this.
Would it impact what might be unfolding?
I doubted this. I slipped on some spidery jazz
that I knew would annoy the owl. He needed
to be in control. I ground coffee beans
and made espresso. The aroma wafted through
the house. I freed the beetle to explore
the table, and when it wandered off the edge
I let it. I’m sure it survived, but I’m not bothered,
just as I know the owl doesn’t care about me.
We are thrown together, all of us, by winds
that come here from far-off worlds. I sipped
my coffee, humming the tune spun through
the jazz, and I felt quite well for the first time
in weeks, even months. Was the owl watching — 
had he been in contact with the beetle?
And what was their collective verdict on me?
Did it add up to more negative evidence?   8 
OK, I’m blanking him. I watched a crow today,
really admired how he operated, looking
after the young ones, his partner, none of
this spying on others. I’ve decided I don’t like
owls, their self-absorption, or their nosiness
about people. I know which I’d rather be.
And I don’t have to deal with a crow stalking me.
The owl would laugh about these thoughts.
He’s been given the task of waiting to release,
when he can, exactly what I need to know
or what he can reveal. I admit he’s not easy
but, shit, he’s the dumb card I’ve been dealt
and I have to pretend I like him. Can I ask him
about the Oxford and Cambridge rowers,
or about the hairdressers the Louisianians use,
or the tiger cubs that Texans keep as pets?
The owl would make minced meat of them all.
I wish he would hoot another noise to me.
I might even acknowledge his importance,
given my situation, but I won’t reveal anything.  9 
I felt the presence of the owl last night.
He was in the room with me. Not literally — 
he appeared in a dream, where a blue van
struggled up an icy road before sliding back
in a horrible, wriggling way, to what felt
like an end. I’m not sure how it seemed so.
And I can’t say where the owl was in this
little film, except he was definitely there.
This morning I came down the stairs,
expecting some sign from him. I found
a few brown feathers on a white plate
on the kitchen table. OK, then, he must be
a brown owl, but why donate some feathers,
and what did these denote? I made coffee,
then put on a CD of Anouar Brahem’s oud
that seemed to suit the moment. And I
decided it was the time to poach two eggs
to serve on top of two slices of rye bread
while I primed the espresso machine again
and asked myself what the owl was saying.  10 
Those feathers were gone from the plate
when I went back for them this evening,
so I wondered if maybe I’d imagined them,
or if they’d fluttered up from the eggs
before I’d poached them. That doubt was
caused by the owl, I was sure — I’d made him
careless, and he was recovering his poise,
his control. And I was back in the place
where I knew nothing, where he liked me to be.
I opened the door and stood there, listening,
but no owl sound came. Then a bat just barely
avoided my head, and glided toward the moon.
I stood watching this leathery fellow, then
closed the door, and opened some wine.
How much did the owl control? Would I
be attacked by a rat tonight while I slept,
not savagely, but enough to terrify me?
Or would cockroaches swarm on my duvet,
clicking enough to wake me? The idea being
that these would render me so punch-drunk
I’d welcome whatever the owl had to say.   11 
I spent the morning drawing owl after owl
on bits of paper, and after I’d got somewhere
near a proper depiction, I found a black marker
and reproduced it on an A2 drawing page
which I Pritt Sticked onto the gable wall, then
I dug out my old black bow and four arrows
and unleashed these into the body of the owl.
I knew I was being provocative, maybe even
launching an act of war, but I could take no
more, and couldn’t see what I had to lose.
The owl clearly was unmoved by this, so I
repeated the desecration four times over
till the drawn owl looked machine-gunned,
whereupon I flung the bow down on the grass
and went in to pour a large glass of  Talisker
for the first time in months, if not years.
It still tasted good. I slipped on Kind of Blue,
which always chilled me, and lay on the sofa
with my shoes kicked off, and the curtains
wide open. I thought, let the owl do his worst.  12 
When the dark came, I lurked in the kitchen,
bow in hand, arrows in the quiver that hung
from my left shoulder, like the Robin Hood
I wanted to play in the school pantomime — 
I got Little John instead! I kept looking out at
the dark garden, wondering if I should be there,
waiting to fire arrows at any sound or movement.
Why did I want to kill the owl? He hadn’t given
me the news I dreaded, but he’d stayed silent.
That was more than I could bear. I poured a
glass of Malbec and put on a CD of Baltic jazz.
Did he think I could wait forever, as if I were
a rock? I sliced some cheddar and a heel of bread,
opened the back door and went out. The moon
turned its big eye onto me, and I saw it wobble.
The stars hummed along. Where am I going?
I shouted at all of them. There was no response.
Then far off, I heard a faint huhuhu followed by
a whoo. You cowardly bastard! I roared, and
sprayed the arrows all over the blackened world.


^^EOP^^

There were no road rails.
I remember no road rails and the death depth off the cliffs
we motored along.
I remember speed in a parched Chevy clunker that could not have sped,
and bench seats, and no buckles, and bare thighs peeling off faux leather
at every hairpin. Every elevated canyon mile was a feat
but a breath of less slickened air too, less cog and fume — 
a winding away from
the wavering, sea-leg steam off blinding sidewalks,
infinite sidewalks and other shoeless kids
kicking rusted palm leaves outside infinite apartment complexes. Away from
our corner
of the valley of concrete corners, of
no evidence of valley besides boulders stacked in the distance of every vista. 
The driver was a stranger, was my mother after my whole life had passed
with stranger after stranger,
was my mother after seven years, and me at seven years
with her driving that snuff-colored Nova from her blinding valley not a valley — 
through Laurel, Topanga, Malibu
canyons all the way to some fantastic, to her beloved
blue — eucalyptus
choking local growth the whole trek. And the cooling air as we  efforted west,
and the jolt of a castle, The Castle,
in a distant crook of a range that hid the slate of the ocean, 
made me want to stop moving
but not stop here. I remember hoping
to find hermit crabs the size of the mole on my right side chin.
And if I tethered them to a stick they’d line up by mass and trade shells, find homes
that fit. And there’d be one left without, one torn out. A book said
a scientist leaned into wet sand, watched a torn crab die
in the beak of a gull. I can’t remember if I saw that death or read it.  I remember 
watching a wrong castle tucked into a wrong mountain notch on the chin of the sky,
like the hermit mole on my chin
if my face were the sky. “It’s a beauty mark,”
my mother had said, “Don’t pick at it.” I eyed that smoking stranger at the wheel
and dug my nail in
as the Pacific swelled into view that first time.


^^EOP^^

1 
We hoped to see things as they are
by which we meant without us. 
We thought once we stripped away
smell, taste, color —  
anything improper —  
leaving only location
and number, 
the thing
would be naked 
on the teeter-totter
of an equation.    2 
Then Archimedes
told another one. 
If I had a long enough lever
and a fulcrum, 
I’d get a high
resolution image 
of objectified bodies
and hoist myself 
on my own petard.


^^EOP^^

I was one year old when my nanny went away
leaving no memory of a face that watched,
arms that held, hands that fed and cleaned me,
left no record of her voice or name. My father
died, leaving wisps of pipe smoke for a memory. 
My mother went away to write in London,
left me at her home place, Ballyrankin,
a sheltered farm in the Slaney river valley.
I listened to stories from a paralyzed aunt
sitting among sleepy dogs next to the fire. 
Statia cooked every day for the dining room,
churned butter, gave sugared bread to me and
her child Bernie, fed outside men in dirty boots
and greasy caps in her stone-flagged kitchen that
smelt of damp clothes, roasting meat, and cake. 
I fished for minnows in Shillelagh stream under ash trees
where filtered sunlight made pools of silver water.
On one side horses grazed and swished
their tails at flies, on the far side cows rubbed
their backs against low beech tree branches. 
My mother went away to hospital, left me with
English neighbors, the Smythe Vigours’
hairy legs banged on passage floorboards,
my bedroom filled with evening sun.
They warned against crying. I cried louder. 
They took my pearl pink rosary beads given
to me by a monk from a mountain monastery.
He told me Holy Mary answered children’s prayers.
A protestant child, I didn’t know the words, but I knew
she’d hear me if I could catch the sunlight on her beads.


^^EOP^^

what will be left after the last fidget
spinner’s spun its last spin 
after the billboards accrue their thick
layer of grit masking advertisements
for teeth paste & tanqueray gin 
after the highways are overtaken
by invasive forests 
after the ministers give up their gods
& the rabbis their congregations
for drink 
after new men rise to lead us sheep
toward our shearing, to make bed
sheets from our hair 
after the high towers have no airplanes
to warn away & instead blink purely
toward heaven like children
with one red eye 
after phone lines do nothing
but cut the sky into sheet music
& our phones are just expensive
bricks of metal & glass 
after our cloud of photographs collapses
& all memories retreat back
into their privatized skulls 
after the water taps gasp out their final
blessing
what then? 
when even the local militias run
out of ammunitions 
when the blast radii have been
chalked & the missiles do all they were
built to 
when us jews have given up our state
for that much older country of walking
& then that even older religion of dirt 
when all have succumbed to illness
inside the church of our gutted pharmacies 
when the seas eat their cities 
when the ground splits like a dress 
when the trash continent in the mid-atlantic
at last opens its mouth to spit 
what will be left after we’ve left 
i dare not consider it 
instead dance with me a moment
late in this last extinction 
that you are reading this
must be enough


^^EOP^^

1 
Father trellis of my voice (or noose) abruptly vanished —    2 
I wear this razory fishhook
of crucifix.
Look. 
How it helps me
keep my head
down, 
down with shame,
the glory
and shame 
see this frail weightless chain: 
there is another
like it.
Sometimes
my neck feels
like it’s
breaking —  
It hangs right here
near the heart’s
hidden room 
where a table is set for me
not
a dark bar.
No more
that pointless horror. 
Weightless frail
chain
massive iron
seaweed and
barnacle-bearded anchor —  
You may peek from your door toward dawn
and see me attempting to make it
to the end of the hallway 
to the restroom
bent double,
gasping
for air in small sips 
but I will be there, table set
for three,
the unseen
host, then me
there to meet my own 
glorified body 
who does resemble me
in a vague way,
but is not particularly radiant 
or splendid: he is ugly,
as though he had been crying all his life 
that can’t be my soul
people scream
when they first see it


^^EOP^^

Soul, don’t complain, says Senhal,
who means by “soul” a thing like “future,”
possesses without knowing it
not soul, but future,
is little present, Senhal, & less past
when this she shares,
not always willing all,
the pale pearl earth with you
& shelters in her heart
a stunted lemon tree, inviolate,
& shielded by a sour ring of fire,
the kind that keeps a Valkyrie asleep.
Always born too early,
Senhal lights these candles
not to read by, but to watch
the diamonds flower & die
within their hot, blue nuclei,
which seem to flicker
with secret intent
that fails, all told,
to comprehend her.
& arguably, this darkness is, for her, the best
of them, refusal of the soul
she never recognizes
as refusal of the future
which she is
instead of all her otherwises — 
& might she have been — 
conscience-calmed — perhaps — 
or else a bird
of the earthly paradise
in which one barely needs to eat
or else subsists on manna
or some other fragrant zero
denuded of the tang of death
& the numb green shade,
a starry zone,
orthogonal with luminous errata,
in which a lake of ultramarine
has been used with never parsimony
in all the places where blue is required
to smudge a Thule out
of sand & sea & air,
a seeming there
that seeming wants
to hold her in its arms,
in which one could be one
& yes the ripe quicksilver
that the artificer poured
into the throats of statues
to give them voice
had never brought the air alive
with hoarsest cries & muffled pleas
(lutes, lobsters, seas of milk, and ships of amber
did they cry?)
as if nor it nor any thing mercurial had ever learned
to savor love & poison in one mouth?


^^EOP^^

A sudden not-breeze fills the air.
Two men dressed in corduroy approach, one pulling a boat.
A boat of agony.
Heigh-ho. Greeting. Greeting.
Fleeting smile, both. The word smile left on the faces of the fourth wall. 
How to read that?
The optic nerve gets it up.
What has been done weighs the heigh.
The smarter of the men has a dollar hanging from a pocket.
Acquisitive or generous? 
Balance implies a man out of sight line removing his shoes.
Why a man? is the question.
The philosopher in the second row wants to punch the usher.
Such restraint stupefies the audience into paradoxical sleep.
They worry but their eyeballs still roll. 
And if the heavens help with a hole in the roof above the lights: drip, drip,
the two men look to the exit, shamed, unwilling to follow one or the other without a speech. Let us bury Caesar.
I hope we find some sand.

^^EOP^^

So déjame
contarte 
un cuento, una historia
es que  
lluvia    rain       agh       what’s the word                     tey tey
at?                       eltiw? Ateltiw? 
Last night, Atelti came after class. Siempre sabes when she’s here because you hear hail on the
windows, the flapping of the leaves, las hojas, ne iswat AND ne kwajkwawit, los árboles, trees 
I figure I guess it shouldn’t be a surprise that she visited
seeing how dark I was, un ichan of  negro, of  zájtik. 
And zájtik isn’t bad. Sometimes it brings rainbows, arco irises, kusamalut
Atelti told me something she heard in El Salvador, algo de mis abuelos y abuelas, both alive and dead 
              Ne muyut shipanu sempa pal ne kali pal ne takamet, siwatket,
              Ajkawat ne neshti ka ne ejekat tik ne weytepet, ne tiupan,
              Ne ilwikat, ken titajtani — tzalan ne ashal, ne apan, ne ujti 
              The fly enters every house of man, woman
              leaving ashes to wind for the volcano, church
              Sky, how do you ask — in between sand, river, road 
So what does it mean? Where’s the answer at the end? The moral? 
The hail rattling outside: clattaraka araka araka araka araka — cla ttaraka taraka taraka taraka taraka
taraka ka ka ka kuh kuh
and me without my raincoat. 
“Don’t be outside by the time I leave,” I said.
“Y qué,” she said as more hail hit the windows, a few pellets falling onto the carpet inside. 
And it continued.
And she added some rain a bit after. 
When it was time to leave
I stepped outside 
it still rained
and was offered an umbrella to the car 
which I refused.
Mi hermana, Atelti, was there to stay. So I thought, “Get   wet. 
If  you’re so desperate
Talk
Dígame” 
And she rained
                                                                                   And vapor seeped out from my buttons


^^EOP^^

Why is it eternity lasts a moment
a moment eternity? 
Are you quiet enough to hear horned owls
at dawn? 
I hear voices rustle in the leaves
after they are gone. 
New mice burst into life.   Small raccoons
bear tiny chains around their wrists.


^^EOP^^

Some days her main job seems to be
to welcome back the Red Admiral
as it lights on a leaf of the yellow
forsythia. It is her duty to stop & lean
over to take in how it folds & opens
its wings. Then, too, there is the common
Tiger Swallowtail, which seems to her
entirely uncommon in how it moves
about the boundaries of this clearing
we made so many years ago. If she leaves
the compost bucket unwashed to rescue
a single tattered wing from under the winter
jasmine or the blue flowers of the periwinkle
& then spends a whole afternoon at our round
oak table surrounded by field guides
& tea until she is sure—yes—that it belongs to
a Lorquin's Admiral, or that singular
mark is one of the great cat's eyes
of a Milbert's Tortoiseshell, then she is
simply practicing her true vocation
learning the story behind the blue beads
of the Mourning Cloak, the silver commas
of the Satyr Anglewing, the complex shades
of the Spring Azure, moving through this life
letting her sweet, light attention land
on one luminous thing after another.
 


^^EOP^^

His muddy rubber boots
stood in the farmhouse mud room
while he sat in the kitchen,
unshaven, dealing solitaire.
 
His wife (we called her Auntie)
rolled out dough in the kitchen
for a pie, put up preserves
and tidied, clearing her throat.
 
They listened to the TV
at six, he with his fingers
fumbling the hearing aids,
she watching the kitchen clock.
 
Old age went on like that,
a vegetable patch, a horse
some neighbor kept in the barn,
the miles of grass and fences.
 
After he died his boots
stood muddy in the mud room
as if he'd gone in socks,
softly out to the meadow.
 


^^EOP^^

I vowed I'd quit ciggies on the heel of the mother
Of all hangovers. The world at noon pulsed a first
 
Columbus Ohio spring day. I'd fallen in love
Of course, as recently as chem lab and held
 
The ghost of her smell
In my clothes. Or lips
 
If I'd been lucky. My blood thunk Thunk-thunked, the way a cut feels
 
As you bend to tie shoes. The way life
Tingles the first day it breaks loose
 
To crawl your skin. Dizzy,
I ran through milky sap and
 
Sycamore-leafed streets, mixing the smells
Of just-thawed earth with essence of girl
 
My blood steamed. I understood lost-at-sea as glamorous
Isolation, the way a hummingbird's movement through two
 
Eye blinks allows it to vanish and
Re-appear. My wings blurred hinges
 
Among worlds. Nothing held me. Nothing
Could catch me. I'd run this way forever.
 


^^EOP^^




For js



You were laughing no you weren't she was she was she wasn't
These aren't the right words 
The people are waiting on the platform and the decisions are being themselves as usual 
You could take this silver cord and wrap it around all of your ideas 
You could you could
What is the way to make meaning
You're less busy than the machine has time for  
I poured the world in for you 
All the sun on that block
Or at least I wanted to:
Everyone is leaving but this would be an arrival your torso is a drum people come through and then they die you see the obituary in passing as the man next to you folds the paper and all these people at all these parties that cannot be the answer but what 
Back above ground and it's the same sun different block same world different world  
Your friend is lying down with the thing he is carrying
Everybody is somebody's family you think you forget the sun keeps going still you keep going the world rearranges itself just so
False alarm you say and then you don't know what to say you wrap yourself in the future you wrap yourself in the past the woman gets in the taxi just in time 
Everybody is it's not an easy thing to understand
False alarm you say and then you don't know what to say the sun keeps  going.


^^EOP^^

Look up: blazing chrysanthemums in rose
shriek into bloom above the Tilt-a-Whirls,
hang for a blink, then die in smoky swirls.
They scream revolt at what the body knows:
all revels end. We clap and sigh. Then, no—
another rose! another peony! break,
flame, roar, as though by roaring they might make
the rides whirl in perpetuum. As though
we need not finally, wearily turn, to plow
back through the crush of bodies, the lank air,
to buses that inch us, sweating, across town.
As though we were not dropped in silence there
to trudge the last blocks home, the streetlamps low,
the crickets counting summer's seconds down.
 


^^EOP^^

when it pushes shadow from the trees
and presses it from their needles outside the Dye House
and the bus is dark inside     when it picks apart the lawn
and you are here
will you soften me?      for the sun
will you deflect it?
I am blinking in the atrium    the library
I don’t know if you have a room for me
or where on me you can lie down
 
but I want my anger easily exhausted
the way fact takes the rug from an argument
we both go on the floor
I do feel your shade
your wavy boughs   you dream
you are leaving me
I would become an ordinary person if you did
but you are awake   and I am ordinary anyway
and it pushes through me
 
 


^^EOP^^

Ya kut unta pishno ma* Ya kut unta pishno ma Ya kut unta pishno ma Ya kut unta pishno ma
 
So I moved to this place,
Iowa City, Ioway
Where green-headed mallards
walk the streets day and night,
and defecate on sidewalks.
Greasy meat bags in wetsuits,
disguise themselves as pets
and are free as birds.
Maybe Indians should have thought of that?
  Ya kut unta pishno ma Ya kut unta pishno ma Ya kut unta pishno ma Ya kut unta pishno ma
 
Maybe you would have
left us alone,
if we put on rubber bills,
and rubber feet,
Quacked instead of complained,
Swam instead of danced
waddled away when you did
what you did…
  Ya kut unta pishno ma Ya kut unta pishno ma Ya kut unta pishno ma Ya kut unta pishno ma
 
So I moved to the Place
The “Jewel of the Midwest”
Where ghosts of ourselves
Dance the sulphur trails.
 
Fumes emerge continuous
from the mouths of
Three-faced Deities who preach,
“We absolve joy through suffering.”
  Ya kut unta pishno ma Ya kut unta pishno ma Ya kut unta pishno ma Ya kut unta pishno ma
 
So I moved to this place where
in 1992, up washed Columbus again
like a pointy-chinned Son of Cannibals.
His spin doctors rewrite his successes
“After 500 years and 25 million dead,
One out of 100 American Indians commit suicide
One out of 10 American Indians are alcoholics
49 years is the average lifespan of American Indians.”
 
Each minute burns
the useful and useless alike
Sing Hallelujah
Praise the Lord
  Ya kut unta pishno ma Ya kut unta pishno ma Ya kut unta pishno ma Ya kut unta pishno ma
 
And when you foreigners
build your off-world colonies
and relocate in outer space
This is what we will do
We will dance,
We will dance,
We will dance
to a duck’s tune.
  Ya kut unta pishno ma Ya kut unta pishno ma Ya kut unta pishno ma Ya kut unta pishno ma


^^EOP^^

The eye’s desire for relief.
I’m the tiger lily bobbing in the heat.
And also the neighbor, shaved bald and
lifting weights on the balcony. Each petal
is the receipt of a shameful dream—
a thought we hadn’t wanted to incorporate
lolling from my parted mouth.
But you know it’s mistakes that make life happen.
A cardboard suitcase of beer for the traveler.
And if we get too close to the words
on this page they soften and warp
into an animal lace, some net
whose logic won’t reveal itself. I pull our eyes
back because I love you. But then you draw them
back further still because that sounds like an excuse.
The whiny version of Love Hurts loops and curls
like ribbon through a scissor, being pulled
across the blade. The money in this poem’s
easy, if you don’t mind having no thoughts and
sitting in one place, while your body changes shape.
 


^^EOP^^

Everyone wants to write about god
but no one wants to imagine their god
 
as the finger trembling inside a grenade
pin’s ring or the red vine of blood coughed into a child’s palm
 
while they cradle the head of a dying parent.
Few things are more dangerous than a man
 
who is capable of dividing himself into several men,
each of them with a unique river of desire
 
on their tongues. It is also magic to pray for a daughter
and find yourself with an endless march of boys
 
who all have the smile of a motherfucker who wronged you
and never apologized. No one wants to imagine their god
 
as the knuckles cracking on a father watching their son
picking a good switch from the tree and certainly
 
no one wants to imagine their god as the tree.
Enough with the foolishness of hope and how it bruises
 
the walls of a home where two people sit, stubbornly in love
with the idea of staying. If one must pray, I imagine
 
it is most worthwhile to pray towards endings.
The only difference between sunsets and funerals
 
is whether or not a town mistakes the howls
of a crying woman for madness.
 


^^EOP^^

I come from the nether regions
 
They serve me pomegranate seeds with morsels of flying fish
 
From time to time I wear a crown of blood streaked grass.
 
 
Mama beat me when I was a child for stealing honey from a honey pot
 
It swung from the rafters of the kitchen.
 
Why I stuffed my mouth with golden stuff, no one could tell.
 
 
King Midas wore a skin that killed him.
 
My nails are patterned ebony, Doxil will do that
 
They made a port under my collar bone with a plastic tube that runs into a blood vessel.
 
 
 
I set out with mama from Bombay harbor.
 
Our steamer was SS Jehangir, in honor of the World Conqueror —
 
They say he knelt on the battle field to stroke the Beloved’s shadow.
 
  The waves were dark in Bombay harbor, Gandhi wrote in his Autobiography
  Writing too is an experiment with truth.
 
No one knows my name in Arabic means port.
 
 
On board white people would not come near us
 
Were they scared our brown skin would sully them?
 
Mama tried to teach me English in a sing song voice.
 
 
So you can swim into your life she said.
 
Wee child, my language tutor muttered ruler in hand, ready to strike,
 
Just pronounce the words right:
 
  Pluck, pluck             Suck, suck
 
 
          Duck, duck
                                           
 
                               Stuck, stuck.
 
 
 
 
 
May 12 - July 4, 2018, NYC
 


^^EOP^^

I  Self-Portrait 
A house
with three stories.
In the basement, monsters.
The upper floors were empty.
No furniture, nothing.
I had a magic pebble
that I needed to hide.
But where?
Woke in a room
with the bed breathing.
Each day the same
scandal—this body.
These teeth and hands.
 
 
 
 
 
2  The Miniature Bed 
A miniature bed, and in it two tiny people
not sleeping, not able to sleep because
a small lie has flowered between them,
fragile as a new, white crocus.
The miniature bed holds them like a miniature boat
making its slow, true course to morning.
These tiny people, thoughts thrumming like mice,
are quiet as the lie blooms over them
in the night, fanning its moth petals,
becoming to them like a moon hovering
over their bed, a moon they might almost touch
with their miniature hands, if they weren't certain
that one wrong gesture might break
the spindles of their small world, if their hearts
were not drops of trembling quicksilver,
if they were brave, if they could see
that small is no smaller than big, that thimbles
are deep as oceans for any god, they might even
touch each other then, opening the dark,
like a match, the sun's flaring.          
3  Harvest
 
The fields are a book of uses.
Near the house
a combine takes the corn down
in long rows.
Dust rises up and replaces itself.
A quick net of starlings
drops to the furrows
and sunshine pours like polished grain
onto the feeding earth,
this country.
 
In the kitchen, milk streams
from the gallon
thin and fresh as luck.
We flourish.
All around us, things flourish.
Cows strain the fence with their abundance.
The herd makes a sound like swelling.
 
Out in the cut field
birds clean the fallen cobs
into sets of teeth.          
4  Sonnet for Lost Teeth
 
The combines were tearing off the field’s clothes.
It was August, haying season. My tooth
was loose, a snag in the clam of my mouth.
I worked it like a pearl. I'd been out of school
for sixty days. In the sweat of the barn
I watched him shoot the calf in the head.
He wiped the hide gently, like cleaning his glasses.
Overnight, I grew a beard so I wouldn't
have to get married. I let my feet go black
from burned grasses. It never gets easier
he said, kicking straw over the blood patch.
She went down so quiet it was almost
sad. Later, when my tooth fell out, I buried it
under my pillow and it grew into money.          
5  Talisman
 
Waiting for the school bus you find
the femur of a baby animal
on the ground. You carry
that femur in your pocket
the entire morning and touch it
secretly through the cloth.
When the teacher asks
a question you don't raise
your hand but quietly
wrap your fingers around
the thin shape, that bone
without a mother.          
6  On Waking
 
Half of everything is invisible.
A river drifts below the river.
A gesture lost in the body.
Wind moves through the open
windows of the trees.
 
Beyond the day, another day.
 
Dreamed I was drowning
my mother's silk laundry
in the river,
kneeling on the wet rocks.
Back and forth I drowned it
in the gray clouds...          
7  Eros
 
Each year fish run the green vein of the river.
The bones of skunks lie buried in the riverbank
upside down, waiting for rain.
 
From a fragment of a Greek statue
you can tell the posture of the whole god.
A skeleton has the same intelligence.
 
So that when a girl discovers it,
loosened by summer rain, surfaced
like a white instrument in the grass,
she suddenly knows how to take it up
and shake the strange rhythms from it like castanets.          
8  A Childhood
 
The horse had been beaten and flies
crawled excited on the beat marks.
He held still in the sunblazed pasture.
For a few minutes I stood at the wire fence.
He was aware of me, but he did not turn—
except his eye, slightly. He listened
through the many ears of the grasses.
A jay made a hole in the air with its cry.
Everywhere, invisible as heat, the gods
married each other and went to war.
The excitement of it vibrated in the flies.
As if we both were standing still
inside some greater, more violent motion.
 


^^EOP^^

                    
                    
                    When I came to this mountainside almost fifty years ago it never occurred to me that there would be an end to it.
         I went along never thinking about the time when I would have to quit. I imagined—I guess — all this would last forever, if I imagined it at all. Now I'm in my seventies and all I can think about is the time when my life will be here no more.
         For example, I love being in the woods felling and bucking hardwood trees, stacking and covering the blocks, then a year or two later, hauling them to the woodshed where I stack them again, and split them all winter long into the right size for the weather—then bring them into the house.
         Now this chore I love so much is seriously painful, and I can see, now, an end to it.
 
                

^^EOP^^

What is so pure as grief? A wreck
set sail just to be wrecked again.
To lose what’s lost–it’s all born lost
and we just fetch it for a little while,
a dandelion span, a quarter-note.
Each day an envelope gummed shut
with honey and mud. Foolish
to think you can build a house
from suffering. Even the hinges will be
bitter. There will be no books
in that house, only transfusions.
And all the lemon and cedar
in the world won't rid the walls
of that hospital smell.


^^EOP^^

There is a hole.
In the hole is everything
people will do
to each other.
 
The hole goes down and down.
It has many rooms
like graves and like graves
they are all connected.
 
Roots hang from the dirt
in craggy chandeliers.
It's not clear
where the hole stops
 
beginning and where
it starts to end.
It's warm and dark down there.
The passages multiply.
 
There are ballrooms.
There are dead ends.
The air smells of iron and
crushed flowers.
 
People will do anything.
They will cut the hands off children.
Children will do anything—
 
In the hole is everything.


^^EOP^^

I can feel myself slipping away, fading away, withdrawing
from this life, just as my father did. When the pain you're in
 
is so great you can’t think about or pay attention to anything
but your own pain, the rest of the world and all other life
 
don't matter.
 
I think about my friends with dementia, cancer, arthritis, and
how much more pain they are in than I am, but it does no good,
 
their pain is not mine, and therefore, no matter how magnanimous
I might want to be, their pain is not as important to me as my own.


^^EOP^^

It’s all the rage to sport waxed moustaches
and cure your own sausages
in some mildewy basement that formerly
would have hosted convulsively
awkward parties with spin the bottle and seven
minutes in the dark and terrifying closet
(aka heaven) but now boasts soppressata
strung on repurposed vintage drying racks
and fat clay pots of kombucha and curdling hops.
Personally I've never recovered from the sex-shaped
void left in those closets by all the groping
that should have occurred to me but didn't:
right under my nose kids my age were creeping
into adulthood one clammy, trembling palm
on one breast at a time. There was also
the horror of not being chosen in gym.
It is conceivable that learning intricately
how to butcher an entire hog
and render every morsel might give one
a feeling of mastery one lacked in childhood. It is the greatest immaturity to believe suffering entitles you to something someone wiser
and grayer than I once said.
But in those basements and carpools and
playgrounds as I assassinated one by one
clandestinely my torturers
abandoning their foul normal
bodies to compost the astonishing
tedium of the wending suburban lanes,
I was transubstantiating to supernal
fame and beauty and such eerie genius
that entire books were written about my
books. In fact it takes a long time to realize
your suffering is of very little consequence
to anyone but you. And by that time the future
is already happening and you're pickling okra
and starfruit and foraging for morels in urban forests
and suspending artisan mozzarella in little wet nets
and crafting small-batch, nitrite-free data
and maybe even thinking about having
children, which you swore in a million
billion years you would never do.
 


^^EOP^^

I want to write my lover a poem
but a very bad one. It'll include
a giant squid and some loose change
 
and cuff links and two blue ferries chugging
headfirst on the East River at twenty-six knots
and only at the last minute averting
 
disaster through quick thinking and sure reflexes. Also
a bow and arrow and glossy red apple
I perch in front of my heart. To be honest
 
my lover doesn't really like poetry,
which I guess is why I plan to write
such a bad one, so he can feel right
 
and strong and good in his beliefs.
Tonight when I go see my lover
he’ll hold me as I've never been held
 
except by him and then I'll have to give him
back. When you get new things
you treat them like glass for a while
 
and then get used to them
and manhandle them
like everything else.
 
I don't want to give him back
but partly it's not up to me and
partly I don't want to be his
 
old sofa. I want to radiate and gleam
arrestingly until the certain, premature
end. You can compose a whole life
 
out of these rollercoasters.
You can be everywhere
and nowhere, over and over 
life slapping you in the face
 till you’re newly burnished
flat-out gasping and awake.
 


^^EOP^^

It is easy to love a pig in a nightgown.
See how he sleeps, white flannel
straining his neck at the neckhole.
His body swells and then deflates.
The gown is nothing to be ashamed of, only
the white clay of moonlight smeared
over his hulk, original clothing, the milk
of his loneliness. The flickering candle
of a dream moves his warty eyelids.
All sleeping things are children.


^^EOP^^

After three weeks of hot weather and drought,
           we've had a week of cold and rain,
just the way it ought to be here in the north,
            in June, a fire going in the woodstove
all day long, so you can go outside in the cold
            and rain anytime and smell
the wood smoke in the air.
 
This is the way I love it. This is why
           I came here almost
fifty years ago. What is June anyway
          without cold and rain
and a fire going in the stove all day?
 


^^EOP^^

Near the camp was a river
and in our house were absentees and hands
that will one day wake us in vain
 
I had just turned seven
while he was sitting in the shade
ironing his clothes
the blue jacket sagging over his shoulders
 
I paid no attention to the road
or the three steps
and didn't notice the carpet
 
I don't remember who was it that said
to me or to another
"When you grow up poetry will become your house"
 
The dust that eats the memories
always distances those folks
 
yet their chairs appear from afar,
from behind the hills and over the houses,
to hang in an air of summer and holm oak,
those shaded chairs that reach the heart
on shoulders topped
with five flowers
 
Which flowers are speech
which flowers are silence?
 
And I can't remember
whether it was my uncle who stood at the door,
whether we had palm and lotus trees
in our house in Karameh,
 
whether my mother
who gave birth to me on the shelf
was folding our clothes behind our father's back
so he could sleep
 
The watchdogs used to cry from the heat,
and poetry, Husseini of Jerusalem,
and Khidr the mystic were all in our house
as was my uncle who came from a pond
within Hebron's walls
 
Twenty years would pass before a photo could tell us
we have grown older
and that's that
 
My father used to discompose his friends
with his days, and women
with the thread of seduction in his voice
as he would sprinkle chatter in their rivers
while walking about here or there with a lilt,
he'd let his days fall off him
and let others gather them as he walked
on gold that came only for him
 
And I can't remember:
in our courtyard there were holm oaks,
a fountain, a tiled floor by a huge door,
we were confused and in a hurry
 
The closet that faced us in the second room
had a mirror
the mirror we now seek
 
And my father was standing alone in the hall that led
the stairs to the roof
thanking his days
or preparing for Wednesday's nap
or Thursday's morning
as he left, among the things he'd leave, the water can
full of water
while around his chairs our Saturdays rose
 
My father didn't want too much from life:
a house, five boys
who don't mess with his papers,
which were already chaos,
and two girls
so that braids could float all around the house


^^EOP^^

Even C.P. Cavafy–
cynical, ascetic,
unknown in his day–
printed at his own expense
poems no one would publish,
poems intimate, personal,
to share with readers
he called friends.
 
But I have hundreds of poems
hidden away in a box.
Even when I know
Cavafy once wrapped verse
with black and gold ribbons
to give away as a gift.
 


^^EOP^^

No dead on the streets today
is a calm day,
traffic is normal,
there's ample room for the procession
of yesterday's dead,
room to add
             a dream, an idea, a little boy,
             an extra push for the beloved boat,
             a nom de guerre for the cell,
             a rose for a new love,
             a hand to a comrade
 
Some room to stay alive for some time,
enough time to shake your hands
and reach the sun
 
Today is a calm day, a pedestrian day
in Beirut dancing in the streets,
obstructing buses and not buying
newspapers:
          the newspapers already went out to offices
and the dead are resting on the Pavement of Martyrs
at the outskirts of Sabra
 
A calm day,
our neighbor will step out in her nightgown
to hang some sleepiness around us,
some sluggish waking
she's too lethargic to gather letters into words
 
Where is life on this vast sauntering morning?
We won't leave
Out of the whiteness of her gown a reason
will come to carry us down to the streets
dead in her "Good morning"


^^EOP^^

Valentine’s Day breakfast at Baker’s Square:
Laura drinks coffee while I watch Andrew,
who refuses to sit but chooses instead
to stay in the restaurant’s vestibule where
he opens and closes the big double doors
over and over again, as if he’s practicing
a grand entrance–entering, crossing
the threshold, and letting the doors
close behind him. I’m thinking,
 
it wasn’t so long ago I carried my tiny son
piggyback through the woods to a waterfall;
wasn’t long ago I kissed Laura for the first time;
wasn’t long ago I lived in the house with my dog
and sat with my notebook at the kitchen table
on Sunday morning after working all night–
sipping burnt coffee and scratching out lines,
lighting my hundredth cigarette, starting over
again, determined to write a love poem.


^^EOP^^

My mother–half-deaf,
a small metal box
pinned to her blouse,
 
and beneath the gray locks
the hidden earphone,
the wire running across
 
her heart to its home
in her ear–can barely
hear me anymore. I’m
 
just someone’s voice
lost years ago, trying now
to make myself clear,
 
deliberately now,
so she will see how
hard the words come.
 
Bent to her breast, I speak
to the heart, almost hopeless,
where hardly anyone
 
is ever heard.


^^EOP^^

And I will bend down to smell his desire
his tomb's flowers and marble
his wilting joy
his swapping temptation for content
 
And I will keep him from the cold, visitors, oleander,
and the sons of bitches and say: No one
will resemble me like my father
his white stumbling and the illusion that plucks words
 
A shout that walks on two feeble legs
eyes me with the summer of discontent
and sprinkles me with water, turns me green
before it shakes the bitter dirt
off its fingers
… that's my father
he cried from a darkness in the grave
 
And I will gather the house of your chucked absence
as if we were alone on Earth
… you die
so I can fold the falcon's wings after its departure
and believe the silence that remains
 


^^EOP^^

O my Love sent me a lusty list,
Did not compare me to a summer's day
Wrote not the beauty of mine eyes
But catalogued in a pretty detailed
And comprehensive way the way(s)
In which he was better than me.
"More capable of extra- and inter-
Polation. More well-traveled -rounded multi-
Lingual! More practiced in so many matters
More: physical, artistic, musical,
Politic(al) academic (I dare say!) social
(In many ways!) and (ditto!) sexual!”
And yet these mores undid but his own plea(s)(e)
And left, none-the-less, the Greater Moor of me.
 


^^EOP^^

my god all the days we have lived thru
saying
 
not this
one, not this,
not now,
not yet, this week
doesn’t count, was lost, this month
was shit, what a year, it sucked,
it flew, that decade was for
what? i raised my kids, they
grew i lost two pasts–i am
not made of them and they
are through.
 
we forget what
we remember:
 
each of the five
the fevered few
 
days we used to
fall in love.


^^EOP^^

If you can make a poem
a farmer finds useful,
you should be happy.
A blacksmith you can never figure out.
The worst to please is a carpenter.


^^EOP^^

                    
                    
                    When I was young, exorcisms were quite common, a remedy not unlike
ice baths. Plus, devils were shorter in those days just as people were.
They hadn't eaten enough fruits or vegetables, and lacked essential
vitamins and iron, grew thin and pale, fell easily into brooding
depressions. They looked more like deer than sheep, and when they
possessed you it was usually because they were fleeing from someone
else and didn't realize where they were until it was too late. It was more
a question of giving directions than driving them out. "Turn right at the
hairdresser's, go straight until you get to the abandoned schoolhouse,
then turn left. You should see the exit from there." "Thank you. I was
completely lost." "You're welcome. Good luck." "You too, and thanks
again."
                

^^EOP^^

having studied swarthmore charts and mirrors,
fashion magazines, foucault, bloom, bad light,
whereof—hereof—had not become clearer;
what vision to present as first self-sight.
 
self quit; put on boots and a see-through dress,
some thought it was ironic "self-object-
ification", said they were not impressed.
some guessed that "honesty" was self's subject,
 
were put off nonetheless, self-asked: to sleep
with me? who would? self flat, self one inch deep,
self-glimpsed not much in that giant mirror:
innocence -credulity, self doth protest!
 
hey! presumptuous interlocutor!
pissed off, thwarted, played, and soon, undressed!


^^EOP^^

      1
I will cry to regret
and slaughter my heart
on a desolate rock in the steppe
and run in the wilderness run
in their illusions in the mirrors
of bullets while shooing
victory and defeat
and also the dead
with war's twig
 
    2
I will arch my back like a noble wolf
and howl in the plains
until the plains go mad
and the god of soldiers spots me lifeless
in war's meanness
I'd be pleased yet angry
and forlorn of seas that have tolled
for thirty centuries
they come and go
 
     3
I call to my friend
and leave him standing in speech
I call to my lover
and leave her insomniac


^^EOP^^

Will the children forgive the generation
that’s trampled by horses of war,
by exile and preparation for departure?
 
Will they think of us as we were,
a bunch of ambushes in ravines
we’d shake our jealousy
and carve trees into the earth's shirt
to sit under,
we, the factional fighters
who’d shoo the clouds of war out of their vehicles
and peer around our eternal siege
or catch the dead
like sudden fruit fallen on a wasteland?
  
Will the children forgive what we were,
some missile shepherds
and masters of exile and frenzied celebration,
whenever a neighboring war gestured to us
we rose
to set up in its braids a place
good for love and residence?
 
           The bombing rarely took a rest
the missile launchers rarely returned unharmed
we rarely picked flowers for the dead or went on
with our lives
 
If only that summer had given us a bit
of time's space before our mad departure
 
Will they believe?
 


^^EOP^^

In the tower the bell
is alone, like a man
in his room,
thinking and thinking.
 
The bell is made of iron.
It takes the weight
of a man
to make the bell move.
 
Far below, the bell feels
hands on a rope.
It considers this.
It turns its head.
 
Miles away,
a man in his room
hears the clear sound,
and lifts his head to listen.


^^EOP^^

Swimming the English Channel, struggling to make it to Calais, I swam into Laura halfway across.
My body oiled for warmth,
black rubber cap on my head,
eyes hidden behind goggles,
I was exhausted, ready to drown,
when I saw her coming toward me,
bobbing up and down between waves,
effortlessly doing a breaststroke,
headed for Dover. Treading water,
I asked in French if she spoke English,
and she said, “Yes, I’m an American.”
I said, “Hey, me too,” then asked her out for coffee.


^^EOP^^

What I envy in the open eyes
of the dead deer hanging down
from the rafters, its eyes
still wet and glassy, but locked now
into a vision of another life,
is the way it seems to be
staring at the moment when
it died. The blue light
falling through the window
into this smoke-filled room
is the same color as the mist
coming down off the mountain
that morning: the deer sees
men with guns
but also sees, beyond them,
the endless mountains.


^^EOP^^

There is a river under this poem.
It flows blue and icy
And carries these lines down the page.
Somewhere beneath its surface
Lying chained to the silt
Harry holds his breath
And slowly files
His fingernails into moons.
He wonders who still waits at the dock
If the breasts of those young girls
Have developed since he sank.
He thinks of his parents
Of listening to the tumblers
Of his mother's womb
Of escaping upward out of puberty
Out of the pupils in his father's eyes
And those hot Wisconsin fields.
He dreams of escaping
From this poem
Of cracking the combinations
To his own body
And those warm young safes
Of every girl on the dock.
Jiggling his chains
Harry scares a carp that circles
And nibbles at his feet.
He feels the blue rush of the current
Sweeping across his body
Stripping his chains of their rust
Until each link softens
And glows like a tiny eel.
And Harry decides to ascend.
He slips with the water
Through his chains
And climbing over and over
His own air bubbles
He waves to the fish
To his chains glittering
And squirming in the silt.
He pauses to pick a bouquet
Of seaweed for the young girls
on the dock. Rising
He bursts the surface of this poem.
He listens for shouts.
He hears only the night
And a buoy sloshing in the blue.


^^EOP^^

When you come, bring your brown-
ness so we can be sure to please
 
the funders. Will you check this
box; we’re applying for a grant.
 
Do you have any poems that speak
to troubled teens? Bilingual is best.
 
Would you like to come to dinner
with the patrons and sip Patrón?
 
Will you tell us the stories that make
us uncomfortable, but not complicit?
 
Don’t read the one where you
are just like us. Born to a green house,
 
garden, don’t tell us how you picked
tomatoes and ate them in the dirt
 
watching vultures pick apart another
bird’s bones in the road. Tell us the one
 
about your father stealing hubcaps
after a colleague said that’s what his
 
kind did. Tell us how he came
to the meeting wearing a poncho
 
and tried to sell the man his hubcaps
back. Don’t mention your father
 
was a teacher, spoke English, loved
making beer, loved baseball, tell us
 
again about the poncho, the hubcaps,
how he stole them, how he did the thing
 
he was trying to prove he didn’t do.


^^EOP^^

I can’t undress from the pressure of leaves,
the lobed edges leaning toward the window
like an unwanted male gaze on the backside,
(they wish to bless and bless and hush).
What if I want to go devil instead? Bow
down to the madness that makes me. Drone
of the neighbor’s mowing, a red mailbox flag
erected, a dog bark from three houses over,
and this is what a day is. Beetle on the wainscoting,
dead branch breaking, but not breaking, stones
from the sea next to stones from the river,
unanswered messages like ghosts in the throat,
a siren whining high toward town repeating
that the emergency is not here, repeating
that this loud silence is only where you live.


^^EOP^^

After the birthing of bombs of forks and fear
the frantic automatic weapons unleashed,
the spray of bullets into a crowd holding hands,
that brute sky opening in a slate metal maw
that swallows only the unsayable in each of us, what’s
left? Even the hidden nowhere river is poisoned
orange and acidic by a coal mine. How can
you not fear humanity, want to lick the creek
bottom dry, to suck the deadly water up into
your own lungs, like venom? Reader, I want to
say: Don’t die. Even when silvery fish after fish
comes back belly up, and the country plummets
into a crepitating crater of hatred, isn’t there still
something singing? The truth is: I don’t know.
But sometimes, I swear I hear it, the wound closing
like a rusted-over garage door, and I can still move
my living limbs into the world without too much
pain, can still marvel at how the dog runs straight
toward the pickup trucks break-necking down
the road, because she thinks she loves them,
because she’s sure, without a doubt, that the loud
roaring things will love her back, her soft small self
alive with desire to share her goddamn enthusiasm,
until I yank the leash back to save her because
I want her to survive forever. Don’t die, I say,
and we decide to walk for a bit longer, starlings
high and fevered above us, winter coming to lay
her cold corpse down upon this little plot of earth.
Perhaps we are always hurtling our body towards
the thing that will obliterate us, begging for love
from the speeding passage of time, and so maybe,
like the dog obedient at my heels, we can walk together
peacefully, at least until the next truck comes.


^^EOP^^

The truth is, I’ve never cared for the National
Anthem. If you think about it, it’s not a good
song. Too high for most of us with “the rockets
red glare” and then there are the bombs.
(Always, always, there is war and bombs.)
Once, I sang it at homecoming and threw
even the tenacious high school band off key.
But the song didn’t mean anything, just a call
to the field, something to get through before
the pummeling of youth. And what of the stanzas
we never sing, the third that mentions “no refuge
could save the hireling and the slave”? Perhaps,
the truth is, every song of this country
has an unsung third stanza, something brutal
snaking underneath us as we blindly sing
the high notes with a beer sloshing in the stands
hoping our team wins. Don’t get me wrong, I do
like the flag, how it undulates in the wind
like water, elemental, and best when it’s humbled,
brought to its knees, clung to by someone who
has lost everything, when it’s not a weapon,
when it flickers, when it folds up so perfectly
you can keep it until it’s needed, until you can
love it again, until the song in your mouth feels
like sustenance, a song where the notes are sung
by even the ageless woods, the short-grass plains,
the Red River Gorge, the fistful of land left
unpoisoned, that song that’s our birthright,
that’s sung in silence when it’s too hard to go on,
that sounds like someone’s rough fingers weaving
into another’s, that sounds like a match being lit
in an endless cave, the song that says my bones
are your bones, and your bones are my bones,
and isn’t that enough?


^^EOP^^

I’m not yet comfortable with the word,
its short clean woosh that sounds like
life. At dinner last night my single girls
said in admonition, “It’s not wife-approved”
about a friend’s upcoming trip. Their
eyes rolled up and over and out their
pretty young heads. Wife, why does it
sound like a job? “I need a wife” the famous
feminist wrote, “a wife that will keep my
clothes clean, ironed, mended, replaced
if need be.” A word that could be made
easily into maid. A wife that does, fixes
soothes, honors, obeys, Housewife,
fishwife, bad wife, good wife, what’s
the word for someone who stares long
into the morning, unable to even fix tea
some days, the kettle steaming over
loud like a train whistle, she who cries
in the mornings, she who tears a hole
in the earth and cannot stop grieving,
the one who wants to love you, but often
isn’t good at even that, the one who
doesn’t want to be diminished
by how much she wants to be yours.


^^EOP^^

 I.
 
The face of Chinatown returns its color,
plucked from July's industrial steamer.
  Dry the cup!
So we do.
 
Four noodle shops on East Broadway release their belches collectively.
They breed in me a hankering for family life.
 
Here, there's no logic to melons and spring onions exchanging hands.
No rhythm to men's briefs clothes-pinned to the fire escape.
 
Retirees beneath the Manhattan Bridge leak hearsay.
 
The woman in Apartment #18 on Bayard washes her feet in pot of boiled
water each evening before bedtime. But every handful of weeks she lapses.
 
I lean into the throat of summer.
 
Perched above these streets with whom I share verbs and adjectives.
 
II.
 
Faces knotted, bangs softened with grease.
The East River pulls along a thread of sun.
 
While Sunday slides in. Again, in those plain trousers.
 
How the heat is driven off course.
How one can make out the clarified vowels of bridges.
 
Who’s keeping count of what’s given against what’s stolen?
 
There's nothing I can't trace back to my coarse immigrant blood.
 
Uncles tipple wine on the streets of Mott and Bayard.
Night shifts meet day shifts in passing.
 
Sweat seasons the body that labors.
 
And in each noodle shop, bowls dusted with salt.
 


^^EOP^^

Ice, entire cakes of it.
Crows feed on sand.
 
So poor is this season
the ground steals color
from the tree-shadows.
 
 
 
            •
 
 
 
Can it be that nothing
is as far as here?
 
Just look!
 
How much past we have
to cover this evening–
 
 
               •
 
 
 
Come to think of it
don't forget to pick
off this self and that self
along the way.
 
Though that’s not right–
you spit them out like pits.
 
 
               •
 
 
 
If there is a partition between
the outer and inner worlds,
how is it that some water in me churns
between the mountain ranges?
 
How is it we are absorbed so easily
by the ground—
 
 
               •
 
 
 
Long nights for simple words.
 
 
               •
 
 
 
Slant rhyme of current thinking
and past thinking.
 
A chewed over hour, late.
Where the long ago past
and the future come
to settle scores.
 
 
                •
 
 
 
Traveling and traveling,
but so much interior
unpicked over by the eyes.
 
 
 
              •
 
 
 
Nothing is as far as here.
 


^^EOP^^

Sunday, awake with this headache. I pull apart the evening with a fork. White
clot behind the eyes.
 
 
Someone once told me, before and after is just another false binary. The
warmed-over bones of January. I had no passport. Beneath the stove, two mice
made a paradise out of a button of peanut butter.
 
 
Suffering operates by its own logic. Its gropings and reversals. Ample, in ways
that are exquisite. And how it leaves—not unlike how it arrives, without clear
notice.
 
 
These days, I've had my fill of Chinatown and its wet markets. Gutted fish.
Overcooked chattering. The stench making me look hard at everything.
 
 
Summer mornings before the heat has moved in. Joy has been buried in me
overnight, but builds in the early hours. My attention elastic.
 
 
The babbling streets of Causeway Bay, out of which the sharp taste of the city
emerges. Nothing can stay dry here. The dark cherries of eyes come and go,
as they please.
 
 
Let there be no more braiding of words. I want a spare mouth.
 
 
My father taught me wherever you are, always be looking for a way out: this
opening or that one. Or a question. Sharp enough to slice a hole for you to slip
through.
 
 
Long car trips where I sat in the back of our family's used Nissan. The stale
odor of plush seats and sun-warmed cola. My parents' and my words do not
touch. I grow adept at tunneling inward, a habit I have yet to let go of.
 
 
I am protective of what eyes cannot pry open. The unannounced. The infinite
places within language to hide.
 
 
A Zen priest once told me that without snagging on a storyline, the body can
only take loss for ninety seconds. The physical body has its limits, is what I
heard. The imagination can break through them.
 
 
Boiled peanuts. Leather of daybreak. Cotton thinning out into thread. Dried
vomit. Ice water from the spigot. The sacred and profane share a border. In the
desert, small droppings of unknown origin.
 
 
Even when I was young, I loved peering at faces in films. The pleasure of
watching and of not being watched.
 
 
Black koi fish open their mouths at the skin of the pond for oxygen. At the edge
of the water, I hold two lines from Ikkyū in my mouth. Make my way slowly.
 
 
Nights when I shared a bed in a small room. Another’s body to the left, hooked
by a heavy dream.
 
 
Funny, the way we come to understand a place by wanting to escape it.
 
 
I can shake out the imprint of my body on the sheets each morning. But the
mind–the mind is a different matter.
 
 
When I was four, I ate spoonfuls of powdered milk straight from the canis-
ter. The powder was sweet. There wasn't enough money for fresh milk. Seven
hundred years ago, Chang Yang-hao wrote, All my life seems / like yesterday  morning. 
 


^^EOP^^

What will survive us
has already begun
 
Oak galls
Two termites’ curious
self-perpetuating bodies
 
Letting the light through the gaps
 
They lay out their allegiances
under the roots
of an overturned tree
 
Almost always better
to build than to wreck
 
You can build in a wreck
 
Under the roots
of an overturned tree
 
Consider the martin that hefts
herself over traffic cones
 
Consider her shadow
misaligned
over parking-lot cement
Saran Wrap scrap in her beak
 
Nothing lasts
forever not even
the future we want
 
The President has never
owned the rain


^^EOP^^

If you don't get too close to people you can't disappoint them,
which would be so much worse
than letting them disappoint you.
 
To the extent that you gain
a perch that means other people look up to you,
to just that extent you can never
tell them how you feel.
 
You can warble, or
follow a siren, or a Shenandoah
vireo, into the shade, or take
advice from the lights: be
a child, or be like a child.
You will want for nothing, and you will never be heard.


^^EOP^^

I can remember when I wanted X
more than anything ever—for X fill in
from your own childhood
 
[balloon, pencil lead, trading card, shoelaces, a bow
or not to have to wear a bow]
 
and now I am moved to action, when I am moved,
principally by a memory of what to want.
 
The point is to be, in your own eyes, what you are,
 
or to keep your own tools, so that you can pretend.
 
And so it was no surprise,
to me at least, when Cooper, who is two,
collapsed in fortissimo fits when he could not have
a $20, three-foot-long stuffed frog
in the image of Frog from Frog and Toad, since he is Toad.
 
That morning, needing a nap,
he had thrown, from the third-story balcony
of Miller's Cafe and Bakery, into the whistling
rapids and shallows
of the Ammonoosuc River, with its arrowheads and caravans of stones,
his Red Sox cap. His hair was shining like
another planet's second sun,
as he explained, looking up, "I threw my hat in the river.
I would like my hat back now."


^^EOP^^

He has 
                sent hither swarms of Officers to harass our people
  He has plundered our—
                                             ravaged our—
                                                                           destroyed the lives of our—
  taking away our­—                                    abolishing our most valuable—  and altering fundamentally the Forms of our—  In every stage of these Oppressions We have Petitioned for Redress in the most humble terms:
 
                                                                Our repeated  Petitions have been answered only by repeated injury.
  We have reminded them of the circumstances of our emigration and settlement here.
 
                                    —taken Captive
                                              
                                                                    on the high Seas
                                                                                                       to bear—
 


^^EOP^^

What woke to war in me those years
When my daughter had first grown into
A solid self-centered self? I’d watch her
Sit at the table—well, not quite sit,
More like stand on one leg while
The other knee hovered just over the chair.
She wouldn't lower herself, as if
There might be a fire, or a great black
Blizzard of waves let loose in the kitchen,
And she'd need to make her escape. No,
She'd trust no one but herself, her own
New lean always jittering legs to carry her—
Where exactly? Where would a child go?
To there. There alone. She'd rest one elbow
On the table—the opposite one to the bent leg
Skimming the solid expensive tasteful chair.
And even though we were together, her eyes
Would go half-dome, shades dropped
Like a screen at some cinema the old aren't
Let into. I thought I'd have more time! I thought
My body would have taken longer going
About the inevitable feat of repelling her,
But now, I could see even in what food
She left untouched, food I'd bought and made
And all but ferried to her lips, I could see
How it smacked of all that had grown slack
And loose in me. Her other arm
Would wave the fork around just above
The surface of the plate, casting about
For the least possible morsel, the tiniest
Grain of unseasoned rice. She'd dip
Into the food like one of those shoddy
Metal claws poised over a valley of rubber
Bouncing balls, the kind that lifts nothing
Or next to nothing and drops it in the chute.
The narrow untouched hips. The shoulders
Still so naïve as to stand squared, erect,
Impervious facing the window open
Onto the darkening dusk.


^^EOP^^

What a profound longing
I feel, just this very instant,
For the Garden of Eden
On Montague Street
Where I seldom shopped,
Usually only after therapy
Elbow sore at the crook
From a handbasket filled
To capacity. The glossy pastries!
Pomegranate, persimmon, quince!
Once, a bag of black beluga
Lentils spilt a trail behind me
While I labored to find
A tea they refused to carry.
It was Brooklyn. My thirties.
Everyone I knew was living
The same desolate luxury,
Each ashamed of the same things:
Innocence and privacy. I'd lug
Home the paper bags, doing
Bank-balance math and counting days.
I'd squint into it, or close my eyes
And let it slam me in the face—
The known sun setting
On the dawning century.


^^EOP^^

                    
                    
                    The Inside Out Mermaid is fine with letting it all hang out–veins, muscles, the bits of fat at her belly, her small gray spleen. At first her lover loves it–with her organs on the outside, she's the ultimate open book. He can pump her lungs like two bellows and make her gasp; ask her difficult questions and study the synapses firing in her brain as she answers to see if she's lying; poke a pleasure center in the frontal lobe and watch her squirm. No need for bouquets or sad stories about his childhood. He just plucks a pulmonary vein and watches the left ventricle flounder. But before long, she starts to sense that her lover, like all the others before him, is getting restless. This is when she starts showing them her collections–the basket of keys from all over the world, the box of zippers with teeth of every imaginable size–all chosen to convey a sense of openness. As a last resort, she’ll even read out loud the entries from her diary about him to him. But eventually he’ll become convinced she’s hiding things from him and she is. Her perfect skin. Her long black hair. Her red mouth, never chapped from exposure to sun or wind, how she secretly loves that he can’t touch her here or here.
 
                

^^EOP^^

                                                1
 
I made myself. Mommy and Daddy were proud, in that order.
I didn’t mail myself like a letter some other kids
already knew. I learned to use stamps. They stuck to my thumb
without any glue. I didn’t have any permission.
                                                  2
 
There was a snowstorm that lasted three days
and a cavern of monochrome memory. There were board games, and a
      pencil-and-paper game
where the object was to figure out the object of the game.
There was a stack of broad-rule writing paper, and a stapled calendar,
and a 64-pack of sparkly rainbow crayons, to make each week look different
since they all started out black and white, and all the same.
                                                  3
 
O grapefruit (as color and flavor). O never quite rightly tied laces. O look,
up there on the uneven climbing bars,
too hot to touch where the sun touches, now that it’s spring,
 
the shadow of a tarp, like a sail between sailors
and thin swings that make no decision, like weathervanes.
 
O think of the lost Chuck Taylors. The lost Mary Janes.


^^EOP^^

                    
                    
                    When my hole-punch drizzles tiny paper circles onto the carpet, my wolf sister moans and bites it, covering her ears with her paws. I think she’s tired of the moon. She takes a stack of dinner plates from my cupboard and slinks off to the park to break them. Our brother shows up a week later, collapses on the sofa like a fur throw. Why have they come here when everything I do is wrong? They howl in the shower together but the water doesn’t mask the sound. I go in afterwards with paper towels to mop the droplets–I know there’ll be water all over–but the room is bone dry. Maybe this time things will be different. I hide the home movies in case they ask for them. In the one I always watch, there’s some wobbly footage of the sky, then my father lowers the camera’s eye to mother teaching my sister and brother to “tell time.” They’re following a mother hare on her sunset rounds–one leveret mouthful at 12 o’clock, another at 3, 6, 9. Then the camera zooms in on me–I’ve spat out my pacifier made of fur and I’m on the porch surrounded by bonsai trees, killing or saving Barbie.
 
                

^^EOP^^

Why and by whose power were you sent? 
What do you see that you may wish to steal? 
Why this dancing? Why do your dark bodies 
Drink up all the light? What are you demanding 
That we feel? Have you stolen something? Then 
What is that leaping in your chest? What is 
The nature of your mission? Do you seek 
To offer a confession? Have you anything to do 
With others brought by us to harm? Then 
Why are you afraid? And why do you invade 
Our night, hands raised, eyes wide, mute 
As ghosts? Is there something you wish to confess? 
Is this some enigmatic type of test? What if we 
Fail? How and to whom do we address our appeal?


^^EOP^^




for the Geechee Gullah Ring Shouters



One of the women greeted me.
I love you, she said. She didn't
Know me, but I believed her,
And a terrible new ache
Rolled over in my chest,
Like in a room where the drapes
Have been swept back. I love you,
I love you, as she continued
Down the hall past other strangers,
Each feeling pierced suddenly
By pillars of heavy light.
I love you, throughout
The performance, in every
Handclap, every stomp.
I love you in the rusted iron
Chains someone was made
To drag until love let them be
Unclasped and left empty
In the center of the ring.
I love you in the water
Where they pretended to wade,
Singing that old blood-deep song
That dragged us to those banks
And cast us in. I love you,
The angles of it scraping at
Each throat, shouldering past
The swirling dust motes
In those beams of light
That whatever we now knew
We could let ourselves feel, knew
To climb. O Woods—O Dogs—                       
O Tree—O Gun—O Girl, run—
O Miraculous Many Gone—
O Lord—O Lord—O Lord—
Is this love the trouble you promised?


^^EOP^^

On the Pan American Highway, somewhere
between the north and south continent,
you come across a chain of volcanoes,
 
a coast with a thick growth of palm trees,
crunching waves of the sea; an isthmus
Neruda called “slender earth like a whip.”
 
When the road bends, turns into a street,
the walls splattered with “Yanqui Go Home!!!”
you see a boy fifteen years old,
 
barefoot, sniffing glue in a small plastic bag.
An old woman in an apron will step out,
say, “This is the right street.”
 
In the public square, there will be no friend
from school to welcome you, no drive
to Sonsonate, city of coconuts,
 
no one to order cold Pilseners, oyster
cocktails, or convince the waitress
into dancing a cumbia or two with you.
 
Instead, at the local bar, you’ll raise
a bottle next to strangers, stub
your cigarette out on the floor.
 
You’ll watch a country ten years
after the civil war: an old man sitting
on the curb, head between knees,
 
open hand stretched out.
Everything will hurt, your hair,
your toenails, even your shoes.
 
You’ll curse dusty streets, demented
sun slowly burning the nape of your neck,
stray dogs following you to the park.
 
By nightfall, you drag yourself back to the bars,
looking for a lost country in a shot of Tíc Táck.
Against the wall, three men with their guitars.
 
When you lie on a hotel bed,
too tired to sleep, when you feel torn,
twisted like an old newspaper, blown
 
from city to city, you have reached the place.
You have begun to speak like a man
by the side of the road, barefoot.


^^EOP^^

After seven lean years
we are promised seven fat ones,
if the cows do not die first.
Some care must be taken
to prevent their demise
in the scrub
or the slaughterhouse.
There must be enough bones
to throw and to bury.
 
The skull of a cow,
I put it on.
There are many strewn in the field,
there has not been much rain.
I look through the eyes,
that is, my eyes replace the eyes
that death has taken.
I can see out or through.
It is not a bad fate
to be a cow,
to be, at once,
so awkward,
so full of grace,
so full of milk.
 
Everywhere the udders are full,
the teats are ready,
the mouth of the calf is soft and deep.
I would thrust my hand in it
for the wet joy of being so used.
 
My own breasts are marked
from the time the milk came in too fast;
 
I did not have time to grow
to the moment of giving.
It is fitting
that beauty
leaves such scars.
 
Milk has passed through my fingers,
has spurted through my fingers,
but not once
during these seven lean years.


^^EOP^^

The ground cracked
like the rough pit of a peach
and snapped in two.
The sun behind the mountains
turned into an olive-green glow.
 
To niña Gloria this was home.
She continued to sell her bowl of lemons,
rubbing a cold, thin silver Christ
pocketed in her apron. Others
like Lito and Marvin played
soldiers in the ruins of a school,
running around mounds of bricks,
          shooting chickens and pigs.
 
No one knows exactly how
a light film of ash appeared
on everyone’s eyelids
          early in the morning
or how trout and mackerel plunged from the sky,
twitched, leaped through the streets.
 
Some say the skin of trees
felt like old newspaper, dry and yellow.
Others believe the soapsuds
washed aside in rivers
began to rise in their milk.
 
One Monday morning, a rain fell
and the cemetery washed into the city.
Bones began to knock
              and knock at our doors.
Streets became muddy rivers
waiting for bodies to drop
              among piles of dead fish.
 
In a year, everyone stabbed flowers on a grave.
 
This explains why women thought
and moved like lizards under stones,
why men heard bees buzzing inside their skulls,
why dogs lost their sense of smell
sniffing piles of rubble to get back home.
 
In a few years, no one cared
about turtles banging their heads against rocks,
bulls with their sad, busted eyes,
parrots that kept diving into creeks,
the dark swelling of the open ground
              or at night a knife
              stained the kitchen cloth.
 
Instead, niña Gloria swept the ground,
the broom licking her feet at each stroke.
 
At the bus station, Marvin shined
military boots,
              twenty-five cents a pair,
reduced his words to a spit, a splutter
of broken sentences
             on shoe polish, leather.
 
In the evenings, he counted coins
he’d tossed in a jar, then walked home,
one step closer to the cracked bone
clenched in the yellow jaw of a dog.


^^EOP^^

In the name of Raven. In the name of Wolf. In the name of Whale. In
the name of Elephant. In the name of Snake.
 
Who have taught us. Who have guided us. Who have sustained us. Who
have healed us.
 
Please heal the animals.
 
In the name of Raven. In the name of Wolf. In the name of Whale. In
the name of Elephant. In the name of Snake.
 
Whom we have slaughtered. Whom we have feared. Whom we have
caged. Whom we have persecuted. Whom we have slandered. Whom
we have cursed. Whom we have tortured.
 
Protect the animals.
 
In the name of Raven. In the name of Wolf. In the name of Whale. In
the name of Elephant. In the name of Snake.
 
Whose habitat we have stolen. Whose territory we have plundered.
Whose feeding grounds we have paved and netted. Whose domain we
have poisoned. Whose food we have eaten. Whose young we have killed.
Whose lives and ways of life we threaten.
 
Restore the animals.
 
In the name of Raven. In the name of Wolf. In the name of Whale. In
the name of Elephant. In the name of Snake.
 
Forgive us. Have mercy. May the animals return. Not as a resurrection
but as living beings. Here. On earth. On this earth that is also theirs.
 
Oh Great Spirit. Heal the animals. Protect the animals. Restore the
animals.
 
Our lives will also be healed. Our souls will be protected. Our
spirits will be restored.
 
Oh Spirit of Raven. Oh Spirit of Wolf. Oh Spirit of Whale. Oh Spirit of
Elephant. Oh Spirit of Snake.
 
Teach us, again, how to live.


^^EOP^^

We were made to understand it would be
Terrible. Every small want, every niggling urge,
Every hate swollen to a kind of epic wind. 
 
Livid, the land, and ravaged, like a rageful 
Dream. The worst in us having taken over 
And broken the rest utterly down. 
 
                                                                 A long age 
Passed. When at last we knew how little 
Would survive us—how little we had mended 
 
Or built that was not now lost—something 
Large and old awoke. And then our singing 
Brought on a different manner of weather. 
 
Then animals long believed gone crept down 
From trees. We took new stock of one another. 
We wept to be reminded of such color. 
 


^^EOP^^

As I punch the time-clock, I know
men will be gunned down at dawn
in a distant continent, someone
will dart into a café with a bomb nestled
 
in the belly, by the roadside a woman
will moan over the body of a man,
shrunken, stretched on the earth, that God
will finger the forehead of a dying country,
 
all of it funneled through the news on TV.
But tonight, instead of tuning in, I’m going to kneel
beside the window, recognize myself
in the croak of the crow, high above the black tree
 
of winter, claws hooked and rough, wings swept
back and hunched, face masked with exhaust.
I’m going to try, even if I fail, to see myself whole,
complete in the cry, in the beak of the crow.


^^EOP^^

This is the silence around the poem of the death of my father.
This is the silence before the poem.
 
While my father was dying, the Challenger was exploding on TV
Again and again. I watched it happen. In his hospital room,
I followed his breath. Then it stopped.
 
This is the silence in a poem about the dying of the father.
 
 
We’re burning the earth. We’re burning the sky.
 
Here is another silence in the middle of the poem about the immolation of the Fathers.
 
The pyres of bodies in Saigon.
The burned air
The charred limbs.
Ash.
Rancid flames.
Heat
Light
Fire
 
                                  We turn away.
 
Here is another silence within the poem about the burial of the fire.
 
When my father died, the rains poured down the moment I picked up the shovel of earth.
I staggered under the weight of the water.
 
Another silence please.
 
 
I have always wanted to be a woman of fire.
I will have to learn how to rain.
Gently, I will learn how to rain.
 
I have set fire to your green fields,
May I be water to your burning lands.
 
Please join me in this last silence at the end of the poem of fire.


^^EOP^^

                    
                    
                    I wanted to have a poem and I was pregnant. I was very thin. As if I’d lived on air. A poet must be able to live on air, but a mother must not attempt it. My mother wanted me to buy a set of matching pots, Wearever aluminum, like the ones she had. They were heavy and had well fitting lids so my suppers wouldn’t burn. My husband wanted me to give dinner parties. John F. Kennedy was running for office.
 
I sensed danger. Kennedy wasn’t against the Bomb or for nuclear disarmament. I joined SANE at its inception. Also Concerned Scientists. I spoke with Linus Pauling and encouraged my husband to help his partner organize Physicians for Social Responsibility.
 
There was a baby in my belly. I wanted to write poems. I had a crazy idea that a woman could write a real novel, the kind that shook the world. I hallucinated that a woman could be a poet, but she would have to be free. I couldn’t imagine that freedom for myself even though I could see it in Isla Negra when I followed Pablo Neruda. I could see it in the way he walked. Even if he were walking inside a dictatorship, among guns, soldiers and spies, there was nothing between him and his vision. Anything he saw, he was able to take into himself–there was no sight, no image, no vision to which he didn’t feel entitled. In his heart, everything–everything–belonged to him. Pablo Neruda was–more than anything–a poet, and so he was an entitled man.
 
I was a woman and entitled to nothing. I had nothing except a husband, a rented house, a set of pots, living room furniture, a frenzy of obligations, credit cards, anxious relatives, too many acquaintances, a gift of future diaper service, two telephones, no time to read, a plastic wrapped cookbook of recipes gleaned from the pages of the New York Times, and a hunger, a terrible hunger for the unimaginable, unlimited freedom of being a poet, and a baby in my belly.
 
I would have called Pablo long distance if I had the courage, if I had the ability to speak Spanish fluently, if we had ever talked about real things. But, what would a man know about a baby in the belly? And what did it matter if there were to be one poet more or less in the world when so many in his country were dying?
 
I woke up one morning and thought–I can’t have this child. My husband said, “You’ll have to get a job after it’s born so we can buy a house. You’ll need an advanced degree so you can do something.” I thought, I can’t. I have to write poems. My mother found a crib. Someone painted it white. A friend sent a pastel mobile with tame wood animals. I thought about blue curtains, making bedspreads, and abortions.
 
Pablo was silent. He was walking so far from me, I couldn’t hear him. My husband objected to donating more free medical care to the Black Panthers. I tried to make dolmades from scratch and located grape leaves preserved in brine at the Boys’ Market twenty miles away. I organized a write-in campaign for peace to challenge JFK. My husband thought it would be nice to have teatime with the children and romantic dinners by ourselves. The new formula bottles lined up on the sink like tiny bombs. The U.S. was pursuing over ground testing; I was afraid the radiation would cross the milk barrier. I had a poem in me howling for real life but no language to write in. The fog came in thick, flapping about my feet like blankets unraveling. I became afraid to have a daughter.
 
I called Pablo Neruda in the middle of the night as he walked underwater by Isla Negra. He moved like a dream porpoise. He seemed pregnant with words. They came out of his penis in long miraculous strings. The sea creatures quivered with joy. I said, “Pablo, I want to know how to bear the child in my belly onto this bed of uranium and I want to know if a woman can a be a poet.” He was large as a whale. He drank the sea and spouted it in glistening odes, black and shiny. I said, “I can’t have this child,” and he laughed as if he had never done anything but carry and birth children.
 
So I packed my little bag as if I were going to the hospital and I left a note and the Wearever pots and sterilized nipples upon the glass missiles, and took the cradle board than an American Indian friend had given me for the baby and that had made my husband snort– “You’re not going to carry the thing on your back, are you?” I took some money, the car, some books, paper and pens, my walking shoes, an unwieldly IBM electric typewriter, my pregnant belly and a dozen cloth diapers, and I went out.
 
I knew how to carry a baby and how to carry a poem and I would learn how to have a baby and even how to have a poem. I would have enough milk for both. I would learn how to walk with them. But I didn’t know, and I didn’t want to know, how to have a husband and a matched set of Wearever pots.
                

^^EOP^^

Everything dies. Without you
I saw one million flamingos
 
ignite a lake in Africa.
The same darkness
 
descended everywhere.
When you dropped your body,
 
I hoped you would tremble
for the beak of God.
 
Why did we wash you three times
tearing off the girl’s white dress
 
to swaddle you in an austere shroud?
Some say, dying, not death, teaches.
 
You gained nothing
from that reduction.
 
Months in the narrow foxhole of disease–
you dug it; we filled it in.
 
My father is thin as you were
in his hospital bed,
 
both of you let everything go,
care for nothing
 
except that barbed hook–
life.
 
It grabbed you like a thorn
until you begged me, “Pull it out.”


^^EOP^^

And now, reader, I come to a period in my unhappy life,
which I would gladly forget if I could. Asia Graves looks  straight ahead as she calmly recalls the night a man paid $200 on a  Boston street to have sex with her.
 
 
                                                        The remembrance fills me with sorrow and shame. “If you 
                                                        want attention and you see that you’re getting it, you just follow your 
                                                        feelings,” senior Araceli Figueroa, 17, said. “It’s sad.”
 
 
It pains me to tell you of it; but I have promised to tell you
the truth, and I will do it honestly, let it cost me what it
may. A plague more commonly associated with other countries has
been taking young victims in the United States, one by one.

^^EOP^^

After a funeral, they were covered with black cloth,
some draped with shawls like a scalloped valance.
Leftover sewing scraps, wool, linen, synthetic,
anything to shroud the odd-shaped mirrors,
though sometimes a corner was exposed like a woman
whose ankle peeks forbidden from under a long skirt.
 
A mourner must shun vanity during shiva, focusing inward
but as a child I wondered if this were to avoid ghosts,
for don't the dead take their time leaving?
I'm of a generation where grandparents disappeared,
great aunts with European accents,
rarely an explanation provided to us children.
 
My mother died too young.
With a baby in arms I couldn't bear to fling
that dark cloth over the glass.
After all she had come back from the dead so often,
even the doctors could not explain it.
Each time I looked in a mirror my mother gazed back.
I could never tell if she were trying to tell me something
or to take the baby with her.
 


^^EOP^^

The wall of identical boxes into which
our Aunt Sticky sorted the daily mail
was at the far end of her dining room,
and from the private side looked like
a fancy wallpaper upon which peonies
pushed through a white wooden trellis,
or sometimes like crates of chickens
stacked all the way to the ceiling.
I'd learned by then – I was a little boy –
that a thing can look like one thing
on one day and another on another,
depending on how you might be feeling.
There were times when we were there,
having our coffee and sweet rolls,
when some woman on the lobby side
would with a click unlock her box
and leaning down, peer inside to see
if she had mail, and see us at the table,
Mother and Father, my sister and I
and our postmistress aunt, and call out,
"Yoohoo, Sticky! I see you have company!"
and waggle her fingers, waving hello.
 


^^EOP^^

In the evening she comes to me
like a child ready for bed.
She slips under covers, curls
into my curves or stretches against
my spine. Some have said they fear
I might crush her, but we're a tender
pair, each aware of the warmth
and the other.
 
I knew a woman once who kept
an orphaned antelope, let it
roam her kitchen, sleep in her bed,
musky scent and hooves.
 
This dog looks like a small deer,
poised and silent in the lawn,
but at night, she is a dark body, lean
and long against the lavender cotton
of my summer sleeping. We are bone
and bone, muscle and muscle,
and underneath each surface
a quiet and insistent pulse.


^^EOP^^

and you press into the dark, imagine
the stranger two rows back, that fragile
chance you’ll forget in the second trailer.
 
Now it’s quiet, still
this burden of being watcher and screen
and what floats across it–light pouring out
 
its time and necklines and train wrecks.
What a relief to yield to the EXIT
sign red “I” blinking like a candle.
 
Soon the enormous figures moving
across rooms, the emphatic narrative
arcs. (There’s the thrum of the subway,
 
its engine of extras.) Here now
the beginning of trivia tests. Warning puppets
with brown-bag faces and fringy hair.
 
You’re almost here. But what you want
is the after. How yourself you are now
walking into the night, full moon over Houston Street,
 
at the bright fruit stand touching the yellow
mums. Here you are: Woman with Cilantro
listening to the rattle of the wrap,
 
the paper sound paper makes after you
have heard movie paper. Apples are more apples.
Paper more paper. Cilantro, its sweaty green self.


^^EOP^^

We start stopping when she’s afraid
something bad will happen. Don’t worry,
I say, all will be well.
 
How could she know? She’s never
read it, never heard of Elizabeth
and Jane, never wanted Mr. Darcy. Like me
 
she needs to know how things will end.
I know Elizabeth will be fine. As I knew,
last week, my sister weeping, that Elinor–
 
sobbing, begging–wouldn’t lose Marianne.
It’s Jane Austen! My sister doesn’t know that
in Austen nothing really bad happens. I leave her
 
on the couch with the last hours.
How much my sister will have to endure,
alone, with this new drama.
 
Later her message. The last one
in which she will sound like herself. Hi, it’s me. The movie was unbelievable. 
  Unbelievable. 
 


^^EOP^^

Chemo      Tarceva     prayer
meditation    affirmation      Xanax
Avastin     Nebulizer     Zofran
Zoloft     Vicodin     notebooks
nurses     oxygen tank     pastina
magical thinking     PET scans     movies
therapy     phone calls     candles
acceptance     denial     meatloaf
doctors     rosary beads     sleep
Irish soda bread     internet     incantations
visitors     sesame oil     pain patches
CAT scans     massage     shopping
thin sliced Italian bread with melted mozzarella
St. Anthony oil     Lourdes water     St. Peregrine
tea     spring water     get well cards
relaxation tapes     recliner     cooking shows
cotton T-shirts     lawn furniture     a new baby
giving up Paris     giving up Miami     charts
bargaining     not bargaining     connections
counting with her     breathing for her     will Pride and Prejudice     Downton Abbey     prayer
watching TV     not watching TV     prayer
prayer     prayer     prayer
lists   
 


^^EOP^^

At the top of a hill each morning,
I wait for the bus by the donut store.
Its pink sign looks hot,
curls, like a rope, a stem to a brain.
You turn toward a jade
at the height of your neighborhood,
stop at a light in its gut.
The sun starts to seep up,
reaching all grasses and grooves of the city.
A white bus with black windows passes.
A few minutes later, the city bus arrives like a room.
It crawls warm and dull to the west edge,
breathing its heat, a few baby hands
warming wide glass.
The billboard at my stop displays a large number to call.
A man walks his sniffing dog below it,
sharp legs brushing wild onion.
At the base of the hill,
I enter my code,
push the gray gate open,
allow the worn loop of my bag
down my arm, walk to my station.
I drop the metal end of a hose
into a bucket, turn the tough faucet.
Traveling after the sound,
the cold rushes out
full force from the rubber,
breaking into itself, interrupting and filling
the round plastic space.
Hungry, I pick up the water.


^^EOP^^

All this time I've been looking for words for certain difficult women because they aren't able to speak for themselves, and now the Clinton Foundation has come up with a brilliant campaign—they decided, for International Women's Day, through digital magic to  erase women on the cover of Condé Nast, posters, billboards, those figures replaced by empty space because women have not yet achieved gender equity, as noted on a website, not-there.org, and they're right. We haven't. But when I read about not-there.org and saw its flashy graphics, I wasn't thinking about how women are not-there-yet, metaphorically, I  just thought about women who are really not there, women and girls who keep disappearing (not from magazines, who don't make news in Manhattan) like they've evaporated, like illusions, hundreds in Juárez, twelve hundred  missing and murdered Native women across Canada. The hands of men.  Now you see her. Not. Not-there. Not here, either,  or anywhere. Maybe only part of the problem is the predatory perpetrator- prestidigitator who more often than not knows her, knows how to keep her quiet, who may claim to love her, even, maybe getting even—or the serial rapist-killer in the bushes who bushwhacks her in the dark. You're always safe, says the forensic psychiatrist, unless a monster happens to show up, and then you're not. Not-there. Maybe a lonely mandible, maxilla, fibula, or  ulna shows up, or a bagged body gets dragged from the river. Or not. Is this the value we permit a woman's life to have (or not-have) throughout a wrong world, a global idea of her as disposable parts? In the end, this is not a  xenophobic poem, not specific—it's everywhere. Not-there. Right here. Yes, the sun rises anyway, but now the parents are staring past each other, that zero between them like a chalked outline in their family photograph. Or not.
 


^^EOP^^

Mahogany maple syrup  runs in spider web lines.  My father never uses the stuff, he eats pancakes, powdered, butter moist.  When I was a child, he knew more of straightness.  Lines and razors were friends.  One night he tried to die by his hand. A girl jumped before he walked to the ledge.  Her mangled body wore the rails like a girdle, her limbs so thin they became a blood putty. Angel,  her name. They had to lift the train to take her out.


^^EOP^^

My hands hold, my father’s older the wires–
picture rolls once, then steadies… an English castle!
A voice-over drones about Edward I,
who, to subdue the Welsh, built castles.
Some sixty years, dozens of engineers, the masses
conscripted from the villages.
 
My father moves on to a Zenith
with a bad tuner. TVs interest him, not English
with their damp, historical programming.
 
                                                         *    *   *
 
Here there were Indians, mound builders.
Here, an English fort, a few farmers.
And here the industrialist settled his ass,
John Ford on the river dredging sand
for making glass. Plate glass.
(Why should America buy from Europe?)
Some half dozen years, German engineers, and hundreds of Slavic peasants.
 
Grandfather sat on his samovar
warming himself and making excuses,
but finally, he set off.
Got a room, became a shoveler.
Got a wife, a company house.
Ford City: a valley filling with properties.
 
No one got along–
Not Labor and Capital, not Germans and Slavs,
not husband and wives, for that matter.
 
                                                        *    *   *
 
Edward’s castles were ruins
by the fifteenth century. Not from Welsh armies,
but the rise of the middle class.
The towns around a castle thrived:
tailors, smithies, cobblers, coopers.
Drawing in the Welsh peasants.
And what with intermarriage and the rise of capitalism…
a castle grew obsolescent.
 
I turn off the set. My father hunts
cigarettes at the Kwik-Mart on the corner.
Overhead, my mother’s footsteps,
the tonk of bottles,
the scraping of plates.
 
                                                       *    *   *
 
During Eisenhower’s reign
my grandfather retired and mowed his lawn
until I took over. He primed the filter,
set the choke, then we took turns pulling
till the sputtering engine caught.
(“Somanabitch,” he spit)
And watched me as I mowed
back and forth for two dollars.
 
Once in the garage he showed me a scythe.
He mowed hay in the old country, and the women
would follow, raking it in windrows.
 
                                                        *    *   * 
The factories today are mostly closed down,
or full of robots or far off in Asia.
Ford City lives through the mail:
compensation, a thin pension,
and, of course, Social Security.
 
I always drive along the factory, windows rolled down;
I want my kids in the back seat to see.
Seven or eight, probably pensioners, congregate
on the corner, each man dressed quite alike:
Sears jacket, cigarette, salt-and-pepper hair.
 
“Honk the horn,” my oldest begs.
He waves and waves zealously
until a man turns–a man
with my face, but full of sweetness now,
silence and clarity.


^^EOP^^

I’m this tiny, this statuesque, and everywhere in between, and everywhere in between bony and overweight, my shadow cannot hold one shape in Omaha, in Tuscaloosa, in Aberdeen.  My skin is mocha brown, two shades darker than taupe, your question is racist, nutmeg, beige, I’m not offended by your question at all. Penis or vagina? Yes and yes. Gay or straight? Both boxes. Bi, not bi, who cares, stop  fixating on my sex life, Jesus never leveled his eye to a bedroom’s keyhole. I go to church in Tempe, in Waco, the one with the exquisite  stained glass, the one with a white spire like the tip of a Klansman’s hood. Churches creep me out, I never step inside one, never utter hymns, Sundays I hide my flesh  with camouflage and hunt. I don’t hunt but wish every deer wore a bulletproof vest and fired back. It’s cinnamon, my skin, it’s more sandstone than any color I know.  I voted for Obama, McCain, Nader, I was too apathetic to vote, too lazy to walk one block, two blocks to the voting booth For or against  a women’s right to choose? Yes, for and against. For waterboarding, for strapping detainees  with snorkels and diving masks. Against burning fossil fuels, let’s punish all those smokestacks for eating the ozone, bring the wrecking balls,  but build more smokestacks, we need jobs here in Harrisburg, here in Kalamazoo. Against gun control, for cotton bullets, for constructing  a better fence along the border, let’s raise  concrete toward the sky, why does it need all that space to begin with? For creating holes in the fence, adding ladders, they’re not here to steal work from us, no one dreams of crab walking for hours across a lettuce field so someone could order the Caesar salad.  No one dreams of sliding a squeegee down the cloud-mirrored windows of a high-rise,  but some of us do it. Some of us sell flowers.  Some of us cut hair. Some of us carefully steer a mower around the cemetery grounds. Some of us paint houses. Some of us monitor  the power grid. Some of us ring you up  while some of us crisscross a parking lot to gather the shopping carts into one long, rolling, clamorous and glittering backbone. 


^^EOP^^

All night I hear the noise of water sobbing. All night I make night in me, I make the day that begins on my account, that sobs because day falls like water through night.
         All night I hear the voice of someone seeking me out. All night you abandon me slowly like the water that sobs slowly falling. All night I write luminous messages, messages of rain, all night someone checks for me and I check for someone.
         The noise of steps in the circle near this choleric light birthed from my insomnia. Steps of someone who no longer writhes, who no longer writes. All night someone holds back, then crosses the circle of bitter light.
         All night I drown in your eyes become my eyes. All night I prod myself on toward that squatter in the circle of my silence. All night I see something lurch toward my looking, something humid, contrived of silence launching the sound of someone sobbing.
         Absence blows grayly and night goes dense. Night, the shade of the eyelids of the dead, viscous night, exhaling some black oil that blows me forward and prompts me to search out an empty space without warmth, without cold. All night I flee from someone. I lead the chase, I lead the fugue. I sing a song of mourning. Black birds over black shrouds. My brain cries. Demented wind. I leave the tense and strained hand, I don’t want to know anything but this perpetual wailing, this clatter in the night, this delay, this infamy, this pursuit, this inexistence.
         All night I see that abandonment is me, that the sole sobbing voice is me. We can search with lanterns, cross the shadow’s lie. We can feel the heart thud in the thigh and water subside in the archaic site of the heart.
         All night I ask you why. All night you tell me no.
 


^^EOP^^

I. The time has come for the nation to turn a new page by righting wrongs of the past.  We apologise for laws and policies that inflicted profound grief, suffering, and loss and for the removal of children from families, communities, and country.  For the pain of these, their descendants, and for families left behind, to mothers, fathers, brothers, sisters, for indignity inflicted on a proud people, we say sorry.  We resolve that the injustices of the past must never, never happen again and look to a future based on mutual respect, where all, whatever their origins, are equal partners.  Spoken by Australian Prime Minister Kevin Rudd, introduced in January and delivered November 29, 2008, the day after he was sworn into office

^^EOP^^

Someone is looking for us.
I sensed it earlier at the creek
while floating on my back, and again
on Route 8 near Brookline.
So we’ve detoured to this hillside
eroding and crazy with markers.
We’re looking for row mm or nn
or something like that.
I lug the baby; my wife runs ahead.
This neighborhood knows her–
she passes so easily between stones.
She finds the grave, her father
dead ten years now. In the time it takes
to say kaddish the sun’s dropped.
I set down my son
and he crawls in the dimness,
pulling himself up on the headstone.
How delicately he fingers the marble.
Quickly he rounds its corner. Vanishes.
I’m thinking: grass, stone, quiet–
then babbling from another world.


^^EOP^^

Shoot in 16 mm film, capture her sitting under an olive-green archway.               Loop the sound of steel striking glass.  When you blink, the camera captures  the frame of her kin, walking upside down.               Loop the sound of tundra grass sprouting.  Her hairline marks her shift        from caribou to woman.  Standing in front of three white spotlights  the silhouette of five black arrowheads  departs from her lips.                Splice together her eyelashes and                frozen lids        exaggerate the strain                of her freckles coiled into song.  Inukshuks tumble from the tips of her fingernails  guiding the landing strip for twin otters;  they watch their children travel to the moon,                or perhaps they erase our oiled webs.                Chart sixteen luminaries into the Beaufort Sea.                                             Wait.     Wait.        Wait.                              The shutter will remember                                             their white crested etchings.  They resurface in the lyric of your documentary.


^^EOP^^

You’re right. I meant “midst,” not “mist.”
I don’t know what I was stinking,
I mean thinking, soap speaks intimately
to my skin every day. Most days.
Depending if darkness has risen
to my skull like smoke up a chimney floe.
Flue. Then no stepping nude
into the shower, no mist turning
the bathroom mirror into frosted glass
where my face would float
coldly in the oval. Picture a caveman
encased in ice. Good. I like how
your mind works, how your eyes
inside your mind works, and your actual eyes
reading this, their icy precision, nothing
slips by them. Even now I can feel you
hovering silently above these lines,
hawkish, Godlike, each period
a lone figure kneeling in the snow.
That’s too solemn. I would like to send
search parties and rescue choppers
to every period ever printed.
I would like to apologize to my wife
for not showering on Monday and Tuesday.
I was stinking. I was simultaneously
numb and needled with anxiety,
in the midst of a depressive episode.
Although “mist” would work too,
metaphorically speaking, in the mist of,
in the fog of, this gray haze that followed me
relentlessly from room to room
until every red bell inside my head
was wrong. Rung.


^^EOP^^

No daylight for two months, an ice chisel slivers frozen lake water refracting blue cinders.  By light of an oil lamp, a child learns to savor marrow: cracked caribou bones a heap on the floor.  A sinew, thickly wrapped in soot, threads through the meat on her chin: a tattoo in three slender lines.  One white ptarmigan plume fastened to the lip of a birch wood basket; thaw approaches: the plume turns brown.  On the edge of the open lead, a toggle-head harpoon waits to launch: bowhead sings to krill.  Thickened pack ice cracking; a baleen fishing line pulls taut a silver dorsal fin of a round white fish.  A slate-blade knife slices along the grain of a caribou hindquarter; the ice cellar lined in willow branches is empty.  Saltwater suffuses into a flint quarry, offshore a thin layer of radiation glazes leathered walrus skin.  Alongside shatters of a hummock, a marsh marigold flattens under three black toes of a sandhill crane.  A translucent sheep horn dipper skims a freshwater stream; underneath, arctic char lay eggs of mercury.  Picked before the fall migration, cloudberries drench in whale oil, ferment in a sealskin poke.  A tundra swan nests inside a rusted steel rum; she abandons her newborns hatched a deep crimson.


^^EOP^^

The bus steps are high, but William clambers up gamely.
Doors shut. He peers out a print-marked window.
From the street corner, I wave, wistful as a soldier’s bride
as his bus pulls away and turns a corner.
 
At noon the yellow bus returns him
to the same place where I’m standing again.
He thinks I stood there all day, waiting in his absence.
When he finds out I left to play tennis,
 
his forehead crumples like paper in a wastebasket.
Now he knows I can move on my own without him.
Tears drawn from the well of desertion form in his eyes.
I’m his first love and his greatest disappointment.


^^EOP^^

What we built to hold us, the year's memory, menus and daytrips, after a while  came loose. Those nights we balanced on each other's mistakes,  cradling our wine: twigs those branches now.  Who knew what lived there? She she she called one bird.  What lived there knew its place. Another bird splits its nest wide,  hinges the gap with spider silk, learning to give, to give, to give until breaking. Only then—  either one gives until breaking or one does not.


^^EOP^^

Does my little son miss the smell
of his first mother? I wonder
as the mewl of his mouth
opens toward a plastic bottle
that is not her breast.
 
Sudden new mother,
I bury my nose deep
into his skullcap of ringlets,
his starry cheesiness.
 
In her good-bye letter to him
sealed in his album
with a birth certificate, which now
list my name as Mother,
 
his first mother writes
she nursed him briefly
after he emerged into
the second room of his world.
 
I think of milk, volcanic
and insistent, answering
the newborn’s gigantic thirst,
a primal agreement between
generosity and greed.
 
Sometimes I press my nose
to the glass of that place
where a mother and my child
belong to each other;
I cannot imagine coming
between them.
 
But then I want to lick him all over
with a cow’s thick tongue,
to taste him and mark him as mine
so if the other mother returns,
she will refuse her handled calf
smeared with my smell.
 


^^EOP^^

My father was four years in the war,
and afterward, according to my mother,
had nothing to say. She says he trembled
in his sleep the next four years.
My father was twice the father of sons
miscarried, and afterward said nothing.
My mother keeps this silence also.
Four times my father was on strike,
and according to my mother; had nothing
to say. She says the company didn’t understand,
nor can her son, the meaning
of an extra fifteen cents an hour in 1956
to a man tending a glass furnace in August.
 
I have always remembered him a tired man.
I have respected him like a guest
and expected nothing.
It is April now.
My life lies before me,
enticing as the woman at my side.
Now, in April, I want him to speak.
I want to stand against the worn body
of his pain. I want to try it on
like a coat that does not fit.


^^EOP^^

Some nights we feel the furred darkness of an ancient one's breath and are trapped in awakening, dismembered by events we no longer recall. We can touch the windowsill, where October air gathers as hours slip past in thin robes, the forest a concert of voices. The last crickets let go of their songs.  The land speaks, its language arising from its own geography— the mountains' hulked shapes are blue whales, remembering when they were undersea ridges, and rivers are serpentine strands  hammered from silver, and dark trees talk to the wind—weaving mortal lives, drumbeats, pillars of smoke, voices wavering into updraft, the storyteller shifting the present.


^^EOP^^

There are too many of us for you to believe you are either alone or  responsible. No woman asks for  this. Some are children. Some are boys. Every one of us should have been heard. This is for Anna, age 17, who was then beaten and left to die; for Nathan, who at 11 admired the  basketball coach; for Rosaline, who sees in her baby the face of a rapist and who finds that face difficult to love; for sisters when soldiers came, mothers imprisoned among guards, for aunties grandmas daughters sons, for one who was tied and one who tried to scream, one whose husband watched, one violated time after time, one torn apart, who called the police who did not call her back, who went to the clinic where there were no kits, who numbed her shame with drugs, who could not drink enough to forget, who took her life, who believed she was an object, who said nothing, who knew no one was there and that no one  would ever be there. Know this: there are so many that if we could speak, our voices might spread like floodwaters over their boots and swell past security stations; that if we cried out together we might finally understand it as an assault on all people, all creation, and maybe then there would be justice in this war to claim yourself, a struggle mapped all over the flesh of every woman or child who has known what it is to be  used, as you were, your sacred body.


^^EOP^^

After a while the 500-year-old village became a secret, carved into the wall of the forest where it met the Pacific, eleven long houses and their racks of drying fish, their dogs. No roads to this town, only boats and the memory of boaters. Blankets made from woodpecker feathers, cattail fluff, cedar bark and dog hair woven into a plaid pattern.  At least that's what I remember of the museum's diorama. When the mud came down the mountain and covered the  village, no one had lived there for years. It was a boater who remembered, after a while, that the village was gone, and also that it had once existed. Archaeologists brought garden hoses to wash the mud off and hooked the hoses up  to the sea. Some of what had been preserved in the mud was destroyed that day by the water pressure, and then later most else was ruined by the wind and rain, but at least for a few weeks they could hold the bones in their hands. The archaeologists brought their dogs, they lived there a while.


^^EOP^^

The Roman candle of a yard light
caramelizes the old snow.
The glow trespasses the dark hold
of December, dimming the view
 
of the night sky with its winter
triangle a boy strains to see
through the haze, as he lets his jacket
hang open, unzipped to the cold.
 
He knows to return through
the black cleft between buildings,
below electric wires that seem
to carry a little train of snow
 
on their slim rails, where he throws
the switch that shuts off the bulb
on its pole, that opens the dome
to a blast of stars in outer space,
 
to the pinpoint of Jupiter,
to the constellation of Orion hunting
the Great Bear that the boy follows
to find a smudge of gray–he can gaze
 
through that peep hole to another
galaxy also spangled with radiance
from stars that traveled two
and a half million light years
 
before appearing as a signal
in the rod cells of his eyes
that pass impulses through
neurons and nerves
 
to his brain that creates images.
He draws in a sharp breath,
the high voltage power box
of his chest hot and humming.
 


^^EOP^^

I.  I borrow wings from other angels, coast the streets to find feathers loosely attached to slender silver ties. With care, I close the catch and fasten cardboard stiffened form so close  I cannot breathe or fly for the air pushed out into a world in masquerade. I am African. I am goddess with flare sounding the trumpets. I call out God.  Meaning changes like sea water in storm. I part the crowds until, beaten, my wings fly, fall, litter the streets. I cradle the newborn twins and realize that I am fallen,  a lesser angel, wingless and depressed. I am seductress unpetaled, undressed.  II.  dress her navel in lotus flowers to swim in the pool of her abdomen twine orange blossoms in her hair and smell the scent of oils and natural perfume kiss her nipples so that they become pyramids wet from a summer rain of tongue press her down into soft linens with hard body folding into hers like tributary waters warm her hands against heated chest that covers drum rhythms resounding  men, worship your women this way women, flush at the adoration and you will know how I feel when he touches my hand


^^EOP^^

                    
                    
                    Once again, someone falls in their first falling–fall of two bodies, of two eyes, of four green eyes or eight green eyes if we count those born in the mirror (at midnight, in the purest fear, in the loss), you haven’t been able to recognize the voice of your dull silence, to see the earthly messages scrawled in the middle of one mad state, when the body is a glass and from ourselves and from the other we drink some kind of impossible water.
         Desire needlessly spills on me a cursed liqueur. For my thirsty thirst, what can the promise of eyes do? I speak of something not in this world. I speak of someone whose purpose is elsewhere.
         And I was naked in memory of the white night. Drunk and I made love all night, just like a sick dog.
         Sometimes we suffer too much reality in the space of a single night. We get undressed, we’re horrified. We’re aware the mirror sounds like a watch, the mirror from which your cry will pour out, your laceration.
         Night opens itself only once. It’s enough. You see. You’ve seen. Fear of being two in the mirror, and suddenly we’re four. We cry, we moan, my fear, my joy more horrible than my fear, my visceral words, my words are keys that lock me into a mirror, with you, but ever alone. And I am well aware what night is made of. We’ve fallen so completely into jaws that didn’t expect this sacrifice, this condemnation of my eyes which have seen. I speak of a discovery: felt the I in sex, sex in the I. I speak of burying everyday fear to secure the fear of an instant. The purest loss. But who’ll say: you don’t cry anymore at night? Because madness is also a lie. Like night. Like death.
 
                

^^EOP^^

I carry my spikes and step on the field an hour  ahead of the others. Last day of March with April  offering tickets for the new season. I'm full of sun  on wet grass, in love with blistered benches.  A sparrow sits on the backstop, watching, ready  to dart if I catch its eye. I drop my bag on home plate  and swirl my foot in the dust the way my cousin does  with his fingers on the skin of a drum head. Next year  he'll be released with the others who spent mornings  breaking windows and trashing vacation homes  like drunks in the right field bleachers. Here, I'm alone  with a sparrow and the smell of a baseball morning  settling around me like a comforter. I start trotting  to first base, the ankles loosening, then the knees,  as the dust begins to lift into the breaking light.  Around second and third I stretch my arms  in a rotary motion ready to fly. A hand waves back  from a passing car, someone who knows me  or remembers rising one morning when the game  of who you are is played out in your mind,  and around you a stadium full of fans begs you to do what you usually do in the clutch. The bat I pull from the bag for the first time is my father's  Louisville Slugger, thirty-three inches, wood barrel.  I thought enough time had passed, the attic dust  hard in the grooves. I stroke it slowly like a weapon you love to touch but would never use. He hit .304 at Omaha the season he was drafted, all-star  rookie-of-the-year. He said we'd join him soon. Then that other draft. He would have been here. I swear he would. The silence feels oppressive now. I dig for a scuffed ball and throw it up, shoulder high,  but let it fall. A natural hitter, my father said, holding my hands. I grip the tar-stained handle. Tears blur the wall that's so far away it looks warped. I aim for marrow deep inside, April hungry for the kill.


^^EOP^^




           Tell me how you die and I will tell you 
           who you are.
                                       Octavio Paz



I stand in line. The woman ahead of me,  blowzy-haired and angry, is told that grace  is the act of restraint and road-kill is not a sport.  She can choose to wait or test the judgment  at another entrance. I know that morality,  penance, a kind heart don't matter, nor the faith  I embraced or didn't, the people I saved. I know  the key is where I land on the scale of commitment.  Earnhardt, Sr., died for the game, and got in.  Many ancient Egyptians buried juggling balls  with them, as though endless practice and craft  were their gifts to the next world. They entered.  I ask if I can peek in, maybe stand on the edge  and look into the vast canyon of pits, arenas,  fields, fairways, pools, rings, tables, tracks,  courts, beaches, forests, mountains  where war is forbidden. Here is what I bring  for review: a nasty fastball, a runner-up ring,  individual initiative, a contrary attitude, the heart  of a poet. I bring a willingness to run like an outlaw,  honor the Greeks and Makahiki, invent new games,  practice past dusk, play on the second squad,  and keep score until I can get in the game  with eternity left on the clock. I hope it is enough.


^^EOP^^

Mary Magdalene                                         Virgin Mother                                                                 Mary, Sister of Martha

^^EOP^^

We the people, we the one
times 320 million, I’m rounding up, there’s really
too many grass blades to count,
wheat plants to tally, just see
the whole field swaying from here to that shy
blue mountain. Swaying
as in rocking, but also the other
definition of the verb: we sway, we influence,
we impress. Unless we’re asleep,
the field’s asleep, more a postcard
than a real field, portrait of the people
unmoved. You know that shooting last week?
I will admit the number dead
was too low to startle me
if you admit you felt the same,
and the person standing by you
agrees, and the person beside that person.
It has to be double digits,
don’t you think? To really
shake up your afternoon? I’m troubled by
how untroubled I felt, my mind’s humdrum
regarding the total coffins, five
if you care to know, five still
even if you don’t. I’m angry
I’m getting used to it, the daily
gunned down, pop-pop on Wednesday,
Thursday’s spent casings
pinging on the sidewalk. It all sounds
so industrial, there’s nothing metal
that won’t make a noise, I’m thinking every gun
should come with a microphone,
each street with loudspeakers
to broadcast their banging.
We would never sleep, the field
always awake, acres of swaying
up to that shy blue mountain, no wonder
why it cowers on the horizon, I mean
look at us, look with the mountain’s eyes
we the people
putting holes in the people.


^^EOP^^

Look who’s whistling through bleached teeth now,
one hand on svelte hip, one fist pumping the air–
Pittsburgh–once that madcap & zany joke factory
 
now chosen for her fetching comeback tale
& her earth-sheltered welcome center
& her Warhol & her Tropical Forest Conservatory
 
& her Rosemont, working farm of the moguls
of ketchup. Rarely since the global credit crisis
do Pittsburghers cross bridges or rivers or the thresholds
 
of stunningly profitable ventures. Yet tonight,
as global output contracts at a pace not seen since
the 1930s, as the French president proposes reform
 
of the International Monetary Fund & the US
president delights in the local crepes with crispy edges,
& as Greenpeace commandos drape a WHAT THE FUCK?
 
banner from the deck of the West End Bridge
(above which Chinook & Black Hawk helicopter hover),
& as police use the LRAD sound cannon on protesters
for the first time in the United States or Canada–
 
a Pittsburgh Pirate homers into the Allegheny River
& sets the esplanade ablaze with the flash
& fizzle of fireworks launched at the flat lozenge
 
of the moon, a ghostly azure, suspended low
above the sweep of the cantilevered roofs
on the opposite shoreline–the poured concrete,
 
the glass towers, the obelisks–a costly parody
of bygone days when confidence in the future, evinced
by our sixty miles of integrated mills, was illustrated
 
by a time capsule, a chamber “hermetically” sealed
in Steel City alloys, bicentennially filled with newsprint
& artifacts of 1958 Pittsburgh to be cracked open
 
& savored in some distant epoch, an idea first
embraced by Esarhaddon, son of Sennacherib, king
of Assyria, Babylonia, & Egypt, & reenacted now
 
in waves of sound & light–the roar of fireworks night
for a losing franchise, the hoarse voices of Pittsburghers–
wafting into the void, accelerated by Jupiter’s pull,
 
& then hurled by Jupiter out of the solar system,
yet another urban missive from a noisy planet,
a comingling of mathematics and human music, charming
 
& powerful, a murmur preserved of our city-state
that once flourished–before its citizens dispersed
to other lands, to greater deeds on the blue Earth.


^^EOP^^

All that once was is this,
shattered glass, a rot
of tin and wood, the hum
of limp-legged wasps that ascend
like mote swirls in the heatlight.
                                  
Out front a cherry tree
buckles in fruit, harvested
by yellow jackets and starlings,
the wind, the rain, and the sun.
 


^^EOP^^

How can we die when we're already
prone to leaving the table mid-meal
like Ancient Ones gone to breathe
elsewhere. Salt sits still, but pepper's gone
rolled off in a rush. We've practiced dying
for a long time: when we skip dance or town,
when we chew. We've rounded out
like dining room walls in a canyon, eaten
through by wind—Sorry we rushed off;
the food wasn't ours. Sorry the grease sits
white on our plates, and the jam that didn't set—
use it as syrup to cover every theory of us.


^^EOP^^

Before clock hands showed the time
time ceased, and looking glasses
were veiled as if they still held
familiar faces, in those
last moments when breath shallowed
like a wellspring running dry,
God-words quickened, only then
the dying left death-beds borne
on the arms of the gathered,
lowered to the floor so they
might press close, as though a door
through which to listen and know
the earth's old secrets before
it opened, and they entered.


^^EOP^^

More than a hundred dollars of them.
 
It was pure folly. I had to find more glass things to stuff
        them in.
 
Now a white and purple cloud is breathing in each corner
 
of the room I love. Now a mass of flowers spills down my
        dining table—
 
each fresh-faced, extending delicate leaves
 
into the crush. Didn't I watch
 
children shuffle strictly in line, cradle
 
candles that dribbled hot white on their fingers,
 
chanting Latin—just to fashion Sevilla's Easter? Wasn't I sad?
        Didn't I use to
 
go mucking through streambeds with the skunk cabbage
        raising
 
bursting violet spears?—Look, the afternoon dies
 
as night begins in the heart of the lilies and smokes up
 
their fluted throats until it fills the room
 
and my lights have to be not switched on.
 
And in close darkness the aroma grows so sweet,
 
so strong, that it could slice me open. It does.
 
I know I'm not the only one whose life is a conditional clause
 
hanging from something to do with spring and one tall room
        and the tremble of my phone.
 
I'm not the only one that love makes feel like a dozen
 
flapping bedsheets being ripped to prayer flags by the wind.
 
When I stand in full sun I feel I have been falling headfirst for
        decades.
 
God, I am so transparent.
 
So light.
 


^^EOP^^




          Be willing to dismantle for the purpose
          of rebuilding on more solid structure.
                                                                 —Horoscope
 



First you must lift the idea
(be careful it may be heavy)
and haul it out to the dumpster.
Next locate the meaning—it may not
come easily, though if you have
the right tools and they are good tools
you should have no difficulty. Now
it is the sentences' turn: take each one
strip it of grammar (you may need
abrasives here) and hang them all
on a line. When thoroughly dried,
lay each one down on the grass or
if you live in the city, the sidewalk will do.
The point is, make sure you put them
in harm's way, wherever you are.
Don't try to protect them. It may be
they will go to war, or wander the desert
or haunt the streets like beggars
or run from the police or suffer
loneliness and despair. Remember:
they must make their own way. The best
you can do is to stay out of theirs
and take them back in if they return.


^^EOP^^

Here was no place for illumination
the cotton dust thick window-strained light.
The metal squall drowned what could not be shouted
everything geared warping and filling.
 
Though surely there were some times that he paused
my grandfather thinking This is my life
and catching himself before he was caught
lost wages or fingers the risk of reflection.
 
Or another recalled in those reckoning moments
remembering the mountains the hardscrabble farm
where a workday as long bought no guarantee
of money come fall full bellies in winter.
 
To earn extra pay each spring he would climb
the mill's water tower repaint the one word.
That vowel heavy word defined the horizon
a word my grandfather could not even read.


^^EOP^^

That summer night
Was hot
Steaming like a crab
Luscious under the shell
 
Televisions gone bleary
Blinked
In front of men
In undershirts drinking beer
 
Wives upstairs took showers
Caught
A glimpse of their backs
In hallway mirrors
 
I sat in the dark
Invisible
On the backporch
Drinking in the night
 
And it tasted good
So good
Going down
And somebody like me
 
Blew night through an alto sax
Blew and blew
His cooling breath
His hot cool breath on me—
 
And I came alive
Glowing
In the dark
Listening like a fool


^^EOP^^

 I. ADMIRAL
 
Laid out on vellum, the past
is a long wound. It unfolds
five centuries later,
beneath the heavy pens of scholars.
The world shifts and spins
as the Admiral's bronze astrolabe
measures the paths between stars.
The sky is written in the sea's
uneasy mirror, and mermaids
comb their hair in the distance. They are not, he writes, so beautiful as I have heard. He dreams of his own
circuitous route to the Heavens.
God and the Crown. Both want too much.
 
II. GOVERNOR
 
At Guanahani, they swam to the caravel
bearing parrots and balls of cotton thread,
these people so unlike him they could not
not be saved.
                        Too angry to sleep,
the Governor haunts every room in his castle.
The servants whisper in their own tongue.
 
The severed hands of the Taino
wave in clear salt water,
in pink-tinted water.
They wave as the gold mines dry up,
as the Governor leaves Hispaniola in chains.
 
Mermaids, dog-headed men and women
with breastplates of copper—
They draw their bows, and arrows
cover the shore of Columbus's dream.
No, not the Taino, whom he once called in dios.
They touch his white skin.
They have the faces of Christian angels.


^^EOP^^

    Betty, if I set out to write this poem about you
it might turn out instead
to be about me
or any one of
my female relatives
it might turn out to be
about this young native girl
growing up in rural Alberta
in a town with fewer Indians
than ideas about Indians,
in a town just south of the 'Aryan Nations'
 
     it might turn out to be
about Anna Mae Aquash, Donald Marshall or Richard Cardinal,
it might even turn out to be
about our grandmothers,
beasts of burden in the fur trade
skinning, scraping, pounding, packing,
left behind for ‘British Standards of Womanhood,'
left for white-melting-skinned women,
not bits-of-brown women
left here in this wilderness, this colony.
 
     Betty, if I start to write a poem about you
it might turn out to be
about hunting season instead,
about 'open season' on native women
it might turn out to be
about your face       young and hopeful
staring back at me      hollow now
from a black and white page
it might be about the 'townsfolk'    (gentle word)
townsfolk who 'believed native girls were easy'
and 'less likely to complain if a sexual proposition led to violence.'
 
     Betty, if I write this poem.
 


^^EOP^^

But keep writing.
Write by the glow of the windows,
the roof alight
like a red-haired girl,
you in the back yard, safe.
 
The ladybug's flown away.
Recall her flit and armored crawl.
To the last breath of summer.
Upon the circular of winter.
 
The man may have left.
This doesn't stop
the writing. Between
the pages, a slight blur.
The man may have been old
and ill, or young
who stopped trying
to be with you.
Ghost days.
 
You're swimming across
a deep lake with a soul
you're making.
You save the swimmer,
the sailor,
the drowned,
the damned
and the beloved.


^^EOP^^

The story goes from in a rainfall
to sister walking a field
browned autumn. And when she arrives
winter has come, so the old man
rises from his chair, picks up
matches, pipes and tools, and
walks out to begin again.
 
The sculptures grow by the day,
birds in ice, recognizable
eagles, a bear who began
as a man in a moment of dance.
He does this in ice, all
winter carving at dawn,
carving at dusk.
 
And sister after walking a field
browned autumn, arrives, watches
from the east window, waits,
goes out to him in spring,
taps him on the shoulder
and points to the pools
of water he's standing over.


^^EOP^^

I.
The people who watch me hang my coat
on a peg at the office don't even know
about that other life,
the life when there was you, it,
however briefly. To them my body
is a fact casual as the weather.
I could tell them:
That day it rained
the way it rains in the New World.
Leaves struck the window like daggers.
I didn't think about God
but the ones we used to worship
the ones who want your heart still
beating, who load you with gold
and lure you to sleep
deep in the cenote.
 
II.
A girl, he said, and I nodded
though we couldn't have known.
I would have left him then
for ten thousand pesos.
I don't know what world you inhabit,
swimming there, baby, not-baby,
part of my body, not me,
swept aside like locks of hair
or toenail parings.
It's ten years today
and you who were never alive
pull a face in the leaves
of jacaranda, the only tree
that lives outside my window.
It must be your voice
whistling through the office window,
though I can't understand your words.
Comfort or accusation,
I can't understand your words.


^^EOP^^

photos of her father
in enemy uniform—
the taste of almonds


^^EOP^^

My ancestors were not diligent
and so they lived beside the fort
that's neither on the maps of Heaven,
Nor of Hell.
In these lands, there is no difference
between a star and thrown car keys.
Chicken nuggets hatch from the eggs of eagles.
I grow dirty while bathing in bottled water.
My bed comforter is a wet parking lot,
I wrap myself up in.
If I eat in the morning, there's nothing left in the evening
My dish of grass and cigarette butts topped with expired coupons.
Stir all I like; I never swallow it down.
All the while, my rabbit's foot runs about
from Las Cruces to West Memphis
searching for flawless luck.
The more one cries, the more one prospers . . .
O' ancestral demon, may my lamentation become verbal sorcery.


^^EOP^^

I come from Inuit oil money,
From instruments of chance and divination.
The most loose, shut in, wavering mind,
Recording my day with recitations, antennae,
Narration and figure, my phone might die. I'm walking dirty.
Shop and mob cops, not to touch my mother's breast
Or the queen's royal crown signature
Izzy Juju—hijacked, forsaking all others.
The untamed scotch is mine. It cost the picture a fortune
To say nothing of my turban, costume copies
Of topaz bracelets, the umpteenth translation.
Did you ever know Micah, Gay Sunshine, Grace Cathedral, Coconut?
I went from heels at Barneys to the depths of the bins.
Who could be like dropping in? I'll fold both my hands
In gloves and wait, Hope Diamond peeking out.


^^EOP^^

This is a paean to relief and ecstasy.
A man's poem of course—the electric ah!
in the long stream arcing a rainbow
under the spotlight moon, a covenant between
mv body and the earth's.
                                             I think of Li Po smiling
silently on Green Mountain and can hear Rumi
drunk on rapture—drink my brother he calls to me,
think of the elephant loosening a great ebullient
stream that floats a river past your house and drop
turds so immense you could build a hut from them
along the shore to shelter your children.
                                                                           What release!
Think of your child pedaling under your hand
and of a sudden—it just happens—you let go
and he's off on his own, free for that first time—
the achieve of, the mastery of the child.
See the stalwart trees in their silence
the stones resting in the driveway, the cat curled asleep
on the front porch, the smear of blood
on the lion's mouth sitting over his fresh gazelle
the morning paper and its stories shouting
for attention. The plenitude of it all.
                                                                And perhaps                    
somewhere a friend is dreaming of me, or someone
a stranger is peeing ecstatic under the same moon.
A covenant then between us.
                                                    True or not. It is no matter.                                    
 


^^EOP^^

It was wartime
Daisies and Maisies in overalls
Worked in factories
Snapping gum in their teeth
Ration spunk
To keep them going
 
Through weekend tours
At the local USO
Or late nights
Checking hats
For the Willard rooftop garden
It was rough
 
Making ends meet
While their men were at war
In radio worlds
And newspaper print
Nights at home were spent reading
 
Letters over and over
Like prayers
Mouths shaped
To the words
And Hershey bars
Melted on radiators


^^EOP^^

april is a dog's dream
the soft grass is growing
the sweet breeze is blowing
the air all full of singing feels just right
so no excuses now
we're going to the park
to chase and charge and chew
and I will make you see
what spring is all about
 
 


^^EOP^^

I prefer
warm fur,
a perfect fire
to lie beside,
a cozy lap
where I can nap,
an empty chair
when she's not there.
I want heat
     on my feet
     on my nose
     on my hide.
No cat I remember
dislikes December
     inside.


^^EOP^^




                                   —in memory of 
                    Cynthia Hurd, Susie Jackson, Ethel Lance, 
                    Rev. Depayne Middleton-Doctor, 
                    Hon. Rev. Clementa Pinckney, 
                    Tywanza Sanders, Rev. Daniel Simmons Sr., 
                    Rev. Sharonda Singleton, Myra Thompson 
                    Shot and killed while at church. 
                    Charleston, SC (6-18-2015), RIP
 



                           poem by        poem
we can end the violence
every day                        after
            every other day
9 killed in Charleston, South Carolina
they are not 9 they
are each one
                                         alive
we do not know
             you have a poem to offer
it is made of action—you must
search for it     run
outside and give your life to it
when you find it    walk it
back—blow upon it
carry it taller than the city where you live
when the blood comes down
do not ask          if
               it is your blood   it
is made of
              9             drops
                             honor them
wash them stop them
from falling


^^EOP^^

Last night, I went to a gay bar
with a man I love a little.
After dinner, we had a drink.
We sat in the far-back of the big backyard
and he asked, What will we do when this place closes?
I don't think it's going anywhere any time soon, I said,
though the crowd was slow for a Saturday,
and he said—Yes, but one day. Where will we go?
He walked me the half-block home
and kissed me goodnight on my stoop—
properly: not too quick, close enough
our stomachs pressed together
in a second sort of kiss.
I live next to a bar that's not a gay bar
—we just call those bars, I guess—
and because it is popular
and because I live on a busy street,
there are always people who aren't queer people
on the sidewalk on weekend nights.
Just people, I guess.
They were there last night.
As I kissed this man I was aware of them watching
and of myself wondering whether or not they were just.
But I didn't let myself feel scared, I kissed him
exactly as I wanted to, as I would have without an audience,
because I decided many years ago to refuse this fear—
an act of resistance. I left
the idea of hate out on the stoop and went inside,
to sleep, early and drunk and happy.
While I slept, a man went to a gay club
with two guns and killed forty-nine people.
Today in an interview, his father said he had been disturbed
recently by the sight of two men kissing.
What a strange power to be cursed with:
for the proof of men's desire to move men to violence.
What's a single kiss? I've had kisses
no one has ever known about, so many
kisses without consequence—
but there is a place you can't outrun,
whoever you are.
There will be a time when.
It might be a bullet, suddenly.
The sound of it. Many.
One man, two guns, fifty dead—
Two men kissing. Last night
I can't get away from, imagining it, them,
the people there to dance and laugh and drink,
who didn't believe they'd die, who couldn't have.
How else can you have a good time?
How else can you live?
There must have been two men kissing
for the first time last night, and for the last,
and two women, too, and two people who were neither.
Brown people, which cannot be a coincidence in this country
which is a racist country, which is gun country.
Today I'm thinking of the Bernie Boston photograph
Flower Power, of the Vietnam protestor placing carnations
in the rifles of the National Guard,
and wishing for a gesture as queer and simple.
The protester in the photo was gay, you know,
he went by Hibiscus and died of AIDS,
which I am also thinking about today because
(the government's response to) AIDS was a hate crime.
Now we have a president who names us,
the big and imperfectly lettered us, and here we are
getting kissed on stoops, getting married some of us,
some of us getting killed.
We must love one another whether or not we die.
Love can't block a bullet
but neither can it be shot down,
and love is, for the most part, what makes us—
in Orlando and in Brooklyn and in Kabul.
We will be everywhere, always;
there's nowhere else for us, or you, to go.
Anywhere you run in this world, love will be there to greet you.
Around any corner, there might be two men. Kissing.
 


^^EOP^^

Ten below, high of zero, 4:11 pm
flashed the alarm panel’s handsome blue touchscreen. 
Without commotion or fire the afternoon
passed slowly, full of promise, 
then disappointment.
Without heartbreak or break-in. 
For company I had Kafka on my lap
and Qolsys vibrating lightly against the wall.  4:34    ...    4:35    ...     There are all sorts of creatures in the world, I read,  wretched, limited, dumb creatures
who have no language but mechanical cries

^^EOP^^

Dear Mother // I apologize for these instructions regarding
my belated death // but police keep pestering parents on 
where to shake their child’s ashes // fuck that // Dance &
laugh my ashes into the volcanoes [volcanoes look like Earth’s 
pimples // about to burst] Dear Mother // I hope neither of
us dies but rather // we drift into alzheimers together like 
Abuela years ago // We can walk out of the house in our
bathrobes // waving at police cars & thinking they’re taxis 
taking fathers home // Dear Mother I haven’t told you but
bombs in Chelsea were so close to me last fall // I fell & 
prayed to Holy Nuns of the Erectile Dysfunction Committee
but still // I’ll never understand why // God made something 
so beautiful as the sun // on the ridge // to be blinding
Dear Mother // I’ve been much too slow to say thank you 
The word twisted on my tongue // I stutter to say th-thanks!!
& maybe it’s my accent // unable to pronounce refrigrator 
En español // refrigerador // As if our language was a child
who wet the bed from being tickled too much // & if we only 
speak one language // can we name her Joy // Dear Mother
I’ve read the credit report // & America fiscally sponsored the 
Civil War in El Salvador // where men had genitals cut off
stuffed into their mouths // their heads decapitated & placed 
between their legs // Tio saw all his friends // students slumped
on chain link fences // after marching outside the university 
As a child // I never thought how difficult it must’ve been to
pick the heads of daisies with me // by the swimming pool 
Each petal pulled // I’d recite // he loves me // he loves me not
God must // in the most bloated nights // the fullest nights 
God must’ve known // you’d follow me outside “heaven’s gates”
What an oxymoron // There must be a heaven that’s boundless & 
unbridled // where we can seek asylum // Dear Mother // please
teach me how to hold the sorrow // without losing my arms


^^EOP^^

In every dream of a room
the first room intrudes.
No matter the years, the tears dried
and forgotten, it is the skeleton
of the first that protrudes.


^^EOP^^

No woman wants to be low-hanging fruit,
my glamorous girlfriend says, but I’m indiscriminate
and love all fruit, I’m tempted to list each kind
right here, in and out of season,
because even just saying the names gives me pleasure,
as does saying your name.
I’m not alone with my passion — my whole family,
we’re a little off in this regard,
we can spend hours talking about cantaloupe
or arguing over how many flats to buy
when it’s Peach-O-Rama at the Metropolitan.
Once I even drove half a day to get to Pence Orchards
where I met and took photos of Bert Pence,
who sold me three boxes of peaches at wholesale prices.
He was so good to me, as was the late-summer freestone
I picked as I walked back through the orchard
in the August heat to the entrance gates,
which were nothing like the Gates of Hell.
On the contrary, I was in heaven there in Yakima.
I can still smell that single peach, which was profusely
low-hanging, it was the definition of low-hanging,
it fell into my hands, as you did — 
or perhaps as I did into yours — 
but that was months ago.
When I walked past the stands yesterday,
on what should have been the first day of spring,
all produce had been covered with heavy blankets
to keep it warm, to mitigate harm.
Today the temperature dropped so low
someone thought to remove the fruit entirely and stash it away.
With this strange weather we’re having, will I see you again?
I can’t help myself.


^^EOP^^

Fish tap tap tap on the roof 
Water rushes by through the living room and into the kitchen late
             night and look someone thought to do the dishes 
A lamp is on in the other room 
Two lamps 
Lampreys swirl in a bucket from last night’s dream 
I had wanted to dream about birds and all I got were these
             eels 
Who could I call to ask what to do? 
  •  
Who could move the peonies back into the kitchen and who might
             change their water? 
Other things get started 
Peepers 
Stuck in jelly 
At the same time spring pushes up against the windows
             a green screen 
And sleep 
Pooled at the top of the stairs    
Who could I call to make an appointment
             or swim? 
Cows float in the bunch 
Scraps of  brown paper 
I learn to swim in the afternoon with everyone else my age 
A sale of  Holsteins and Herefords 
You can smell the detergent in the yard with
             the other flowers 
When I woke up this morning the lights were already on in the
             clover 
  •  
Hunkered down on all fours to see it maybe press your nose
             up against it 
Like rabbits 
The bottoms of  her baby feet 
My son’s hair is still gold and smells like wheat 
The porch light sluiced through the mown grass so we would know
             where we were or were not 
At home or away 
Just upstream from a cell tower and a box of  Huggies    
Who would scoop up the backyard and who flush out
             those rabbits? 
The neighbors are already at it 
Just upstream from a can of  Red Bull and a pollen allergy 
The old mower used gasoline but this new one you just plug into a wall 
Trims the edges 
An orange extension cord crawls out from the dining room into
             the sun 
The entire afternoon stacked up on the edge of
             the patio 
  •  
Dandelions with their heads chopped off and my mother’s one or
             other dog or is that a deer? 
Deer file up to the window to look at you 
A gardening problem in the suburbs 
Deer pellets 
Your little fingers opening an apple opening
             a star 
Feeding it to a deer 
The seeds inside were red watermelon seeds    
A light sweat breaks out over the milk carton 
Not only that but also fish piled up in the back of  a truck or slung into
             waxed bags 
A silver leak 
Where is everyone? 
My kids slide inside their wet rooms asleep 
A bag of Chinook a bag of
             Silverside? 
Leaking onto a pile of ferns 
  •  
A light wash overflows this regular morning 
Aspirin with codeine inside is nice and something to look forward
             to outside of a blank slate 
The cool floors of grocery stores 
The side of your cheek in the morning
             a fish cheek 
Safeway is open ditto Fred Meyer 
The fridge opens by itself and leaks something almost lettuce and
             almost milk 
Just upstream from a pair of headphones and a Weight Watchers    
Not only a light on in the refrigerator but a puddle lit from inside 
A dragonfly drags through grass
             and trash 
You don’t get to be the grass 
That dragonfly probly isn’t even a dragonfly probly it’s a deerfly 
Snapdragons! 
I dreamt we started the whole day over from scratch 
Poured that out onto the floor 
  •  
Not only static in the trees when I wake up but something whipped
             up into glossy foam 
Chirrup-chirrup my tree makes syrup
             syrup so sweet 
Upstream from a can of Aqua Net and a Pepsi 
White twist ties 
Just opened this morning 
Skipping down the grandmother sidewalk without stepping on a
             crack 
No one to catch it or hold it    
No one to pull the light out of the rhododendrons by hand with
             their own hands 
Mom calls from the dog run in the backyard 
A minor threat 
A dog floats by another dog 
Put the coffee on I’ll be right in! 
A wind from I-5 kicks up her green jogger and there she’s gone 
Stuck in a tree 
  •  
No one to mow the backyard or the front even or take a message 
The eels are male then female and back again 
They swim under the couch and disappear 
The sun goes on despite disappointing coverage and lower fees 
Mom does her hair 
What would you like to do with this pile of cell phones? 
What would you like to eat?    
The baby likes dogs and flowers 
Bees in the lilac tree have something to say and say it without giving
             away the ending 
A yellow retriever mix or black lab or roses 
Royal Gold or Ruby Ruby 
That lilac tree probly isn’t even a lilac tree probly it’s a bush 
Press play 
Her little fingers can’t yet work
             a button 
  •  
Not only a list of ants making its way from a crack in the concrete to
             a scrap in the sink 
Flower Carpet Coral or Flower Carpet Pink 
But milk in the ground 
Babymeal 
Something opens in the day and you
             step right through 
The ants are interesting they stick together all in a line or a ring
             circling 
The rings of  Saturn    
Oh look someone picked up the tennis balls and miscellaneous toys
             before plugging in the mower 
Or a spaniel or a boxer 
No one to pick her up or hold her? 
Blight was a word we never used as the roses took or they didn’t 
The baby? 
Fragrant Cloud Fragrant Plum 
The grass is tennis-ball green 
  •  
But also that deerfly could have been a mosquito just outside the
             service area 
I could finally get through to you to reach you! 
The tips of its fingers 
Paper or plastic? 
If you want birds you might try a bird feeder 
Just upstream from a gallon of  2% and a yellow pack of American
             Spirits 
Stick on your mosquito body or yellow swimsuit
             and swim    
But also the kids breathing inside their mammal rooms breathing
             water 
Someone left the bougainvillea on all night ditto the humidifier 
Same frequency as the rhoddy’s 
You could hear it for a long time after 
Their dream names Sharpied onto the sides of a white
             plastic bag 
I could finally do that 
No one has called my cell phone now for hours   
  •  
Cherry blossoms call to the surface of things that is
             their color 
In contrast to almost everything else on the floor 
My dream kids shit in buckets 
Frogs try to get on them 
Who will shoe their pretty little feet who will hold their hands? 
This is the earth and sometimes the earth
             changes colors 
Now I remember they were horses mulching the backyard    
Who will polish their shiny little hooves? 
Who will pick them flowers? 
A regular morning 
You nuzzled open a pile of cherries and there it was the thing we
             always wanted 
Whatever that was 
A chain link fence goes round and round
             like a song 
They sleep standing up in a circle 
  •  
Dandelions pee in a corner of the yard a kind of Kodak
             yellow 
Lamb’s Tongue ditto the Coltsfoot 
My horse kids eat something off the ground I can’t quite make out
             some leather fruits and Oh’s 
Nosing in the dark 
Nosing inside of  holes 
Lay their necks across my one neck 
Just upstream from a microwave and a tub of  Cool Whip    
Noses against the sliding glass door squeak a little at night that is
             their sound 
Noses against visitors 
Who will mow around their calves? 
Mom said she wasn’t sure 
Not one memory of a butterfly back there but horseflies somehow in
             the buck grass 
Eat the roses 
Dig a little hole and get into it 
  •  
What should I do with their withers and fetlocks what should I do
             with their dressage? 
A parade is nice 
I shoveled the backyard for a picnic but you could still smell it 
The tomatoes almost took ditto
             the basil 
Not only today but also tomorrow 
Noses in the dark 
Manure noses    
The day curled up in a cup 
A private life you can hear above the washer or was that the mower
             even now it’s two blocks away 
Listening is yellow and green 
Fish swim in cell phones 
Speakers set up thoughtfully throughout the house did you
             notice that? 
Skin wings on the back of another animal or person 
Eating out a radio 
  •  
The day curled up in a corner 
Butterfly static but harder to hear the closer you are to the window
             isn’t that odd? 
Skateboards on the macadam 
Switch heel kickflip via a Frontside 180 
I couldn’t see the kids before they were born though they threw
             their voices 
An earful of leaf  blowers 
Then they were here    
The day was moving off somewhere
             hard to see 
The day was both 
Curled up on the couch 
At first I thought I could hear them through leaves and understory
             but then I wasn’t so sure 
You both do and you don’t 
More a davenport than anything else 
Just upstream from a can of  lemon Pledge and some Gordon’s 
  •  
Did I tell you that I watered the cherry tree in the backyard ditto
             the crepe myrtle? 
Is that what’s it called? 
Talking to maple leaves makes for a nice morning if quiet
             at first and then loud 
Day moves toward the door 
A box fan instead of air conditioning 
I can’t tell their voices apart 
Across the dark green lawn something glows is that a glass of milk?    
Kids curled up on the coating 
An earwig floats by another earwig 
The day listens to traffic moving off in two directions at once like
             standing in a spring shower 
Flowers appear without warning 
And whom do we have to thank for this delicious lunch? 
These petits fours? 
That one and only glass of milk? 
  •  
For instance you walk through the room without
             looking up 
The door opens out onto central air after all 
Light a cigarette in there 
Those Chinook and Silverside probly aren’t probly they’re Rainbow
             Trout and Organic Salmon 
A spoonful of roe 
No place to light your fingers 
Or move them back and forth    
For instance the phone keeps ringing in the other room 
Beneath a tea cozy 
Just upstream from a toilet cover and
             a Percocet 
More a lilac than anything else 
An ant floats by another ant 
A lilac tree 
But you don’t even know how to have fun anymore you don’t even
             like to do drugs 
  •  
Sidewalks glint in sun and trees newly opened oh shit I woke up
             with a tension headache! 
Pear blossoms 
They smell like semen 
For instance I look forward to seeing you all day 
No place to put our feet up or
             say anything 
Blah blah blahblahblah 
Quick let’s do it before the kids wake up!    
For a long time I would cut the grass in the morning before
             it got too hot 
For instance the basil burned ditto the oatmeal 
Growing up I never considered a different kind of  life because we
             had television 
It doesn’t seem that long ago 
A swimming pool in the living room 
White reverb 
I used to take off fast but now I take off slow 
  •  
More a migraine than anything else 
Something dull in the bushes is that a rabbit? 
A dead squirrel whirligigs
             the light 
That light was cling-free 
For instance a Coke is nice and something to look forward to and
             you can do it by yourself 
I think the day knows exactly what it’s doing 
Opening a stuck window or collecting a small fee    
But also you see something out the window I don’t see 
Moss grows you can count on it 
Morning dew scratched at the door then cantered away into what
             we’re not sure of 
I filtered everything through rain and got what exactly
             more rain? 
The good news is ferns 
The good news is graffiti 
Those peonies probly weren’t even peonies probly they’re dahlias 
  •  
But also the kids pick flowers if you let them 
Some petals are soapy and blow down the street a quick and linty
             pink and white dream 
As for TV there’s always perennials 
As for day care there’s always the grass 
A pile of nachos in the microwave 
Just upstream from a car battery and a glass of SunnyD 
Benadryl in the grass and grass insects tuning up the tardy afternoon a
             twitchy kickstart    
Her sneeze in the puffed-out dandelions his little cough someplace
             else altogether 
It’s time for lunch 
It’s time for the sun 
Just because you carry something from one day to the next it doesn’t
             make all days the same 
Everybody out of  the pool! 
The regular skimmers are brightly colored and constant 
The regular skimmers are chlorined and cousined 
  •  
Not only recycling but holding hands in a holding pattern the day
             spends outside 
Tied up with kitchen twine and stacked neatly by the curb 
A cardboard floats by another
             cardboard 
The next thing you know the rain has stopped 
And starts again before you know it with a drop and a drop and yet
             another drop 
A cup of coffee on the counter 
The dogs in the backyard in a lather    
Just upstream from a VHS player and a bucket of KFC 
Stars look down and count the tops
             of our heads 
A cell phone tower via a pine tree 
The newly emptied mall parking lot via a lake 
I got here late 
Wildstyle via FatCap along the chain link was red and yellow spray
             roses 
The top of my daughter’s head ditto the top
             of my son’s 
  •  
The afternoon leans toward television and birds 
A dream can stay on all morning and does so sticking around for
             drop-off and pickup 
Just in time for a quick once-over 
The pansies took ditto the ground cover 
More an annual than anything else 
The top of my daughter’s head is astro fluff in the
             atmosphere 
Blue jays on shuffle in the regular trees    
For instance bees make their home in the sandbox 
Margarine via butter 
The sound of the interstate via the sound of the sea 
The top of my son’s head is corn silk shot through a cassette deck
             playing early Black Flag 
Alone in the kitchen 
Mom presses rewind on the microwave 
Dogs melt into the linoleum 
  •  
Not only that but you don’t have to feel bad anymore 
Blue jay by blue jay 
The birds are real and wait just outside where
             we left them 
Just upstream from the new mixed-use building concern and a two-
             liter of  Diet Squirt 
Wings in the wallpaper 
Wings and glue 
I wasn’t going to do it again but maybe you could describe
             the light?    
It’s not easy but it’s a little
             easier 
Probly those earwigs weren’t even earwigs probly they were rollypollys 
Our loved ones are everywhere 
Leaves buffeted by the HVAC system 
Their names whispered through an intercom in the evergreens 
The blue jay’s nesting material was modern and shining recyclables
             reflected on the surface of  the lawn 
A twist of  tinfoil in the shape of a swan 
  •  
A cloud of dryer lint soundproofs the scrape 
Open wires braided in a regular fishtail braid or a 6-pack yoke in a
             classic milkmaid 
Cotton wool jute and burlap 
Feathers from other birds mixed with regular paper
             and fiberglass 
Just upstream from a bottle of  Sumatriptan and a case of  bottled
             water 
More a grocery list than anything else 
A single zigzag    
Tinsel blings the classic cup 
Leaves repurposed as sanitizer and a kind of traditional blockwood
             painted or flock wallpaper 
Banana leaves and artichokes on fast-forward 
Cellulose is waterproof 
Human hair or horsehair in a perfect carousel 
Not only plastic strips but cellophane draped over the vegetation 
A cell phone calls from a cornrow 
  •  
A bird calls from a saucer or plate 
A wire hanger hangs in this regular afternoon a kind of dressing
             chair without a seating assignment 
Dead twigs dead leaves and dry
             grass 
Reclaimed corners 
Reclaimed grass 
That monoprint of a maple leaf on the platform 
A phosphorous updo    
For instance neighbor kids find a nest and check on it each morning
             balanced on a pile of chairs 
The ground looks up and then returns to whatever it was doing
             before 
Curbside check-in for squeakers 
Curbside check-in for suet 
Broom bristles mop string and
             dental floss 
An onion bag in a topknot 
That twist of  tinfoil in the shape of a Park-n-Ride 
  •  
For instance a light applause breaks out over the swing set slide and
             seesaw combo 
Did I tell you I aced the bathroom? 
A roll of toilet paper 
Scotch-Brite and a butter knife 
Probly that nest wasn’t even a nest probly it was a regular
             four-in-hand 
Warm water white vinegar and Arm & Hammer 
An upload of sunlight    
For instance butterflies have tongues and hang them out in the day
             to pick up what exactly? 
The local station we used to get we don’t get anymore 
Voice mail via an otter 
A block-graph via a bluebell 
Their tongues curl in the light of a flatscreen projecting a host plant and
             a finale 
Four long two short 
Sip-sipping a hotspot 
  •  
For instance the grass looks up and then goes back to whatever
             it was doing before 
A very heavy rain followed by a very light rain 
Did I tell you I replaced everything and
             all at once? 
Dog shit in the backyard 
The day in a V shape planted in parks parkways and yards or
             seasonally planted around the house 
An attachment via an acorn 
A chat room via a catkin    
If  the day is fernlike and pointed at the ends and irregular or keeled
             as the times and styles change 
A four-ring box clutch via a pillbox 
A glass organza via a clinkerbell 
Those blue jays probly weren’t even blue jays probly they were
             finches 
You can’t put the day back together again 
A decal of a hawk silhouette 
Just upstream from a pair of  headphones and a Stouffer’s 
  •  
If  the day is tapered twigs leaf stems and a white undersurface
             tolerating the usual errands 
A small tree in the shade of a tall tree 
An ozone inside a loophole 
More a Lean Cuisine than anything else 
We let the grass go yellow on purpose and drove straight to the store 
My daughter pulls the grass up
             with her fingers 
My son uses scissors    
If  the day is deciduous and thin with waves at the margins and
             common or common enough 
Did I tell you I vacuumed the carpets and dusted
             the picture window? 
A picture of what? 
An airplane headed in the direction of  the Willamette 
Meanwhile the river looks up and then goes back to whatever it was
             doing before 
A landing strip via some riprap 
Our futures in a bindle 
  •  
If the day is untidy looking and aromatic with end-leaflets narrowing
             where the sun is lopsided and lobed 
I’ll wait outside 
We can’t leave the kids in the car anymore 
Or wind or cows or people 
Schist in your shoes pick up where we left off 
A photo-offset of a fern into a
             spreadsheet 
The blue flame in the new gas stove has fins    
If  the day is irregular on both sides and pebbled or modified by
             acrylics and permanent 
Black toner cartridge via a starling 
A stop bath via a sparrow 
The afternoon clears the table for flowers and more
             television 
Not only whatever’s on but a pinnate in the past 
More a dinette set than anything else 
The day ticking over in the fixer bath 
  •  
Meanwhile a northern flicker bends a piece of plexiglass into a wind
             chime 
Did I tell you I raked the leaves and put them all into a black
             Glad bag? 
Meanwhile a black-capped chickadee 
One kid asleep upstairs another on the pot 
Bird clutter marks the spot 
Just upstream from a newly relaxed regulation and the brand new
             Jiffy Lube 
A birdbath in a dribble!    
A damselfly vacates the day in a blur 
A mosquito on a daisy 
My daughter looks up and then goes back to whatever it was she was
             doing before 
The afternoon divided up into zones 
Where her new sounds meanwhile astound the daylight
             on a leaf 
An off-brand beetle duct-tapes the water 
X’s & O’s 
  •  
You don’t have to if  you don’t want to 
Pink rollers via a ripple 
Little white sticks via a balk 
Meanwhile a deer tick slides into the very last reserved parking spot 
Under arms around the ears back of the knees and
             between the legs 
Meanwhile inside a belly button 
A pink parking pass flutters between the seat cushions    
A speckle-winged quill vacates the day in a blind 
More a leftover than anything else 
That grass probly wasn’t even grass probly it was a roll of   Diamond Pro
             Fescue or Jade 50 
A blue tint ditto a cloud of flies 
Meanwhile a regular water strider enamels the edge of a pond
             making room for you and the rest of  the day 
A stork inside your mind 
Dots and lines     
  •  
In other places we felt much the same as we do today only
             more so 
Meanwhile a mayfly floats by another mayfly 
A hard drive via a hedge 
A Bluetooth via a squiggle 
Oh look someone remembered to take out the compost 
Meanwhile mites in a double clasp and peaked felt number wish you
             well and more 
White foam flowers on a polished floor    
Who will tape their wings back? 
Who will fold their corners? 
A common green lacewing has an appointment someplace else
             altogether and will keep it 
To a thrip or a honeydew? 
A grand tour 
Just upstream from a stackable washer/dryer unit and the brand new
             FreshDirect 
The loop that keeps happening in the leaf litter 
  •  
Before you know it that light has changed from checker mallow and
             milkweed to something more en-suite 
Whites and sulphurs 
Probly that lacewing wasn’t even a lacewing probly it was a green
             smudge 
Hey! Hey kids! 
Meanwhile a green comma or a common
             ringlet 
Their wings are made of cardboard and Reynolds Wrap 
A rubber band here a rubber band there    
Meanwhile real sunlight sneaks up the wall somewhere between
             butterfly yellow and butterfly brown 
Not a dream really just an ordinary afternoon 
What color is that goldenrod? 
A focal point via a knob 
The new streaming service was all aflutter and temporarily
             unavailable 
Not only that but a golden hairstreak 
One kid on the couch the other in a bole 
  •  
Just between the dimmer switch and a short circuit of  local or overlit
             fritillaries 
Hi-Liter yellow and chisel tipped 
A bucket of  honeysuckle 
Bring the car around I’ll be right out! 
Did I tell you I aced the console with some Orange Glo ditto the late
             afternoon? 
They blanket the lawn in summer 
A long dash followed by a short dash    
Right between a commotion of  track lighting and a dribble of newish
             antibiotics 
A newish drop in the bucket 
An overflow of stillness and snacks 
My son looks up and then goes back to whatever it was he was
             doing before 
The day is nonslip and early 
A download of nervy and rainbowed fluorescence 
A bedhead floats by another bedhead 
  •  
Just between the newly installed porch floods and a small handful of
             cabbage whites 
A vertical frequency to it 
A sprinkle of what exactly? 
Not only that but our intentions stacked up
             in a swirl 
The bunting’s vocals were lip-synced and weird ditto the dishwasher’s 
A voice box via a gorge 
A yellow Lego on top of a yellow Lego    
Right between a semi-transparent aftereffect and a latticed or
             crosshatched bit of fluff 
An upgrade via a wrinkle 
More a floater than anything else 
Probly that bunting wasn’t even a bunting probly it was a Western
             Peewee 
We began with sliced apple and later moved on to sunlight 
An orangetip on a pincushion 
A pip on the carpet 
  •  
Or an inverted firefly blinking on and off through a drift of dandruff
             flicked off the TV set 
A flittery cat’s eye 
Yellow green or pale red 
Just upstream from a can of  Sea Foam and a bag of Birds Eye Single
             Steamers 
An additive combination of  bark dust and
             grade school 
Or a perfect glow stick 
The tops of trees    
Or an elliptical wastebasket where my son might pick out a glow
             worm or a lime green flashlight fish 
The day has its limits 
The yard looks the same now than it did just an hour ago 
Same rush of  Oregon grape same hurry of
             salmonberry 
The names for things slip away 
A rotary via a spiral 
A router via a tangle 
  •  
Or a streamer bobs its way across the living room trailing a yellow
             popper through the top water 
My daughter ties off an improved clinch knot 
A perfection loop 
The day is construction paper
             and laundry 
It syrups the corners 
Not only that but the remote control scuddled in the wingback 
Wide open spaces    
Or a glint in the kitchen counter where a local slope wrinkles a bowl
             of cereal on the new Formica 
The toaster shimmies 
A splake floats by another splake 
Did I tell you I folded the clothes in a basic reverse squash or rabbit
             fold ditto the onesies? 
The day is sound checked and
             perennial    
Appearing and disappearing in the hydrangeas 
A plus sign followed by a minus 
  •  
Or a speck of something else altogether some mica or something
             made of  OJ bits and squinting 
A dreamy dusky wing 
Meanwhile the grass is back 
Butter and eggs are seamless and windowbox the stand mixer organic
             dish soap and phone 
A private suburb here where we put things 
A plug-in via a stob 
Rods and cones    
Or cuckoo bees spun out in a bright wash of parallel and early or late
             climber roses 
Just upstream from a buffet-style weekend special and some notable
             losses 
Pollen paints the car and cleans out eczema 
Wicks out the margins 
Wisteria points up the positives of nonverbal
             choral work 
Or music you can’t hear 
Water music 
  •  
Or a flowering piggyback petals a residue of  light-to-dark jellies and
             purple glue stuff 
A smidgen of  Windex 
A gimlet in waves 
Probly that cat’s eye wasn’t even a cat’s eye probly it was a regular
             toothpaste 
At the same time heaps of clouds bounce off
             the driveway 
I plated the snacks ditto the expectations 
Burnt toast and bitumen    
Or outside the voices of other children climb up 
Taller ones 
Pedal bikes pushed up and down the walk all day transfigure
             the pavements in a wired curlicue 
A fiddlehead with arms and legs 
Or taller trees in a chase 
The day is non-glare and leafed out stuccoed by
             robot beetles 
One television is off the other is vertical rays of  light 
  •  
Or a #2 pencil beam crinkles the cornea in the backyard feathering seed
             starters and stems 
The day feels irreversible and will stay inside a Dixie cup 
Things stick to the door screen 
Windy light broken off and moth dust broken off 
Ribs and holes 
Not only that but a complicated system of noticing and a dob of
             apple juice 
You blow on it and it glows    
Or a refurbished working day backlights the hanging geraniums a
             handful of pink fiberglass 
A lake effect glancing off the sideboard 
A streamer via a stickle 
A cooler via a brook 
More than that those green and gold flecked inlays look away 
A creek bed in the hallway    
A spiral floats by another spiral 
  •  
And pink and blue transparencies gel the day each morning 
And pansies more than you 
You don’t have to wonder about the sky anymore you don’t have to
             ask what to wear 
Just upstream from a sketchy weather system and the new overpass 
High on glue 
The raindrops can’t lash the ferns they can’t
             flash flood a pinna 
Then the sun comes out again    
And trees are stressed out and can’t get going either 
It’s dinnertime breakfast is over 
Over and over my son’s voice across the lawn a white sparkler then
             a green sparkler then a white 
Someone comes running 
Probly those geraniums aren’t even geraniums probly they’re trailing
             accents 
Local traffic 
Left to your own devices you would watch TV clips all day and              
             make more toast and then what brush your teeth? 
  •  
And vacuuming the carpet makes a nice smell part burnt tips part
             wet dog 
It’s difficult to think of something to do 
A snip floats by another snip 
I guess what you’re doing today is doing chores 
I picked up everything in the house and put them all back down just
             to the left of themselves 
Pajamas and urine 
A throw rug via a jelly roll    
And its color time and petal time again & leaves lift the light outside
             the window just enough 
Let the flowers back in ditto the dog 
You only have a few minutes for anything it’s hardly enough time
      to get started 
Hey! Hey trees! 
Did I tell you I scoured the linoleum with an X-Acto and cleaned out
             the wayback? 
One tree is a pine and one is a maple I know that 
One tree is you 
  •  
And a handheld  Japanese coffee grinder collects dust and would
             after any wedding not just ours 
Bags of  groceries wait in a brown line 
A skater floats by another skater 
Green feedback 
Golden raisins 
If  you want to hear lake water lapping it up those thousand tongues
             pushing past duckweed you’ll have to imagine it 
A basin inside a teacup    
And slices of orange radiate in a Ziploc 
No one uses sprinklers here except the university we’re just as happy
             with people 
Just upstream from your first home and anything that’s leftover 
Repetitions in crinoline 
Or dream neon 
If you want to hear the lawn service line up edges in sunlight you’ll
             have to wait until Wednesday 
In the morning the kids come running down the stairs


^^EOP^^

Dear sir, your air of authority
leaves me lost. Eases me from
a place of ease. Contracts with
my contradictions to take from me
a place. Autopilots my autobiography.
Frightens my fright. Sighs with
my breath. Wins at my race.
Your certainty has me curtained.
Your nerve has me nervous. Your
childhood has me childlike and
your nastiness nests in my belfry
like a hawk. You are beyond
and above my slice of sky, peach
as a pie, bourbon as its pit. You are
spit and vinegar while I sour
in my bowl. You bowl me over
while I tread lightly on
my feet. You walk on water
while I sink. You witness me,
fisherman, boat on the lake,
while I struggle and burble and brittle
and drop. You wink at me and
I must relate. I close my eyes
to erase you and you are written
in my lids. A litmus test. A form
of lair. God with three days
of facial growth and an old bouquet
for a face. Soap and water for
a brain. I have no handsome
answer. I have no pillar of salt
or shoulder to look over. I have
no feather to weigh. I have no
bubble to burst. I am less
to myself, a character in a drama,
a drumbeat, a benevolence, a
blight. All parts of me say shoot
on sight. Aim for an artery
or organ. Good night.


^^EOP^^

She could live on chips on paint chips potato chips the poker chips he stacked in towers on the nightstand she could live in glass or underground or in his Cadillac she lived inside his head his cowboy boots she found a scorpion in once stabbed him in the shoulder by mistake he called her lucky charm called her witch made her practice in a walk-in closet how to cast a spell draw fortune how to make herself more pretty she dreamed she buried the brother she didn’t have dreamed her brother was dwarfed he died when her father called her pet he died when her father left she learned to live in the parking lot alone outside the casino learned to live at the bar by the pool tables theatres where men shot men raped women shot women shot themselves skinned animals ran one another over and over she learned to live in his smoke his vodka his idea of perfection the perfect girl the perfect evening unencumbered by her needs she dreamed of being buried on her knees her knees are plum so cute and sore so sturdy the father is dying now the girl is grown she dances with knives in her panties the men love her knives she loves the mistakes she makes the knives are her father the men are her father the panties are wool are sheep she dances in sheep with knives she strips off the sheep and for a moment feels her flesh at peace with her flesh she almost puts away the knives almost lets the men lose interest there is still so much work to do


^^EOP^^

The sky is high
We shit on earth
We look up the sky
The earth gives birth
To our future


^^EOP^^

I'm just an assistant with the Vanishing Act.
My spangled wand points out the disappeared.
It's only a poor thing made of words, and lacks
the illusive power to light the darkling year.
 
Not prophecy, not elegy, but fact:
the thing that's gone is never coming back.
 
Late or soon a guttering silence will ring down
a curtain like woven smoke on thickening air.
The audience will strain to see what's there,
the old magician nowhere to be found.
 
For now, I wear a costume and dance obliquely.
The applause you hear is not for me, its rabid sound
like angry rain—as one by one the known forms cease to be:
childhood, the farm, the river, forested ground;
the tiger and the condor, the whale, the honeybee;
the village, the book, the lantern. Then you. Then me.


^^EOP^^

Caretakers — died in 2009, 2010, 2011, 2012, 2013, 2014, 2015, 2016, 2017, one after another. One didn’t show up because her husband was in prison. Most others watched the clock. Time breaks for the living eventually and they can walk out of doors. The handle of time’s door is hot for the dying. What use is a door if you can’t exit? A door that can’t be opened is called a wall. My father is on the other side of the wall. Tomatoes are ripening on the other side. I can see them through the window that also can’t be opened. A window that can’t be opened is just a see-through wall. Sometimes we’re on the inside like a plane. Most of the time, we’re on the outside like doggie day care. I don’t know if the tomatoes are the new form of his language or if they’re simply for eating. I can’t ask him  because on the other side, there are no words. All I can do is stare at the nameless bursting tomatoes and know they have to be enough.


^^EOP^^

We were up late and everyone had been drinking, and someone said, Hey, is that God’s
head on the boil?
We didn’t know where to look or what to think, it was obviously some sort of perverse
joke, or not, right?
And the conversation went on for days, sober, drunk, asleep, awake, what did it matter?
Some of us felt the real time was for something, but what?
And the questions kept coming, once they started, my favorite one being two strung
together, What makes art “modern” and what does “urgent” mean now?
Where was the greater good? That was another one bandied about,
followed by Where was the common tent? which gave a feeling of empathy for a minute
and then grief because, well, where was it?
Will you arm, hoard seeds, go hungry? Those terrified me because, after all, who will
repair things when the end is pale or dark?
Where will you hide out 
when capital runs out, when water? Which will be greater, the heat or the cold?
Wait, did God’s boiling head just say something? Cry out Go to hell from a giant lobster
pot? Tantalizing us with where to go next?
Are phosphorescent lamps to mark escape paths?
Not that it’s not a great party, but whose place is this? Igniting
quail in banana leaves, sons bandaged, who invited us?
Why are the emerald bleeding and the ivory weeping? (Lower the freaking music.)
Does anyone have the time?


^^EOP^^

take you where
you don’t want to go. 
Where you’d been
and had passed smilingly through,
and were alive. Then.


^^EOP^^

Everything has gender
in Arabic.
History is male.
Fiction is female.
Dream is male.
Wish is female. 
Feminine words are followed
by a circle with two dots over.
They call it the tied circle,
knotted with wishes
which come true only when forgotten
or replaced by the wishes of others. 
In the town of tied wishes,
people feel great anticipation
because a stranger will arrive
today in her feminine sign.
Someone says he saw her
two dots glittering,
refuting another’s vision
of a cat’s eyes hunting in darkness. So scary, he says, how the moon
hides in her red circle

^^EOP^^

1 
I wanted to write an epic about suffering,
but when I found a tendril
of her hair among the ruins
of her mud house,
I found my epic there.   2 
I didn’t sleep last night.
As if the night
were hiding in the morning coffee.   3 
Her life is a game of snakes and ladders
sent relentlessly back to square one,
but whose life isn’t? She takes a breath
and throws the dice again.   4 
The city glitters below
the airplane window, not because
of the bones and skulls scattered
under the sun, but the view
through the frosted breather hole.   5 
She died, and time changed
for those she loved most,
but her watch kept ticking.   6 
A god carried the burdens
until the weight persuaded him
to transfer them to man — 
the new suffering god.   7 
The map of Iraq looks like a mitten,
and so does the map of Michigan — 
a match I made by chance.   8 
If you can’t save people,
at least don’t hate them.   9 
Her bubbling annoys me — 
can’t understand a word she says.
So what if I toss her from the aquarium?
So what if I spill her new world
with this nasty immigrant fish!   10 
The city’s innumerable lights
turning on and off remind us
we are born to arrive,
as we are born to leave.   11 
The handkerchiefs are theirs,
but the tears are ours.   12 
Women running barefoot.
Behind them, stars falling from the sky.   13 
So strange,
in my dream of us,
you were also a dream.   14 
He said to me: You are in my eyes.
Now when he sleeps,
his eyelids cover me.   15 
Gilgamesh stopped wishing
for immortality,
for only in death could he be certain
of seeing his friend Enkidu again.   16 
Some say love means
putting all your eggs
in one basket.
If they all break,
can the basket remain intact?   17 
The homeless are not afraid
to miss something.
What passes through their eyes
is how the clouds pass over the rushing cars,
the way pigeons miss some of the seeds
on the road and move away.
Yet only they know
what it means to have a home
and to return to it.   18 
The wind and rain
don’t discriminate
in buffeting us.
We are equal
in the eyes of the storm.   19 
When I was broken into fragments,
you puzzled me
back together
piece by piece.
I no longer fear
being broken
in any moment.   20 
Freezing in the mountains
without blankets or food,
and all they heard was no news is good news.   21 
Their stories didn’t kill me
but I would die if I didn’t
tell them to you.   22 
Before killing them
they collected their personal effects.
Their cell phones are all ringing
in the box.   23 
We are not upset when
the grass dies. We know
it will come back
in a season or two.
The dead don’t come back
but they appear every time
in the greenness of the grass.   24 
If yearning encircles us,
what does it portend?
That a circle has no beginning
and no end?


^^EOP^^

When I was your age I went to a banquet.
When I was your age I went to a barroom 
and bought cigarettes with quarters
lifted from the laundry money. Last night 
I did all your laundry. I don’t know why
I thought this love could be pure. It’s enough 
that it’s infinite. I kiss your cheek when you sleep
and wonder if you feel it. 
It’s the same cheek I’ve kissed from the beginning.
You don’t have to like me. 
You just have to let me
keep your body yours. It’s mine. 
When I was your age I went to a banquet
and a man in a tux pinched my cheeks. 
When I was your age I went to a barroom
and a man in a band shirt pinched my ass. 
There is so much I don’t know about you.
Last night I skipped a banquet 
so I could stay home and do your laundry
and drink wine from my grandmother’s glass. 
When I was your age boys traded quarters
for a claw at my carcass on a pleather bench 
while I missed the first few seconds of a song
I’d hoped to record on my backseat boombox. 
When I was your age I enjoyed a hook.
You think I know nothing of metamorphosis 
but when I was your age I invented a key change.
You don’t have to know what I know.


^^EOP^^

Wheal Emma and Brookwood are abandoned copper mines whose remains are located near Buckfastleigh, within the Dartmoor National Park, an area with a long history of widespread industrial activity. From this one locality, in the second half of the nineteenth century, more than thirty thousand tons of copper ore were raised, processed, and shipped for smelting. In 1859, in order to stabilize and increase the power supply, Wheal Emma Leat (a fifteen-mile-long channel) was cut across moorland and around woodland valleys to transport water from the River Swincombe and to feed the mines by supplementing the Mardle, a tributary of the Dart. Some of this now empty moorland waterway can be walked today on Dartmoor. I am grateful to Kevin and Donna Cox, owners of the Brook Manor estate, for showing my collaborator, Ignacio Acosta, and me over the remains of mine workings on their land.

Widening the plug doorway
on the bob wall left no
surface evidence. The Mardle
has a floodplain fair and wide.
Material would have been
trammed directly, although
blacked ochreous water flows
freely from the collapsed
portal. Humphrey kept Kevin
back when we went into
the near horizontal dark adit
stooped at the panic shaft.

In Brook Wood at the combe
head is a small killas quarry
predating all three setts.
Rent was paid to the Brook Wood
adventurers. Three areas of
dumping partially covered
this crumbled masonry within
woodland of varying density
just south of the tarmac road.
Yet a leat is depicted on the
1886 OS map channeled entirely
in a raised wooden aqueduct.

 

Wheal Emma Leat, 2017, by Ignacio Acosta.


 

Engine House, 2017, by Ignacio Acosta.



Then buildings fall into decay
where ivy and tree growth
have taken hold. The silted channel
follows the contour round hills
and combes using the best-fit
method to Wheal Emma sett.
Whereas conifer scrub and dense
patches of rhododendron
are seen quite late in the sequence.
All 99 stations were used and
having passed over the wheel
water may have been diverted.

The long wheelhouse sides are not
straight but slightly kinked to provide
for a dished 60-ft wheel
over an arched tailrace exit
at floor level. In this same evening
were those people engaged to feast
on roast beef and strong ale nearby.
Within the valley of the holy brook
the mines are situated near
Buckfastleigh, crushed ores are hauled
for the South Wales copper smelters,
Alfred Jenkin their agent in Cornwall.

Over and over had they been
in the heaven of expectation
finding the ore ground pitched eastward;
those who gambled their lives in swift
currents and dark treacherous pools.
Granting two properties as
one sett at a royalty of 1/24
together with fine machinery,
wheels, a beam engine, and water
privileges. One hundred and twenty-
five workers being then separated
only by a small transverse valley.

The flat rods moved off so quietly
that those not looking were unconscious
of their being in motion. Steam was
employed only at limited scale.
Emma, 116 fathoms below adit,
pumping backed-up water for life itself:
men cutting lode in fume- and dust-ridden air
or crushing with hand tools, spalling, cobbing,
came our tramroad to harbor direct
in Totnes and thence by sea to Neath — 
no more windlass or horse-whim turning.
What you see here is the dressing floor.

Their Phoenician purple dye — 
their copper with fifteen percent
Cornish tin. Remember when
a solid solution of
metal elements was defined
by ecstatic bonding.
Water poured over its surface
producing hydrogen gas.
The new material is
stable and ready for use
but scaled-up production
could fuel cannibal drones.

 

Tailrace, 2017, by Ignacio Acosta.


 

Green Pool, 2017, by Ignacio Acosta.



We love the color and
the stillness. Nothing would
live in this water now
at the base of a spoil heap
two stories high. Worm casts
and broadly scattered pits
are laminated onto a
non-conductive substrate.
This is the green pool:
a water soak away
made from glass epoxy.

They are brown and green
like uneven flat loaves
and the museum label
reads tortas de cobre.
Moss grows on anything
like black flame retardant
mechanically supports and
electrically connects — 
the fenced-off shaft
protecting the river
from what leaches out
between sea-borne traders.

At these horizons the levels were
extended over 330 fathoms.
Small groups of self-employed
miners and their families
continued to migrate. Here was
alluvial gold mixed with
sand and gravel, producing
more than 14 heads of stamps were
capable of crushing. Composed
of quartz, peach, and gossan with black
and yellow copper letting down
a stream of mineralized water.

For in much of this section
the leat had been cut from
solid rock. A stone-lined sluice
is just visible. 4,000 shares
on the cost book system,
streamworks in eluvial ground,
5 shillings each deposit. Nothing
but a washing strake such as
we use, commodified and priced
both minerals since the Bronze Age
in West Devon, in Cornwall
beneath a layer of black sand.

An adit is also brought home
to the spot from below: narrow
tailings in steep profile cast
every shovel full as it rises
into a tye. £40,000 worth
of copper ore from above
the 50-fathom level.
Water breaks up the soil, exposing
mere threads of land, linear strips
cut into channels called races
dug across the ground to be worked,
removing the overburden.
                

^^EOP^^

i was born

at the rupture the root where

i split from my parallel self  i split from

the girl i also could have been

& her name / easy / i know the story

all her life / my mother wanted

a girl named for a flower

whose oil scents all

our mothers /

petals wrung

for their perfume
i was planted

land became ocean became land anew

its shape refusing root in my fallow mouth

cleaving my life neatly

& my name / taken from a dead woman

to remember / to fill an aperture with

cut jasmine in a bowl

our longing

our mothers’

wilting

garlands hanging from our necks


^^EOP^^

The curtain parts one last time
and the ones who killed
and were killed,
who loved inordinately,
who went berserk, were flayed alive,
descended to Hades,
raged, wept, schemed—
victims and victimizers alike—
smile and nod and graciously bow.
So glad it's finally over,
they stride off
suddenly a bit ridiculous
in their overwrought costumes.
And the crowd—still dark,
like God beyond the footlights of the world—
rises to its feet
and roars like the sea.
 
 


^^EOP^^

I hear a book being written, my sister says, or is it a poem?
 
Her eyes are closed.
 
It has a lot of semicolons.
 
 
One sentence or two? she wants to know. Comma? Period.
 
Well, I say, semicolons join and separate.
 
 
Grammar, my sister says, is very interesting.


^^EOP^^

I can enter the morning with traces of an eternal dream: to live
on a planet of women. we sing in the fertile forest, caress on
lavender hills, bathe beneath cascades of clear waters. and just
like that, nude and wet, we mount each other’s bodies. our
desire is a whale that searches for calm in the depth of the sea.
 
I smell sex in my hair when I awaken.
 
the dream perfumes all of my days. I go to the post office and
look for stamps with etchings of flowers and fruits so that I can
send letters to the women who loved me in my sleep.
 
we are in a world that is not ours. what do we do with the
dreams that touch our consciousness in the nude each night?
 
our planet of women is nothing more than a dream. who knows
how many of us bathe in the woods or which ones of us have
wings that let us fly with our flesh? it’s not for anyone to know.
fortunately, we always dream paradise, we make it ours. there,
we find each other and live in our collective memory.
 
and so, I smell sex in my hair when I awaken.


^^EOP^^

I wait for you to come
to brush your shoe against
the blade of grass I'm sitting on
touch me with your hand
as you reach for one last
violet to take home
 
or pick up a worm to place
gracefully in the garden
 
even better if you lie
on a hillside to watch the sunset
or breathe in stars
 
I will feel your warmth, bury
my head next to that freckle
on your calf, that hair
on your forearm, or just behind
the lobe of your left ear
 
I promise not to take too much
blood into my swelling body
 
only what I think I need
 
and I will never
let you know I am here
though I will love you
 
deeply
 
 


^^EOP^^

For those of us who live at the shoreline
standing upon the constant edges of decision
crucial and alone
for those of us who cannot indulge
the passing dreams of choice
who love in doorways coming and going
in the hours between dawns
looking inward and outward
at once before and after
seeking a now that can breed
futures
like bread in our children’s mouths
so their dreams will not reflect
the death of ours;
 
For those of us
who were imprinted with fear
like a faint line in the center of our foreheads
learning to be afraid with our mother’s milk
for by this weapon
this illusion of some safety to be found
the heavy-footed hoped to silence us
For all of us
this instant and this triumph
We were never meant to survive.
 
And when the sun rises we are afraid
it might not remain
when the sun sets we are afraid
it might not rise in the morning
when our stomachs are full we are afraid
of indigestion
when our stomachs are empty we are afraid
we may never eat again
when we are loved we are afraid
love will vanish
when we are alone we are afraid
love will never return
and when we speak we are afraid
our words will not be heard
nor welcomed
but when we are silent
we are still afraid
 
So it is better to speak
remembering
we were never meant to survive.


^^EOP^^

My cousin, Milton, worked for a cable company.
The boy I knew when we were children
 
had fists that were often clenched, his face set like
an old man whose life had been so hard,
 
it hardened him. But the man's hands opened to let
more of the world in. He sent the funniest
 
cards to family and friends at Christmas, laid down
cable so others could connect. Yet, he lived
 
alone, kept to himself much of the time, so when
his sister found his body, he'd been gone
 
a good while. He died young at fifty-seven, without
fuss or bother. No sitting by the bedside
 
or feeding him soup. He just laid himself down like
a trunk line and let the signal pass through.
 


^^EOP^^

Silence is the sound the knife makes
slitting the skin. 
Can you identify my weakness,
a pricking sensation
and numbness in one limb? 
Can you hold this tongue?
Tell me, what is the function
of meticulous courage. 
You are the most yourself
when you are in the motion. 
One can be quick and too quick.
I have a stomach too.
It gets hungry. 
If I be of necessity
opportunity,
if there be the slightest chance of success,
why have a mind, if? 
Does that scream in the night across the alley
beg an answer? Are we crowning
into the sludge of an injury and its repair? 
An elephant is larger and stronger than a horse;
but it is not preferred as a beast of burden. 
Strength is a wee umbrella
in the storm.
This the friction sound heard
in inspiration, expiration, or both. 
For convenience of description,
blood is bright red and frothy. 
Have you earned the privilege
of making mistakes? 
There really is no sex in science. 
The nomenclature lifts
delicate subjects up from the plane
in which language places them. 
Man has more strength,
woman, more endurance. 
The hands and the instruments
are the chief sources of danger. 
This fever. 
There is no subject on which so much has been written
                                                                             and so little known.


^^EOP^^

He brings me chocolate from the Pentagon,
dark chocolates shaped like tanks and fighter jets,
milk chocolate tomahawks, a bonbon
like a kirsch grenade, mint chocolate bayonets.
He brings me chocolate ships, a submarine
descending in a chocolate sea, a drone
unmanned and filled with hazelnut praline.
He brings me cocoa powder, like chocolate blown
to bits. Or chocolate squares of pepper heat.
Or if perhaps we've fought, he brings a box
of truffles home, missiles of semisweet
dissolving on the tongue. He brings me Glocks
and chocolate mines, a tiny transport plane,
a bomb that looks delicious in its cellophane.


^^EOP^^

The guy my girlfriend ran off with
in 1983 drove a rusted-out Beetle
and carried a .22 pistol for runs to the bank
to drop off nightly deposits from the General
Cinema, where he was Assistant Manager
and where I worked and saw Rocky Horror
about 20 times more than I wanted to
in egg-and-tp-drenched midnight shows.
He lived in a rat-trap, roach-infested, leaning-over
shack on the edge of The Heights,
a few streets over from the house where,
in 2004, a local TV reporter was murdered
in her bed, her face beaten beyond recognition.
                 *
In 1988, on my first night as Assistant Manager
at a restaurant in Dallas, a fight broke out
between a pimp and a private investigator,
who also may have been a pimp. A group
of frat boys decided to jump in and knocked
the whole scrum over onto the floor
just on the other side of the bar from me.
The pimp came up pointing a .22 semiautomatic
directly at the closest object, which happened
to be my forehead. He didn't shoot—
just waved his gun around until everyone
cowered under their tables—then
calmly walked out the front door and down the street.
                *
My best friend in sixth or seventh grade
moved to Arkansas from New Mexico.
Ron's skin was lizard-rough.
He raised hamsters and hermit crabs.
I struck him out for the last out of the Little League
Championship. We went out to his father's farm
and shot cans and bottles with his .22 rifle.
Back in New Mexico, he'd had some health problems
and his mother had shot herself in the head.
A few years ago, a dead body was found
buried on his father's property. Ron's son
ended up shooting himself in the head as well.
He was 22.
                *
On December 14, 2012, an armed gunman
entered the Sandy Hook School with two pistols,
a Bushmaster .223, hundreds of rounds of ammunition,
and a shotgun in the car. Rather than turn right,
toward my wife's classroom where she pulled
two kids into her room from the hallway,
he turned to the left, murdered twenty children
and six adults, including the principal
and the school psychologist, both of whom
went into the hallway to stop the gunman,
and shot two other teachers, who survived.
After that, a lot of other things happened,
but it doesn't really matter what.


^^EOP^^

—I want to draw the sky.
—Draw it, my darling.
—I have.
—And why do you spread
the colors this way?
—Because the sky
has no edges.
. . .
—I want to draw the earth.
—Draw it, my darling.
—I have.
—And who is this?
—She is my friend.
—And where is the earth?
—In her handbag.
. . .
—I want to draw the moon.
—Draw it, my darling.
—I can't.
—Why?
—The waves shatter it
continuously.
. . .
—I want to draw paradise.
—Draw it, my darling.
—I have.
—But I don't see any colors.
—It is colorless.
. . .
—I want to draw the war.
—Draw it, my darling.
—I have.
—And what is this circle?
—Guess.
—A drop of blood?
—No.
—A bullet?
—No.
—Then, what?
—The button
that turns off the lights.


^^EOP^^

We feel the volt inside our veins,
inside the vines, inside the rain,
and through the capillaries of
a tree. We feel the pulse above
in storms, vibrato of thunder,
the whispering rhythms of a river,
magnetic currents in the earth,
the alternating flow of breath,
the push of tides, reversing air
from caves, dilating hum and dance
of bees, the chant of auctioneer.
All oscillate together, or
they seem to, in this play of chance,
beneath the stars' indifference.


^^EOP^^

Yesterday I lost a country.
I was in a hurry,
and didn't notice when it fell from me
like a broken branch from a forgetful tree.
Please, if anyone passes by
and stumbles across it,
perhaps in a suitcase
open to the sky,
or engraved on a rock
like a gaping wound,
or wrapped
in the blankets of emigrants,
or canceled
like a losing lottery ticket,
or helplessly forgotten
in Purgatory,
or rushing forward without a goal
like the questions of children,
or rising with the smoke of war,
or rolling in a helmet on the sand,
or stolen in Ali Baba's jar,
or disguised in the uniform of a policeman
who stirred up the prisoners
and fled,
or squatting in the mind of a woman
who tries to smile,
or scattered
like the dreams
of new immigrants in America.
If anyone stumbles across it,
return it to me, please.
Please return it, sir.
Please return it, madam.
It is my country. . .
I was in a hurry
when I lost it yesterday.


^^EOP^^

The plump lemon,
the spoon's metal
cuts off the shadow,
 
the bursting overflow of pleasure,
the dark night of the shriek,
a nameless fire in the street,
some blackened breadcrumbs...


^^EOP^^

What a surprise it is to hear
that locusts come the thirteenth year
and not the seventeenth as told
for ages and enshrined in old
folklore and rhymes and family lies.
The species similar otherwise:
cicadas books call periodic,
found here in our southern district.
They grow from eggs pressed into twigs.
The nymphs that hatch then start to dig
at least ten inches into soil,
and live by sucking juicy oil
from roots and stems, sweet sap
that nourishes through the giant nap,
and then the lucky thirteenth year
they grow a polished armor
and crawl into the summer air
and, louder than a Mahler choir,
fill meadow, hedge, and orchard grove
with necessary calls for love,
then leave their eggs to fortune's whim
with Philip Glass-like requiem.


^^EOP^^

Did you know there were hundreds of little
night moths
crowded against the window pane
to catch a glimmer of light?
 
It was the scent of a strange perfume,
from fallen cocoons, sticky sincerity
that made them flee.
 
In this world of protected ruins,
in this circular world
where people tell
and re-tell the same stories,
in this world where people forgot
that the dyke
wouldn't be massive enough to hold back
the sea swell;
in this world where each and every one
would flee in panic in the end;
even the old lady sold
spun silver birds
while she whispered...
 
The tiny, translucent and elegant
night moths
like freshly picked pumpkin seeds
crowded in the corner of that half-open window
clinging to the cold glass,
light eager,
while the vapor filled the room
reaching the nostrils
of colleagues
 
who didn't recognize each other
but intertwining their fingers,
waited for someone else's words
to atone
and explain
and bestow
meaning to words.


^^EOP^^

He plays a train.
She plays a whistle.
They move away.
 
He plays a rope.
She plays a tree.
They swing.
 
He plays a dream.
She plays a feather.
They fly.
 
He plays a general.
She plays people.
They declare war.


^^EOP^^

All the kids came rumbling down the wood tenement
Shaky stairs, sneakers slapping against the worn
Tin tread edges, downhall came Pepo, Chino, Cojo,
Curly bursting from the door like shells exploding
Singing "I'm a Rican Doodle Dandy" and "What shall
We be today, Doctors or Junkies, Soldiers or Winos?"
 
Pepo put a milk crate on a Spanish Harlem johnny pump
And drops opened like paratroopers carrying war news.
 
Then Urban Renewal attacked the pump, cleared the slums
Blamed Puerto Rico and dispersed the Spies, blasting
Them into the Army or Anywhere Avenue in the Bronx.
 
And nobody, but nobody, came back from that summer.
 
Just as Korea was death in service to the warring Nation
The Bronx was death in service to the negligent Nation


^^EOP^^

Monterosa, your body is dead on Avenue A. Angelo,
They found you eyes open staring at the beer
Soaked floorboards. Did you want that? Did
You mind them filling your back with buckshot?
 
Angelo, I am angry with them all, and you Monterosa
Killed and killers, killing and dealing dope. No good
You were, no good they are. Still, I wish their fate
To be bodies stacking under the same blue smoke.
 
Monterosa, there is blood on your song, blood on the juke
Box. The cowbell, the conga, and your corpse form the trio
That is the rhinestone pin of my failure, your failure,
Our failure, who loved, but did not rescue Angelo.
 
Angel, hold him, while I bury him in these clean words,
And pray to see the resurrection of the rose mountain.


^^EOP^^

Puerto Rico was created when the pumpkin on top of
The turtle burst and its teeming waters poured out
With all mankind and beastkind riding on the waves
Until the water drained leaving a tropical paradise.
 
Puerto Rico was stumbled on by lost vampires bearing
Crucifix in one hand, arquebus in the other, sucking
The veins of land and men, tossing the pulp into the
Compost heap which they used as the foundation for
Their fortifications and other vainglorious temples.
 
Puerto Rico was arrested just as it broke out of the
Spanish jail and, renamed a trusty, it was put in an
American cell. When the prisoner hollered, "Yankee, Go
Home," Puerto Rico was referred to the United Nations.
 
Puerto Rico, to get to paradise now, you have to ride blood.
 


^^EOP^^

lives on an island
of last-ditch attempts
and ancient consolations
 
after the shipwreck
she swam ashore near naked
hands scraped raw on coral
bra and panties soaked through
sand in her teeth
lapped by aftermath
lying exhausted
slowly approaching
the condition of music
 
he loved her stubborn luster
sure they argued sometimes
the word "argue" from Latin
meaning to make clear
while she sat quietly
in the wing chair
her eyes closed
police ransacked his desk
the note turned up in his pocket
with the letter for his sister
a baseball ticket stub
receipts for two "taco platters" he whose soul was bound up with mine
and part of a bookmark
 
six weeks later she looks great
thin and translucent
a statue of justice sans blindfold
she wears beautiful blouses now
peach, gold, seedling green
her complexion
has never been better
lushness nips at the heels
of destruction
 
tonight's lurid sunset's
a cocktail of too many boozes
she'd like to switch it off
via remote control
but there's no antidote
for celestial events
 
a frantic bat takes a wrong turn
from the attic veers
into her living
room, bounces off walls
a sick flut-thud each time it hits
the suicide's wife
pulls out her roasting pan
climbs the kitchen counter
teeters and grabs
for twenty minutes
at last claps on the lid
walks her prize outside
 
releases the creature
into the trees
where the lawn peters out
where the idea that at death
something is liberated
can flap blackly away.


^^EOP^^

Three women survive.
One hides in a bedroom of a house,
sharpening blades in the bathroom, her night.
Another disinfects the cloth her older sister contaminates.
The third, more tender and insecure, proud and serene,
        takes her first steps,
surrounded by palm trees, lemon trees, pomegranate trees,
        bougainvilleas, birds of paradise...
 


^^EOP^^

Shook the box like a maraca.
 
Stood around like a dope in my punch-colored dress, clutching your box
to my chest.
 
Opened your plastic receptacle, the size of a jack-in-the-box. But instead
of gaudy stripes, your box is sober-suit blue, hymnal blue.
 
Tasted them. You've gained a statue's flavor, like licking the pyramids, or
kissing sandstone shoulders. I mean boulders.
 
Remarked to your box: "REINCARNATION comes from roots meaning 'to
be made flesh again.'"
 
Stowed your box under my bed for a week to seed dreams in which you
advise me. (This didn't work.)
 
Opened the Babylonian Talmud at random. Read aloud to your gritty,
gray-white powder: "There are three keys which the Holy One, blessed be
He, has not entrusted into the hands of any messenger. These are: the key
of rain, the key of birth, and the key of the resurrection of the dead."
Worked myself up to watery eyes. Any intensity evaporated the instant I
stopped reading.
 
Tried to intuit your format, sift it from tides of void. Does shape play a
role? My watch ticked in an exaggerated way. Closed my eyes, sent forth
mental tendrils seeking the nothing of you. They curled back on them-
selves, weaving around the wing chair, a dog's leg, a lamp stand, eventu-
ally heading back toward the nothing of me.


^^EOP^^

The dissonance of women. The shrill frilly silly
drippy prissy pouty fuss of us. And all the while
science was the music of our minds. Our sexual
identities glittery as tinsel, we fretted about god's
difficulties with intimacy, waiting for day's luster
to fade so we could slip into something less
venerated. Like sea anemones at high tide
our minds snatched at whatever rushed by.
Hush, hush, my love. These things happened
a long time ago. You needn't be afraid of them, now.


^^EOP^^

   —kept losing self control 
    but how could one lose the self
 after reading so much literary theory?
The shorter "i" stood under the cork trees,
     the taller "I" remained rather passive;
 the brendas were angry at the greed, angry
that the trees would die, had lost interest
 in the posturing of the privileged,
 
   the gaps between can't & won't...
   Stood outside the gate of permissible
       sound & the wind came soughing 
through the doubt debris (soughing comes from swāgh—to resound...
echo actually comes from this also—)
  we thought of old Hegel across
the sea—the Weltgeist—& clouds
 
went by like the bones of a Kleenex...
        it's too late for countries
but it's not too late for trees...
  & the wind kept soughing   with its sound sash, wind with
        its sound sash,    increasing
bold wind with its sound sash,
            increasing bold—


^^EOP^^




For the graduates of the University of Arizona.



This morning we gather in gratitude for all aspects of sacredness:
the air, the warmth of fire, bodies of water, plants, the land,
and all animals and humankind.
We gather to honor our students who have achieved the extraordinary
accomplishment of earning doctoral or master's degrees.
We gather to honor their parents, grandparents, children,
family members, and friends who have traveled with them
on their path to success. They have traveled far distances to be here
this morning: we honor their devotion.
 
May we remember that holiness exists in the ordinary elements of our lives.
 
We are grateful for a homeland that has always thrived
on a glorious array of people and their diverse cultures, histories,
and beliefs. We acknowledge the generosity of the Tohono O'odham
in granting this land on which we learn, teach, celebrate
accomplishments, and sometimes mourn losses.
 
May we always cherish our ancestors as we prepare for the days ahead.
May we remember that we exist because of their prayers and their faith.
 
We are blessed with distinct and melodious tongues.
Our languages are treasures of stories, songs, ceremonies, and memories.
May each of us remember to share our stories with one another,
because it is only through stories that we live full lives.
 
May the words we speak go forth as bright beads
of comfort, joy, humor, and inspiration.
We have faith that the graduates will inspire others
to explore and follow their interests.
 
Today we reflect a rainbow of creation:
Some of us came from the east, where bright crystals of creativity reside.
They are the white streaks of early morning light when all is born again.
We understand that, in Tucson, the Rincon Mountains are our inspiration
for beginning each day. The Rincons are everlasting and always present.
 
Those who came from the south embody the strength of the blue
mountains that encircle us. The Santa Ritas instill in us
the vigorous spirit of youthful learning.
 
Others came from the west; they are imbued with the quiet, yellow glow of dusk.
They help us achieve our goals. Here in the middle of the valley, the ts'aa',
the basket of life, the Tucson Mountains teach us to value our families.
 
The ones from the north bring the deep, restorative powers of night's darkness;
their presence renews us. The Santa Catalina Mountains teach us that,
though the past may be fraught with sorrow, it was strengthened
by the prayers of our forebearers.
We witnessed the recent fires the mountains suffered,
and in their recovery we see ourselves on our own journeys.
We understand that we are surrounded by mountains, dziił,
and thus that we are made of strength, dziił, nihí níhídziił.
We are strong ourselves. We are surrounded by mountains
that help us negotiate our daily lives.
 
May we always recognize the multitude of gifts that surround us.
May our homes, schools, and communities be filled with the wisdom
and optimism that reflect a generous spirit.
 
We are grateful for all blessings, seen and unseen.
 
May we fulfill the lives envisioned for us at our birth. May we realize
that our actions affect all people and the earth. May we live in the way
of beauty and help others in need. May we always remember that
we were created as people who believe in one another. We are grateful,
Holy Ones, for the graduates, as they will strengthen our future.
 
All is beautiful again.
Hózhǫ́ nááhasdłíí’.
Hózhǫ́ nááhasdłíí’.
Hózhǫ́ nááhasdłíí’.
Hózhǫ́ nááhasdłíí’.


^^EOP^^

If someone tells you that your poem is nostalgic,
take it as a compliment. There's no greater
praise. In Greek, nostos means "return" and algia "pain." What's a poem without the return
of pain?  If they tell you that your poem is
melancholic, take that as a compliment, too. In
Greek, melan means "black" and khole "bile."
What's a poem without the most pernicious disorder
of the body and soul?  Pain and illness.  If your
poem is nostalgic and melancholic, see a doctor.


^^EOP^^

We could hear her
knocking down strands of cobweb
from ceilings—sticky filaments,
sacs of eggs—as we woke most mornings
to a worm of discontent.
It lodged beneath the heart,
rubbed our frayed nerves,
gnawed at the gut, spleen,
ovaries. Filth
 
was Mom's first enemy, so each day
began with ritual cleaning: the stab
and sweep of the broom down the dark hall,
over the stained and scratched oak floors.
 
For weeks, she held her dust mop
one-handed, and with the other
cupped a hernia, while she swore
at us kids in that hard voice—a litany of our sins
and failures: sloth,
stupidity, secrecy.
 
We watched her
smash the spiders that ran, herky-jerky,
along the baseboards, while we ran, too.
 
Glaring at each other,
we gathered up the scattered
laundry, our father’s shoes,
his newspapers and tools, our books,
drawings, music, sweatshirts,
and jackets, whatever
we’d left lying around.
 
We were guilty, but good
at evasion. We cultivated
shrewish or obsessive behaviors of our own: my tough
older sister sneered and stalked out of the house
to meet her boyfriend;
my sweet younger sister
trembled and cried, comforted
by one of our many dogs.
I slammed doors, pounded them
with my fists, screamed, “Shut up,
shut up, shut up!” She couldn’t
 
leave us alone. She loved us
too much.
 
Though we were quick, she was
quicker. Her words stung.
 
We must have deserved it.


^^EOP^^




For Marilynn



 Nihideezhí, it was a moist June afternoon when we buried you.
The Oak Springs Valley was dense with sage, cedar, and chamisa;
and gray, green, and brown shrubs cradled the small cemetery.
The sky was huge overhead.
Your son said later, "Did you see the sky? It was purple.
I knew it would rain," he said.
 
The dark Carrizo Mountains were so clear.
 
There were so many people, Sister.
Many of your friends whom we didn't know,
and your former schoolmates whom we remembered as children,
and Sister, we met many relatives for the first time.
 
We cried, not wanting to leave you in that serene place.
We hesitated, though our father, his parents, and their parents
are buried there. Our older sisters thought ahead to bring flowers for them.
They huddled quietly over their graves a few feet away.
 
Shideezhí, remember how red the sand is?
The men—your sons, our nephews, grandsons, and various in-laws—
took turns filling your grave. Their necks and arms were streaked
with dusty sweat. They kept their heads down;
their faces were damp and eyes, swollen.
 
We had to get it all out; we cried
and held each other. My granddaughters hovered near me
as if I might faint or fall unexpectedly.
 
Did you see, Sister, the way the grandchildren fed and served everyone?
They guided the grandparents and the elderly to their chairs.
Once seated, they served plates filled with mutton ribs,
potato salad, corn, thick slabs of oven bread, crispy fry bread,
and Jell-O salad. They placed the salt and pepper—that enduring couple—
before us and implored us to eat. The two delights we relished were good—
hot, strong coffee and cold, crisp diet pop.
 
We ate for you; we consumed your meal, Shideezhí.
We ate to honor the times you cooked for us—
those tasty dishes, scrumptious pastries combined with laughter,
silly childhood memories, and always teasing jokes.
Sister, I didn't know how we would make it;
it is still too much to think of you not being here.


^^EOP^^

         Sometimes  ,  when i'm
            very tired  ,    i think
 of extremophiles    ,   chemolithoautotrophs
       & others with     power for changing
    not-life into lives  ,    of those that eat rock
& fire in volcanoes   ,     before the death
 of the world but after   the death of a human
                              ,    of their taste
for ammonia or iron  ,     sulfur & carbon
                             ,   somehow
 enough of it to go on ...     As workers
          taste revolt       ,   they grow
at the vents of oceans   ,     turning mute vapor
into respiration            ,   changing unhinged
   matter to hinges        ,  near the rims of sea
trenches or the caves     ...     Our friend wrote
    of writers living              in gray hiding,
                            ,     of those who love glass
    & early freedom   ,    steep sand
  & late freedom       ,     sex among gentle
     or bitter grasses     ,   those with a taste for
 blue or belligerence   ,   obscure lives, she
called them               ,   the writers
    of radical mind     …
The living prefer life    ,  mostly they do
                         ,   they are ravenous
                         ,    making shapes in groups
    as the dying grow     one thought
          until the end ,   wanting more
              specifics   ,   desert or delay 
          until the i        drops away into           i am not here ,   the mineral other
pumps & vast vapors  ,    ridges & shadows beyond
            the single life it had not thought of—


^^EOP^^

                    
                    
                    Shadows lengthened while we sat stuck in traffic just beyond San Rafael. Headlights had begun to flare in the cool dusk. The hum of the car's engine lulled me, and I put my forehead against the glass, looking out over a darkening landscape. We were headed to the Bishop's Ranch, a weekend retreat for Episcopal Young Churchmen in hilly country that would someday produce superlative wines with garnet hues that stain the inside of a glass. I was queasy from the lurching of the car, the stops and starts, the smell of exhaust. Though trembling with cold, I was too shy to ask the lady, the mother of one of the other girls, to turn on the heater. I imagined pale pink blossoms on the Japanese plum, apple trees laden with white flowers, and north of Sebastapol the vibrant yellow of daffodils on slender, pleated stems. That night I slept in a single bunk made up with thin sheets and blankets.
 
A warm sun the next day restored me, but in the evening, seated by the fire that crackled in the fireplace of the big lodge, I felt flushed. Our recently ordained curate (we were not to know he was gay till some years later) had asked me to bring my guitar, and now he wanted me to sing about the girl who decides to sleep next to her mother her whole life long instead of falling for an unfaithful suitor. I sang; we all sang together. Young Father W. had a wonderful tenor voice. His smile reassured me, but now I was tired and, earlier than the others, I decided to return to the dorm.
 
In that clear March night, the sky gleamed like black ink and stars blazed, bright and alive. Walking downhill, guitar in hand, I suddenly stumbled with dizziness, and the slope swam before me. “Hold on, hold on,” I told myself as I nearly fell onto the dew-slick lawn. For a moment I could sense myself floating away from my body. Back in the dorm, I crawled into bed and lay shuddering with cold, bones aching. The room seemed to spin. I wanted to be home, but the thought of facing my mother filled me with terrible dismay. I knew the blue failure notice mailed by the school would have arrived.
 
Sure enough, it lay open on the dining table when I got home the following afternoon. A Sunday fog, hardly a mist, had blown in from the bay and was gathering in the eucalyptus across the ravine. The house was steamy. A basket of clean laundry occupied a chair atop a stack of San Francisco Chronicles. Mom sat at the table sewing, but I knew she was scowling. I thought it wise to look industrious, so I began to fold towels and pillowcases. “What I want to know,” began my mother, “is whether you have any ambition? Obviously, you will never get to college. What do you expect to do with your life?” She paused, and I shrugged. “Go ahead and shrug. Do you think your girlfriend is going to take care of you? That won’t last long. And why is it you only fall in love with girls? Well, I suppose you want to be a boy.” What an unutterable failure I am. I retreated, burned by her ferocious, upright anger. “Oh, yes, I’m sure you’re sick! But you will go to school tomorrow!”
 
That night, wracked again with cold, unable to stop my trembling, I sought my parents’ bed, stood moaning till Mom woke and let me under the covers, where she tried to warm me with her body. Weeks later we learned that one of my classmates, a robust girl who shot baskets as well as any boy, had succumbed to the illness and died. That night, my mother placed her hand on my forehead–her smooth palm, her touch, gentle–and said to my barely awake dad, “Our daughter has a raging fever.” Like a miracle, I was still her child. Comforted, I slept.
                

^^EOP^^

 If an idea exists but is never found,
then the stained-glass windows
 
will reflect nothing back to the ear.
Most days filter through the mind,
 
waiting not for movement
but for a road to be built,
 
brick by brick, word by word,
 
weariness replaced with joy,
but what is joy without the years
 
and the way they open constantly,
two or three hearts pumping a volume of blood
 
meant for just one?
 
                                   Our disbelief in the ordinary
emerges from the way we color routine:
 
leaves pile up depending on the wind,
but why pause to notice?
 
Eventually the seasons embrace
what our words will not, the illuminated day
 
just one of a thousand others,
and the names we give back to the world
 
mean ultimately little against the way
 
the sun pleads sense
from the smallest cradle of dew.


^^EOP^^

Ours was a play-filled childhood; irrigation ditches ran deep
during the summers. We played in the water and dirt, then inscribed
ABCs and numbers onto the smooth ground. Our cat Polly died
of rabies; then all the pets had to be shot, some in the rib cage
as they thrashed in panic. There was a pink bruise
on my forehead from pressing against the wall. We couldn't figure
 
out how such a thing could happen. The dogs were steadfast figures
around the farm. They chased strange cars and sometimes invoked deep
panic among visitors and passersby. They had cuts and bruises
from scuffles with roaming packs. No tags were inscribed
with their random Navajo names. Snazzy was skinny; his rib cage
obvious through thin fur. He looked as if he might die
 
from hunger, but he ate like nobody's business. Who knew he would die
of rabies with the rest? The main thing was to figure
out how they contracted it, my parents said. We cried until our rib cages
ached; our eyes stayed swollen. This first loss was too deep
to even talk about. Decades later, I can finally describe
how that summer led us into a grief that felt like a bruise
 
that would last forever. But our neighbor suffered worse bruises:
their huge dog, named Dog, was the first to die
and was the cause of all this. Their home and fields are inscribed
in our memories as "the rabies place." Over time, they must have figured
it was too much to live down. Childhood losses run deep,
even though we are grandparents now. The memory is an invisible cage
 
of anguished sobs, gunshots, yelping howls, canine rib cages
exploding. Sometimes we reminisce and notice that the bruises
of grief have turned pale like smoothed-over scars. That initial deep
hurt was the start, we found, of how love could die
right before us, even as we watched: stunned figures
pleading for mercy, urgent prayers saying, "Let God's scribe
 
mark this down. We've paid our dues. Our hearts are inscribed
with loss after loss." For some reason, after everything, our rib cages
held up and continued to cradle tender hearts. They must have figured
that all the prayers and careful teachings would prevent bruises
that would weaken us. Our love for those homely animals was deep
 
and would figure in the knowledge that such bruises
aren't endless, and that our rib cages are not mere bones. One can die
from grief, so now we can describe loss and love as the Holy Twins.


^^EOP^^

Now begins the festival and rivalry of late fall,
the weird debauch and daring debacle
of frat-boy parties as students parade foggy streets in mock
processions, bearing on shoulders scrawny effigies of dead,
defeated Indians cut from trees, where,
in the twilight, they had earlier been hung.
 
"Just dummies," laughs our dad, "Red Indians hung
or burned—it's only in jest." Every fall
brings the Big Game against Stanford, where
young scholars let off steam before the debacle
they may face of failed exams. "You're dead
wrong," he says to Mom. "They don't mock
 
real, live Indians." Around UC campus, mock
lynchings go on. Beneath porches we see hung
the scarecrow Natives with fake long braids, dead
from the merrymaking. On Bancroft Way, one has fallen
indecorously to a lawn, a symbol of the debacle
that happened three generations ago in California's hills, where
 
Native peoples were strung up. (A way of having fun? Where
did they go, those Indian ghosts?) "Their kids perform mock
war dances, whooping, re-enacting scenes of a debacle
white folks let loose," chides Mom. "Meanwhile we hang
portraits of presidents on school walls and never let fall
the old red, white, and blue. My dear brother is dead
 
because he fought in a White man's war. How many dead
Indians do they need to feel okay? This whole thing wears
on my soul." In the dark car we go silent, and the fall
night gets chillier. In yards, blazing bonfires mock
the stars that glow palely somewhere above. A thin moon hangs
over the tule fogs. I've never heard the word "debacle”
 
before and wonder what it means. "What's a debacle,
Mom? " I ask. "Oh, honey, it's a terrible and deadly
collapse. Complete ruin." I've noticed how the hung
Indians have their heads slumped forward. They wear
old clothes, headbands with feathers, face paint, moc-
casins instead of boots. Little do we know, this fall,
 
living Indians at Feather Falls
leave tobacco to mark that, indeed,
we're still here, lungs full of indigenous air.


^^EOP^^

Empty air has its own mechanism, me dijo. 
Its gears accord to whim.
 
We go out only when we have to, me dijo. 
We have hidden things for breathing.
 
You can't understand it prepped that way, me dijo. 
It always changes, but never readily enough.
 
Some things we say more of and then again, me dijo. 
They always mean less once pre-written.
 
The context connections are far too frail, me dijo. 
To make them you need to pixel-point time.
 
There are no click-in-n-out pictures, me dijo. 
You facet your eyes to see them multiply.
 
There are hands held out everywhere, me dijo. 
We have to be careful what to step around/in.
 
Sometimes we come this close too late, me dijo. 
Then we have to wait for inertia to embrace us.
 
We are the hungry, hungry: so ravenous, me dijo. 
We will tear at your insides and lick them clean.


^^EOP^^

All at once that stubborn dog of a heart
stopped barking at Lady Poetry, jumped
over the wall where the sacred crows of
Kashmir dwelt and said: I've come into
this world to stay. It can't be, protested
the daffy nurses of Pickapoon Hospital.
It can't be, the guardians of the public
order responded in chorus. All at once
that heart stopped leaping, not in his
beloved Buenos Aires where he'd mis-
placed his violin for good or in Ukraine
where José sawed timber and memorized
train schedules. That stubborn dog of a
heart kept singing in the face of turbulence,
never knowing whether the Lady would
arrive. He put bars on his verses because
of issues with his lungs and thanked the
little birds that ate from his hand. He fed
the crows as well—"breadcrumbing," he'd
call it—ringing a bell while quoting
mystics in their native tongues. This is
why I've come, he'd say, but all at once
that stubborn dog of a heart stopped
speaking and drew a giant moustache
high up in the spheres. You can see it
if you dare listen to their music.


^^EOP^^

There's no cause for vanity and none for
pride: it's just a matter of assembling
words in lines, then dividing them up (or
letting them divide themselves), hoping
they sound good or bad. (What's important
is that they sound like something.) It's all
a question of staying alert so that red doesn't
bleed into orange or orange into yellow or
yellow into silence. There's no cause for
rejecting silence and none for accepting it,
either. We should speak when there's noth-
ing to say and be quiet when others talk.
That's the poet's business, so get used to it.
There's nothing glorious about it. The future
doesn't count for anything and the past just
laughs at us. There's no cause for writing
this poem and none for deleting it, either.


^^EOP^^

           We had a grief
we didn't understand while
           standing at the edge of
   some low scrub hills as if
humans were extra
   or already gone;—
 
what had been in us before?
          a life that asks for mostly
    wanting freedom to get things done
in order to feel less
          helpless about the end
of things alone—;
 
when i think of time on earth,
   i feel the angle of gray minutes
          entering the medium days
    yet not "built-up":: our
work together: groups, the willing
    burden of an old belief,
 
           & beyond them love, as of
    a great life going like fast
creatures peeling back marked
    seeds, gold-brown integuments
    the color time
  will be when we are gone—


^^EOP^^

What might all songs lean into?
 
               You scramble eggs one moment,
and in the next minute
 
               you're eating them
with dry toast and black coffee
 
               in silence.
 
                              On a day like any day,
your voice is not your own:
 
the grass clippings disrupt
 
a robin too large to fly
from worm to worm.
 
We don't know why we speak,
 
               but yet our voices
persist, even when void of substance—
                              like a dream you'd like
 
     to recall throughout the day,
 
but you don't or you can't
and after a week, it's gone forever.
 
Of course our voices
evolve years before our bodies—
 
our vocal cords vibrate like a heartbeat,
               senselessly. No explanation
needed.
 
Eventually all languages converge.
               Each thought falls
 
into all others. And what thought
               resists being built by words?
 
                              Perhaps fear placed us
               here in this room together:
 
a fear of fire at one point turned
into a fear of God. After that, a fear
 
of godlessness, a room
where a word before
 
               another word and another
 
word after the first
was all we had, all we could
imagine. Somehow
 
an image means
more than the object itself
but not because
 
               it's made of words. Most likely
it's because the act of creation
 
sets the mind down like a bird
               in a field
 
where the speed of the invasive cannot exist.


^^EOP^^

1
Desert heat, high clouds, and sky
the color of lapis. On this journey,
anything seems possible,
so we stop by an ancient cottonwood
to kiss. The beauty trembles,
doesn't say a word, just watches
me, so open. Small birds fly by, flock
in the shady tree above us. What
settles in her heart? What congeals?
Hope? Despair? Far off, the river churns
in its sandy banks, swallows veer, turn
in fiery air. Will these kisses seal
her to me? I her lover, she my wife?
Is all of this a dream, my whole life?
 
2
She is just this side of wonderful,
and suddenly the glamorous world
fills itself with shining and we laugh
at highway monuments that explain
how hard the trek had been for Franciscans
in the Indian wilderness, poor fellows—
conversion is the devil's own
work! Then the stones of her dream
turn up under her feet, the back
of a huge land turtle. I know
we must be circling Paradise
because the ants enter the fleshy petals
of the roadside flowers with evident
joy and purpose (oh, my dark, pretty one).
 
3
Music, my adored. When is there never
music? My accordion puffs up
with drinkable melodies. I spill
her tunes into your listening ear,
one after the other: the squeeze-box
enters the dance of the plaintive gypsy
with its hard rhythms, lilts the back-
breaking labor song the worker croons
to earth, warbles romantic notes of
dissolving borders. You melt
like a woman beneath her lover's touch.
Music is happy and pitiless when
it sets fire to combustible souls. Even
the raspy bandoneon's voice is lyric.
 
4
Sacred. Sacred. Sacred. Sacred. (Speak
in a whisper.) We slip into this
space half cognizant. The land is very
large indeed: bones of the earth
worn down, though she is a living thing.
See how she exposes her grace? Antelopes
graze on the far plain—their high,
white tails—the red soil throbs
its slow heartbeat, and the blue sky
clears so smartly, perfectly, like
radiance. Are the ancestors near?
What can we know? We decide
to wander around this prairie, mistaken
for Utes, buy commodities in little towns.
 
5
Late afternoon we head west along the willow-banked
Malheur after the long curve of the Snake River plain.
(Above the falls where the Shoshone went to pray
we soaked our feet in cold water, and I observed
the arch of her brown foot.) Rabbitbrush and sage
along the highway, juniper on far hills and bluffs.
Sundown, and dusk falls over the wide basin of land.
In Burns we eat eggs in a cafe, take a room
in the Motel 6. In the dark, I can see
her black hair, black against the pillows. Its clean
scent makes me think of corn. At dawn, I hold her
and there are kisses. Then more kisses. Then more.
The day is cold; a north wind blew last night. But
the land is open. Rain falls in showers of light.
 
6
Her hand on my thigh, my shoulder,
in my hair. She leans over to kiss my cheek.
We look at each other, smile. For miles
we travel this way, nearly silent, point
with eyes or chins at the circling hawk, the king-
fisher on the snag above the swollen
creek. One night I weep in her arms
as she cries, "Oh, oh, oh!" because I have touched
her scars lightly: throat, belly, breasts.
In that communion of lovers, thick sobs
break from me as I think of my love
back home, all that I have done
and cannot say. This is the first time
I have left her so completely, so alone.
 


^^EOP^^

Perhaps is a new and sudden way of being.
 
Like satisfaction not yet begun or some other kind
of kindness:
 
a more gentle one?
 
Night makes us all into the middle
of something until we aren't
 
anything anymore. The sky
isn't any color here. It's OK
because consolation is color enough
 
for your cheeks, wind bitten and glorified
by the light of the wine in this glass draining
 
toward a better time, a better space. I invented
a notion of hell, and you invented a notion of hello.
 
Amazing similarities and bizarrely coincidental snow
 
Like a twig falling from an oak's tallest point,
 
I keep wondering when forgiveness
found its way into this world
 
in a time before bargaining and beckoning.
 
It's quiet again and now the sky is a tangled
mess of rags seeking out the bored and unwilling.
 
I'd like to make a map not of the land
but of the path I took to arrive in this place,
 
a map with no idealized purpose,
a map of a thousand airless pines.


^^EOP^^

I would have come.
When you called. But.
I had the most beautiful pale pink rose.
Its healthy stem was clenched between my teeth. And.
Its thorns bit sharply into my tender wet flesh. So.
 
I couldn't answer you. Still.
My lips moved at you silently.
They offered words you never heard.
They screamed inside my crazed brain. Only.
It could do nothing for you.
 
In time the petals wilted.
They blew away. And.
They became compost in someone else's garden.
The tough, fibrous stem withered.
I bit down hard to snap its grip on me. Then.
 
My teeth fell out.
Its thorns had burrowed into my cheeks.
They had implanted themselves permanently.
They were suckling on my softest tissues. And.
Not long after they sprouted tiny shoots.
 
They coiled their way down.
I still held the memory of your call. And.
The long stemmed beauty lodged next to it.
They cleaved unto the long roots curling down my neck.
My body held tight and listened. Hard.


^^EOP^^

I am so done with feeling
Xmas Amaryllis grow
in places where thralls go free
I am not quite enough
for the woodland; promoting myself again
after all accused men have been named 
In Casablanca I wait for livestock
to come through luxe doors
for thighs to grow less through absorption
My killer is not going to be invited to this
Ornamenting party and I am blue daisies 
casting O’s wide in anointment
Now that he’s gone I am free to torch down the
Valley                        la spiaggia of pure
Purple                         small neck in hand


^^EOP^^




after Miller Williams



This is to say we continued. As though continuing changed us.
As though continuing brought happiness as we had known.
 
On a dry field without cover, his skin blistered raw in the sun.
Not one among us came, as though he had no relations.
 
What did we say to our brother? How could we leave him alone
while soldiers guarded his corpse as though precious to them?
 
One of the women, in darkness, crept to the field where he died,
prayed for him, covered him up. Dust over what was not dust.
 
We would have ventured out with her if we had loved ourselves less.
We had to think of our children, and he was not coming back.
 
How could we live with the silence, live with our grief and our shame?
Death did not heal what he suffered. He was making demands.
 
We did not want him to be there, asking the question he asked us,
changing the sound of his name. He had embarrassed us.
 
This is the memory we carried, avoiding the thought that he remained
face down among the charred grasses, holding the earth with his hands.


^^EOP^^

That sound Arvo Pärt does with one piano note 
stars split, fade, wander 
in cosmic expansion—
  
First responder’s genesis and torch of 
metadatacrunch tumbling in a  
burnt and weedy churchyard 
equal parts Lethe and lithe—  
Grass, is it hollow, hallow 
to wake no longer among 
mortals? The woman her dress flowered 
from a blown ceiling silver-rosed—  
Flat plasm’s 
archangel coming clear out 
of sheetrock and screen 
shield and spear in hand 
let us do all the cooking  
if she will lead the pack, remember the route, read the waters—   
After the great fire we 
tread river’s late cream and flare. 
We woke in a city. 
Where who slew us into portions 
on a block out of earth 
gathered our limbs  
and we were allowed to continue  
unhunted. If “if” is the one word one is given with God  
to explain how one survived. 
Oh.  Ah.  Siren, 
white cockatoo 
meets deep 
blue.  
Fog.  Pour ammonia 
on coyote  
scat.


^^EOP^^

throughout the years I have designed
high-end custom homes
crafting spatial poetics with vigas and latillas 
hand peeled by mojados 
whose sweat translates into profit for developers
working at a nifty rate
 
sometimes I go visit these homes
as they are being finished
  may I help you? 
I am asked by the realtor
standing at the door,
thinking that I may be the guy
who mixed the mud and pushed the wheelbarrow
 
I introduce myself as the designer
  oh, well, it’s so nice to meet you,  what a wonderful job! please, come in. 
 
I was once asked by a home magazine journalist
if I felt insulted by such incidents well, no, I said, my mind mixing for an answer a good batch of cement is never accidental 
 
last year on my way up through Santa Fe
I made a detour and drove by a house of my design
the season’s first snow on the ground,
smoke rising out of the fireplace chimney
 
inch by inch
I know that house
through its X, Y, and Z axis
 
but, I cannot approach the front door
knock and expect to be invited in
to sit in the corner of my pleasing
and lounge around with the owner
as we sip on cups of hot herbal tea
making small talk about the weather
or discussing a reading
by the latest author come through
as the sun’s last light
streams in gallantly
through the window
just where I placed it
and for that reason
 
I take a handful of snow to my mouth
toss another into the air
my blessings upon the inhabitants que Dios los bendiga y les dé más 
my grandfather would have said
 
I turn my car toward home
to my mother’s house
a place near and far to me
she, my mother, is bedridden
and my brother is the self-appointed caretaker
to bathe and feed her
bring her morsels of conversation
 
it is their own world now
 
ruled by a juxtaposition of understanding
against what I have come to know, now
here, so far and away 
I am greeted at her front yard
by an old, propped up trunk hood
proclaiming my brother’s spray-painted inscription
         Jesus Saves 
on the opposite side it reads
         Keep Out! 
  I guess it just depends on  what kind of day he’s having, 
someone once remarked
like a rattlesnake
it’s a fair warning
 
years ago I accepted this madness
and called it not my own it’s better that he be drunk on Christ, said my mother than on what he used to drink 
 
we all agreed


^^EOP^^

Know no name
Why this holy day honed
Hollow day haul
I lost wind when wooden
I can’t bear to be
Unaided in hunt unhanded
To haunt when strewn sound
Who will be held in hand
Brought sent
Mooring at the shore
Who’re you for
For what fewer who wore
Be called this wooer
More who are the ones
In horror to light will strew
then sue for war


^^EOP^^

When I learned I might have cancer,
I bought fifteen white lilies. Easter was gone:
the trumpets were wilted, plants crooked with roots
bound in pots. I dug them into the garden,
knowing they would not bloom for another year.
All summer, the stalks stood like ramshackle posts
while I waited for results. By autumn, the stalks
had flopped down. More biopsies, laser incisions,
the cancer in my tongue a sprawling mass. Outside,
the earth remained bare, rhizomes shrunken
below the frost line. Spring shoots appeared
in bright green skins, and lilies bloomed
in July, their waxed trumpets pure white,
dusting gold pollen to the ground.
                                                                     This year,
tripled in number, they are popping up again. I wait,
a ceremony, for the lilies to open, for the serpentine length
of the garden to bloom in the shape of my tongue’s scar,
a white path with one end leading into brilliant air,
the other down the throat’s canyon, black
and unforgiving. I try to imagine
what could grow in such darkness. I am waiting
for the lilies to open.


^^EOP^^

I.
    The first question is always phrased this way:
    “So. How much Indian are you?”
 
II.
    We did not live in tepees.
    We did not braid our hair.
    We did not fringe our shirts.
    We did not wear war bonnets.
    We did not chase the buffalo.
    We did not carry shields.
    We were never Plains Indians.
    We tried to ride,
    but we kept falling off of our dogs.
 
III.
     A local official came to our office to ask our help with a city event. He had a splendid idea, he said. To kick off the event and show everyone in town that our tribe was still around, we should go up to the bluff overlooking the city and make a big smoke signal. Then they would know we were here.
     Who ever heard of smoke signals in the forests? I imagined us upon the bluff, lighting one of those firestarter bricks. We haven’t made fire since the Boy Scouts took over. And how would the citizens know it was us? They’d probably call the fire department.
 
IV.
     As they ask, they think, yes,      I can see it in her face. High cheekbones
    (whatever those are) and dark hair. 
 
    Here’s a thought: don’t we all have
    high cheekbones? If we didn’t,
    our faces would cave in.
   (But I do have a colonized nose.)
 
    I’m sick of explaining myself.
 
    “You know,” I finally say,
    “It doesn’t matter to my people.”
    I ride off to my ranch-style home.
    Time to weave a basket, or something.
 


^^EOP^^

It was a vertical time. It was the expression, a spirit giving way onto an electric barren. We
circled and were encircled and had no cause. It was a time of the self come on in a field of
apparatuses. It was vignetted by sleep, and the sleep was in its center breached. Cold moving
through the smell of gas. The big-leafed enclosure. It was a time that clattered at the horizons,
whose recounting was already foreclosed, as in a numeral smudged in powder, as in a thin water
making of the atmosphere a disc. It was a time of guzzling. A time amid what has been kept, a
time of calendered trust, repeated appeal, erasures of flight. We begin with a weedy stem drawn
against the winter sky. Dear hierophant, our decision initialed. The muffled sound of the closet
and the machine.


^^EOP^^

I’m terrified of a number of fates,
Poisoned water under a tyrant’s wage,
Being fired for doing nothing, my parents dying,
Committing a thought like this to the page,
The splash of acid to the face
The Queens non-profit boss received
Leaving work one blue August evening. Hell’s
So eloquent and poetry’s no fate at all
Unless you count the story of the divided sea
Waiting to wash its assassins away.
Says the Pharaoh, “That’s so sad.”
But that story is less fate than news, whereas
That Queens boss? Permanently burned, the Times
Says one eye won’t stop weeping.


^^EOP^^

at the unemployment office
I know it can be a two hour deathly wait
before one’s name is called out
so I find a chair and bury my head
in a book that I brought to read
 
sitting beside me, a man and a woman converse
talk of years past, of people they knew
 
       and Leonard, is he still in prison? 
       yeah, he’s still doing time       well, that’s good, I guess, means he’s still alive
 
a young girl walks in, short black halter top
and airbrushed-on jeans
her breasts pouting up past a too-low neckline
the men, the women, all stare
whether they’d like to or not
 
Leonard’s friends exchange stories
       yeah, my ex, she just wants my money       I tell her, well, go work then! 
 
and they laugh between the irony life, huh, she tells him, it’s crazy, the things we get into, 
he agrees
the rest of us caught silently in their exchange agree, as well
 
his arms are thick with hair
and tattoos of skills
and scrawled out
indecipherable letters of the alphabet
 
      yeah, this chick that was riding with me once, he tells her
    got her jacket belt caught on my wheel    I didn’t even know it until I got to the next light
   I went back, she was alright, just fell off, didn’t get hurt or nothing   she was pissed though. 
 
“just fell off, didn’t get hurt,” what does he mean?
this story just drops off, I want to know a little more, a lot more
I mean, how fast was the bike going when she fell off
did she ruin the belt, scrape her nose
did they drink a lot of beer afterwards?
 
and so the time drags by, the line lengthens
now and then people unbury their heads
from their midmorning dragging into noon thoughts
women adjust their bra straps
scold their kids with unfulfilled warnings
the folks behind the counter look at us
holding their half empty cups of coffee
 
ah, if only there was a dollar for every story


^^EOP^^

All night vigil.
My two-and-a-half-year-old boy
and his 10-month-old sister
lay on the same bed,
facing opposite ends;
their feet touching.
They looked soft, peaceful,
bundled there in strands of blankets.
I brushed away roaches that meandered
across their faces,
but not even that could wake them.
Outside, the dark cover of night tore
as daybreak bloomed like a rose
on a stem of thorns.
I sat down on the backsteps,
gazing across the yellowed yard.
A 1954 Chevy Bel-Air stared back.
It was my favorite possession.
I hated it just then.
It didn’t start when I tried to get it going
earlier that night. It had a bad solenoid.
I held a 12-gauge shotgun across my lap.
I expected trouble from the Paragons gang
of the west Lynwood barrio.
Somebody said I dove the car
that dudes from Colonia Watts used
to shoot up the Paragons’ neighborhood.
But I got more than trouble that night.
My wife had left around 10 p.m.
to take a friend of mine home.
She didn’t come back.
I wanted to kill somebody.
At moments, it had nothing to do
with the Paragons.
It had to do with a woman I loved.
But who to kill? Not her–
sweet allure wrapped in a black skirt.
I’d kill myself first.
Kill me first?
But she was the one who quit!
Kill her? No, think man! I was hurt, angry. . .
but to kill her? To kill a Paragon?
To kill anybody?
I went into the house
and put the gun away.
 
Later that morning, my wife came for her things:
some clothes, the babies. . . their toys.
A radio, broken TV, and some dishes remained.
I didn’t stop her.
There was nothing to say that my face
didn’t explain already.
Nothing to do. . . but run.
 
So I drove the long haul to Downey
and parked near an enclosed area
alongside the Los Angeles River.
I got out of the car,
climbed over the fence
and stumbled down the slopes.
A small line of water rippled in the middle.
On rainy days this place flooded and flowed,
but most of the time it was dry
with dumped garbage and dismembered furniture.
Since a child, the river and its veins of canals
were places for me to think. Places to heal.
Once on the river’s bed, I began to cleanse.
I ran.
 
I ran into the mist of morning,
carrying the heat of emotion
through the sun’s rays;
I ran past the factories
that lay smack in the middle
of somebody’s backyard.
I ran past alleys with overturned trashcans
and mounds of tires.
Debris lay underfoot. Overgrown weeds
scraped my legs as I streamed past;
recalling the song of bullets
that whirred in the wind.
 
I ran across bridges, beneath overhead passes,
and then back alongside the infested walls
of the concrete river;
splashing rainwater as I threaded,
my heels colliding against the pavement.
So much energy propelled my legs
and, just like the river,
it went on for miles.
 
When all was gone,
the concrete river
was always there
and me, always running.


^^EOP^^

The sudden pink shape
surfacing in black-water lagoons
shocked explorers.
All dolphins share man’s
thumb and fingerbones,
but these also wear his flesh.
When the river overflows
and floods the varzea, 
these dolphins travel miles
to splash in the shallows
amongst buttress-roots of giant
rainforest trees.
The waters abate, trapping fish,
dolphins never.
 
A lamp burning dolphin oil
blinds. At night
the pink-flesh contours melt and blur.
The flipper extends the hidden hand
to lift its woman’s torso
to the land. An Eve,
born each night from the black Amazon,
roams the dark banks for victims
to draw to the water and death.
Taboo to the Indians,
this pink daughter of the river’s magic
always looks, to explorers,
like she’s smiling.
 


^^EOP^^

When Heavy tells a story
the millwright shanty under the electric furnaces
chokes with quiet, amid the roar,
as Heavy pauses, adjusts his mountainous weight
over a creaky grease-stained metal chair
and looks up at the whirling ceiling fan
next to fluorescent lights hanging by wires.
His fingers lace like so many sausages
across the canvas of blue workshirt
on his chest.
 
Heavy tells his story
and the voice of reason quickens the demise
of foulness from red-faced millwrights
just back from a repair job
and sitting around for the five air whistles
that again call them to combat on the furnace floor.
 
All laughter stops, all nonsense sayings
and cuts of wisdom cease their echo
when Heavy tells a story.
 
Heavy talks about the Mexican melter
who once had an affair with the Pit Boss’s wife.
The heart of the problem–and the fact
from which the story’s plot revolves–
was that the melter lived across the street
from the Pit Boss.
One night just before the graveyard shift,
the melter left his home, kissed his wife’s
round face and proceeded to walk to the bus stop.
But a bullet pierced through his hardhat
and he fell, like an overturned stack of fire bricks,
onto the pavement.
The moral of this story:
Never have an affair with someone
whose old man lives
within shooting distance.
 
Heavy tells a story
about a furnace foreman who always yelled
at the laborers for failing to clean
the bag house of the built-up filth
from hours of cooking scrap iron and ore.
The men told him it was too dangerous
to walk on the tin-roofed panels;
their weight could cause
them to fall some 30 feet
into the gaping mouth of a flaming furnace below.
“Nonsense,” the foreman yelled,
“you’re all just lazy Polacks.”
(he called everyone Polacks).
The foreman then proceeded to walk
across the roof as the men stood nearby,
with mouths open, near the safety of side beams.
“You see,” he said standing in the middle
as hydraulics moved shutters
up and down to capture the sulphur dust.
 
Then the foreman moved forward
and before anyone could shout,
he crashed through the roof,
screaming into a reddened pot of molten metal;
the oxygen in his body making popping sounds
as it entered. The furnace operates continued
to pour ladles of scrap iron and to melt the steel.
They skimmed the slag off the top
and when it was ready, they poured
the molten mass into ingot molds.
There was nothing they could do for the foreman,
they said. Production had to keep going.
 
Heavy looks into the eyes of his listeners and says:
Somewhere there’s a skyscraper in downtown LA
with steel beams made from the ingot
with the foreman’s body in it.
Somewhere there’s a bridge or underground pipe
with the man’s remains chemically bound
within the molecular structure.
 
Heavy tells a story. . .
 
and the men lay down their tools,
and coffee is poured into heavy ceramic cups,
the shanty stills beneath the rumbling,
and even foremen stop by
to pay a listen
when Heavy tells a story.


^^EOP^^

A mother possum crawled down the chimney
the spring Donny came to us
because both sets of his parents had kicked him out,
the same April after your dad and I divorced
when you kicked a hole in the dining room wall.
The possum was swollen with young
she would later carry, half-grown, on her back
or hanging from her thick, hairless tail.
“An oversized rat with maternal instincts,”
your dad once said.
 
Instead of one angry son, I now had two–
fifteen and seventeen–
two forged signatures on absence excuses,
two discipline committee meetings,
two conferences with the principal.
While I worked,
you shared contraband beer,
as well as the basement bedroom
with its fieldstone fireplace
in which you found the possum one cool evening.
 
Laughing and cheering, you teamed up
to cage her with a trash can,
carry her to the alley out back and dump her.
The possum squeezed back
down the chimney twice more. The third time
you threw her out on Troost Avenue, screaming
for a car to smash her beneath its tires.
She must have been near her time,
desperate for a nest,
to crawl back down after that.
The noise woke me after midnight.
Donny had clubbed her with his nunchuks.
You both kicked and stomped
her head as she lurched, stumbled
between your feet.
Halfway down
the basement steps I stopped,
seeing your faces. The possum fell
limp. I backed slowly up the stairs.
 
In the morning, you couldn’t meet my eyes.
I just made you clean up the mess.


^^EOP^^

Continue to pour my thoughts out on this topic of discussion
Slow down, I keep gettin the feeling that I’m rushin
Like my cousin’s dying breaths, or the decision that was made
But lemme backtrack, letting feelings get in the way
A normal adolescent, aspiring for the highest
Goals that were attainable, wanted to be the flyest
We all searchin for something we’ve made a pact to do
The drive of ambition, it’s in us, it’s in you
Now snatch every dream that a mother had for her son
And replace that with a breath, “Baby, just take another one!”
A white man’s gun, the very courier of evil
He left, enjoyed his night, but the gunshots were lethal
Deceitful, everything we’ve been told from the start
We’ve more than just some ghetto thugs, these thoughts split us
    apart
What you must understand is our culture bore from oppression
The Hip Hop inside of us a form of expression
I wish I had the chance to explain to Jordan’s killer
That the song “Beef” by Lil Reese shouldn’t label him a dealer
Or is he ignorant or another ghetto thug?
Do you understand that your ignorance filled him with 3 slugs?
I don’t want sympathy and I don’t want affection
I want this country to head in the right direction
Instead of discussin who the Grammys should be awardin
Work to prevent murders like those of my cousin, Jordan.
 


^^EOP^^

his eyelids like a moth’s fringed wings.
Arms flail against the Ninja Turtle sheet
and suddenly-long legs
race time.
 
Awake, he’s a water-leak detector, a recycling ranger
who bans Styrofoam and asks for beeswax
crayons, a renewable resource.
He wants to adopt the Missouri river,
write the president
to make factories stop polluting.
 
They’re old friends, he and George Bush.
He writes and scolds
the president, every month or so,
about the bombing the children of Iraq
(he made his own sign to carry in protest),
about the plight of the California condor and northern gray wolf,
about more shelters and aid for the homeless.
The lion-shaped bulletin board in his room
is covered with pictures and letters from George,
who must be nice,
even if he is a slow learner.
 
Joseph is a mystery fan, owns 54 Nancy Drews.
Nancy’s his friend, along with Jo, Meg, and Amy
and poor Beth, of course, whom he still mourns.
He also reads of knights and wizards, superheroes,
and how to win at Nintendo.
 
The cats and houseplants are his to feed and water
and the sunflower blooming in the driveway’s border
of weeds. He drew our backyard to scale,
using map symbols, sent off to have it declared
an official wildlife refuge, left a good-night
note on my pillow, written in Egyptian hieroglyphs.
 
In my life, I have done one good thing.


^^EOP^^

We set up an assembly line.
I heat the tortillas in manteca 
after Crystal dips them in chile ancho 
and drains them. Niles carries full plates
of hot tortillas to his father,
who rolls them around spoonfuls of filling.
When we’ve finished the hot, greasy work,
I pour the last of the sauce over neat rows
of stuffed tortillas, sprinkle them with cheese,
clean the stove and counters.
The kids help their father rinse plates and pans.
They don’t know this is the last time.
The cheese melts. Crystal
dances to “No More Lonely Nights” on the radio.
Niles and his dad joke and wrestle.
After grace, we sit before steaming plates.
The kids stuff their mouths, insult each other,
and laugh. We can’t avoid their eyes
forever. Their father and I stare
at each other across the table.


^^EOP^^

in my house. Days we’re ordinary,
affectionate, a close,
happy couple, but nights
require a passport and serious
immunizations, warnings about
security and guerilla attacks.
You are a foreign ruler,
quite possibly benevolent
in intention – but we know how
these things always play out,
don’t we? – with needs alien
to and hostile to your citizenry,
me, without power
except to say, “No more,”
and hope to survive
the fallout from the battles
in the streets. Days, we’re
the peaceful, devoted
pair all our friends envy.
Nights are always tense
around the DMZ that is our bed
with occasional forays into the bush
where the enemy is always lying
in wait. Sleep is hard, fearful
and troubled. I dream us
going down in flames.


^^EOP^^

Bless Tuesday, blessed Monday.
Bless the word week, its seven
small days trail with y.
Bless the men whose words
I was too young to hear.
A whisper loves a canal.
Bless my laugh, lent by grief,
I have so little left to borrow.
But my hair, it grows—
if hair be gold, cut mine so
I might rid my beloved
of his student loans. Bless
thieves, universities, those
hands caress what’s not theirs.
Bless thinking it was yours.
Here are hands, blessed one.
Bless them holding the door.
Bless each crier on the F
train before and after me
as they blush, as they transfer
into tunnels for the red line.
Oh bless, bless wildly, what
remains to be done. Bless
the one who told me so,
the ones who didn’t.
Even weak breaths bless.
Bless weakness, fragile fortress,
my friend’s body absent
of soundness. Bless the sound
of someone reliable answering
your call, saying If you’re going
through hell, Hello.

^^EOP^^

Watts bleeds
leaving stained reminders
on dusty sidewalks.
 
Here where I strut alone
as glass lies broken by my feet
and a blanket of darkness is slung
across the wooden shacks
of nuetsra colonia.
 
Watts bleeds
dripping from carcasses of dreams:
Where despair
is old people
sitting on torn patio sofas
with empty eyes
and children running down alleys
with big sticks.
 
Watts bleeds
on vacant lots
and burned-out buildings–
temples desolated by a people’s rage.
 
Where fear is a deep river.
Where hate is an overgrown weed.
 
Watts bleeds
even as we laugh,
recall good times,
drink and welcome daylight
through the broken windshield
of an old Impala.
 
Here is the Watts of my youth,
where teachers threw me
from classroom to classroom,
not knowing where I could fit in.
 
Where I learned to fight or run,
where I zigzagged down alleys,
jumped over fences,
and raced by graffiti on crumbling
factory walls.
 
Where we played
between boxcars,
bleeding from
broken limbs and torn flesh,
and where years later
we shot up carga 
in the playground
of our childhood.
 
Watts bleeds
as the shadow of the damned
engulfs all the chinga of our lives.
 
In the warmth of a summer night,
gunshots echo their deadly song
through the silence of fear;
prelude to a heartbeat.
 
Watts bleeds
as I bled
getting laid-off from work,
standing by my baby’s crib,
touching his soft check
and fingering his small hand
as dreams shatter again,
dreams of fathers
for little men.
 
Watts bleeds
and the city hemorrhages,
unable to stop the flow
from this swollen and festering sore.
 
Oh bloom, you trampled flower!
Come alive as once
you tried to do from the ashes.
 
Watts, bleeding and angry,
you will be free.


^^EOP^^

Alan drives a cab at night,
Has cab driver’s elbow
In his left arm,
Sells real estate by day.
 
Alan dreams of a big deal,
Of opening a classy poolhall.
Has a four million dollar deal
Which will probably fall through,
Has a big land deal with the Post Office
But it will take 20 years to deliver
Because they are so slow.
 
Alan collects baseball cards and comic books
Hates condos and townhouses
Though he lives in one.
Was a trader for nineteen and one-half years
Then fired when the market melted.
 
Alan, even if he was rich,
Would not let his stepdaughter
By his second wife
Have her own phone and private line
Like her rich friend Rebecca has
Because after all she is only twelve.
 
Alan, half Jewish, has three tattoos.
“I got them recently because I wanted them.
My Jewish aunt nearly had a stroke
When she saw them.”
 
Alan admits he is a pack rat saving
Everything, loves wood, restoration, and antiques.
Alan admires the people who buy old houses
And fix them up.
Hates the development of Staten Island
Blaming it on the people from Brooklyn.
 
Alan was cooking sausages and onions
(His other half is Italian)
In his back yard
When a woman knocked his parked car
Into the next block,
Totaled it; he got $1,200 more
Than it was worth.
 
Alan found a turtle and put
It in a safe stream,
Stopped a dog from killing a cock
In historic Richmondtown.
 
Alan hates the dump—
ninety-four percent of the garbage there
Is dropped by the other boroughs—
Likes the idea of secession,
Staten Island free and independent.
 
Alan apologetically asks
If he didn’t talk too much
As he brings me to my destination.
 
He leaves me a great silence
And I wish I had one million American bucks
To tip the exuberant Alan.
 
Alan, take this million bucks
Strip the paint off the good wood of your dreams
And tattoo the tedious days.


^^EOP^^

It’s true: I almost never
smile, but that doesn’t mean
 
I’m not    in love: my heart
is that black violin
played slowly. You know that
 
moment late in the solo
when the voice
is so pure    you feel
the blood in it: the wound
 
between rage
and complete surrender. That’s
where I’m smiling. You just
can’t see it—the sound
 
bleeding perfectly
inside me. The first time
I killed a vampire    I was
 
sad: I mean
we were almost
family.
 
But that’s
so many lives
ago. I believe
 
in the cry that cuts
into the melody, the strings
calling back the forgotten world.
 
When I think of the madness
that has made me    and the midnight
I walk inside—all day long:
 
when I think of that
one note    that breaks
what’s left of what’s
human in me, man,
 
I love    everything


^^EOP^^

Thinking to see them there, captains
industrious in
morning sun, I crack the egg’s tender
yellow head
 
Love comes to me un-
­repentant, toward it all vectors
converge repeating, like
 
moment of the necessary form
I pluck a feather from your neck
 
On the page one alights without permission, or
love is
an assemblage
 
beginning each day identical, palpable I
remarks of, is it that music or need edits
my body
 
two people leave a shopping mall
with goods, death squad hovering high
a streetlamp
Call your mother, stay up late
 
to watch the neighborhood 
undressing light, like
multiple phone calls
connected then
hung up, get the family together soon, watch
 
American bison overtake the field
filling a vehicle lane in early snow
obstructed I paused
To see it, their dark furs shaking enormous
out of trees they descended from the line of sky
respond to a much deeper instinct
 
we were then back on our way
input later to the search bar
I love keywords, like
love is
an exodus
 
I imagine you sleeping, then a pyramid or
chandelier throwing sunlight
 
An absence emerges, sharp
I regard the whole
practice of it
 
touch it


^^EOP^^

First:       Brother, remove the tool marks on your scathed skin, brush your tattoos with
                                   nettles, smear bearberry juice in the gashes. Crack open the jail-seed.
 
Second:   Tear away the bars which restrain
                                   your lean, spare life. Bend your curves in a knot. Brother, smudge your
                                   saw-tooth edges.
 
Third:      Cut red seaweed to conceal your gray cadaver;
                                   start wetting your skin down; after scraping,
                                   drip your bowels of blood, change into wolf.
 
Fourth:    The savannah sparrow flies north.
                                   In speech, smell fine-grained hawthorn.
                                   Collapse your voice into bark and howl.
 


^^EOP^^

The radio clicks on—it’s poor swollen America,
Up already and busy selling the exhausting obligation
Of happiness while intermittently debating whether or not
A man who kills fifty people in five minutes
With an automatic weapon he has bought for the purpose
Is mentally ill. Or a terrorist. Or if terrorists
Are mentally ill. Because if killing large numbers of people
With sophisticated weapons is a sign of sickness—
You might want to begin with fire, our early ancestors
Drawn to the warmth of it—from lightning,
Must have been, the great booming flashes of it
From the sky, the tree shriveled and sizzling,
Must have been, an awful power, the odor
Of ozone a god’s breath; or grass fires,
The wind whipping them, the animals stampeding,
Furious, driving hard on their haunches from the terror
Of it, so that to fashion some campfire of burning wood,
Old logs, must have felt like feeding on the crumbs
Of the god’s power and they would tell the story
Of Prometheus the thief, and the eagle that feasted
On his liver, told it around a campfire, must have been,
And then—centuries, millennia—some tribe
Of meticulous gatherers, some medicine woman,
Or craftsman of metal discovered some sands that,
Tossed into the fire, burned blue or flared green,
So simple the children could do it, must have been,
Or some soft stone rubbed to a powder that tossed
Into the fire gave off a white phosphorescent glow.
The word for chemistry from a Greek—some say Arabic—
Stem associated with metal work. But it was in China
Two thousand years ago that fireworks were invented—
Fire and mineral in a confined space to produce power—
They knew already about the power of fire and water
And the power of steam: 100 BC, Julius Caesar’s day.
In Alexandria, a Greek mathematician produced
A steam-powered turbine engine. Contain, explode.
“The earliest depiction of a gunpowder weapon
Is the illustration of a fire-lance on a mid-12th-century
Silk banner from Dunhuang.” Silk and the silk road.
First Arab guns in the early fourteenth century. The English
Used cannons and a siege gun at Calais in 1346.
Cerigna, 1503: the first battle won by the power of rifles
When Spanish “arquebusiers” cut down Swiss pikemen
And French cavalry in a battle in southern Italy.
(Explosions of blood and smoke, lead balls tearing open
The flesh of horses and young men, peasants mostly,
Farm boys recruited to the armies of their feudal overlords.)
How did guns come to North America? 2014,
A headline: DIVERS DISCOVER THE SANTA MARIA
One of the ship’s Lombard cannons may have been stolen
By salvage pirates off the Haitian reef where it had sunk.
And Cortes took Mexico with 600 men, 17 horses, 12 cannons.
And LaSalle, 1679, constructed a seven-cannon barque,
Le Griffon, and fired his cannons upon first entering the
     continent’s
Interior. The sky darkened by the terror of the birds.
In the dream time, they are still rising, swarming,
Darkening the sky, the chorus of their cries sharpening
As the echo of that first astounding explosion shimmers
On the waters, the crew blinking at the wind of their wings.
Springfield Arsenal, 1777. Rock Island Arsenal, 1862.
The original Henry rifle: a sixteen shot .44 caliber rimfire
Lever-action, breech-loading rifle patented—it was an age
Of tinkerers—by one Benjamin Tyler Henry in 1860,
Just in time for the Civil War. Confederate casualties
In battle: about 95,000. Union casualties in battle:
About 110,000. Contain, explode. They were throwing
Sand into the fire, a blue flare, an incandescent green.
The Maxim machine gun, 1914, 400-600 small caliber rounds
Per minute. The deaths in combat, all sides, 1914-1918
Was 8,042,189. Someone was counting. Must have been.
They could send things whistling into the air by boiling water.
The children around the fire must have shrieked with delight
1920: Iraq, the peoples of that place were “restive,”
Under British rule and the young Winston Churchill
Invented the new policy of “aerial policing,” which amounted,
Sources say, to bombing civilians and then pacifying them
With ground troops. Which led to the tactic of terrorizing
     civilian
Populations in World War II. Total casualties in that war,
Worldwide: soldiers, 21 million; civilians, 27 million.
They were throwing sand into the fire. The ancestor who stole
Lightning from the sky had his guts eaten by an eagle.
Spread-eagled on a rock, the great bird feasting.
They are wondering if he is a terrorist or mentally ill.
London, Dresden. Berlin. Hiroshima, Nagasaki.
The casualties difficult to estimate. Hiroshima:
66,000 dead, 70,000 injured. In a minute. Nagasaki:
39,000 dead, 25,000 injured. There were more people killed,
100,000, in more terrifying fashion in the firebombing
Of Tokyo. Two arms races after the ashes settled.
The other industrial countries couldn’t get there
Fast enough. Contain, burn. One scramble was
For the rocket that delivers the explosion that burns humans
By the tens of thousands and poisons the earth in the process.
They were wondering if the terrorist was crazy. If he was
A terrorist, maybe he was just unhappy. The other
Challenge afterwards was how to construct machine guns
A man or a boy could carry: lightweight, compact, easy to
     assemble.
First a Russian sergeant, a Kalashnikov, clever with guns
Built one on a German model. Now the heavy machine gun.
The weapon of European imperialism through which
A few men trained in gunnery could slaughter native armies
In Africa and India and the mountains of Afghanistan,
Became “a portable weapon a child can operate.”
The equalizer. So the undergunned Vietnamese insurgents
Fought off the greatest army in the world. So the Afghans
Fought off the Soviet army using Kalashnikovs the CIA
Provided to them. They were throwing powders in the fire
And dancing. Children’s armies in Africa toting AK-47s
That fire thirty rounds a minute. A round is a bullet.
An estimated 500 million firearms on the earth.
100 million of them are Kalashnikov-style semi-automatics.
They were dancing in Orlando, in a club. Spring night.
Gay Pride. The relation of the total casualties to the history
Of the weapon that sent exploded metal into their bodies—
30 rounds a minute, or 40, is a beautifully made instrument,
And in America you can buy it anywhere—and into the history
Of the shaming culture that produced the idea of Gay Pride—
They were mostly young men, they were dancing in a club,
A spring night. The radio clicks on. Green fire. Blue fire.
The immense flocks of terrified birds still rising
In wave after wave above the waters in the dream time.
Crying out sharply. As the French ship breasted the vast
     interior
Of the new land. America. A radio clicks on. The Arabs,
A commentator is saying, require a heavy hand. Dancing.


^^EOP^^

I remember that first time:
the empty auditorium, her voice,
the dark all around us,
her mouth reaching into mine.
She was Freddy’s foxy older sister,
and I didn’t know why
she wanted to kiss me. She
had already finished high school
and probably shouldn’t have
been walking the halls, but
she always called me her friend.
So one Monday after gym,
 
I found myself beside myself
in front of her house—with my
trench coat and lunch bag—
probably not looking much
like Shaft. Inside, the air held
warm milk and we talked a bit
about her baby    and her Aunt
who paid the rent painting cars.
 
Maybe she liked me because
we were both black and mostly
alone in the suburbs, but I hadn’t
thought about that. It was her voice
that got me—banked fire, the color
of dusk—her voice, and my name
was smoke in her mouth.
 
I think about it more than I should now,
that January noon—an hour before
algebra—how most days I’d be
thinking football    or replaying
the seventy-some kisses I’d gotten
over those lean years, but that day
 
Donna and me were on the couch
munching potato chips. Rrruffles  have rrridges, she kidded coming
from checking the baby who’d
slipped into a nap. I was kind of
disappointed that we hadn’t
done anything, but I needed time
to get back to school, so I started
to stand. She said wait,  look at this mess,
 
and with her left hand, she
brushed the crumbs from my lap
the way you’d whisk away lint—
then, swept over my pants again—
to be thorough, I guessed, but slower
and then some more, as if her hand
 
were getting    drowsy. You know
how sometimes you see something
but just can’t believe it—like a squirrel
bobbling a biscuit on your kitchen counter
or a cricket creeping the red feathers
of your mother’s Sunday hat?
 
Her hand there, on my lap,
could easily have been a five-fingered
flying saucer from the fifth dimension.
For awhile, I just watched and
wondered if she knew where
her hand had landed    but it was me
who didn’t know: me with my
six dozen kisses and the great Eden
of my virginity. How
do we not talk about it
 
every day: the ways
we were changed
by the gift
in someone’s touch—your body,
suddenly a bright instrument
played by an otherwise
silent divinity.
 
When I heard my zipper, I couldn’t
have said where my arms
were    or what a clock was for:
I had
no idea    I could be such a stranger
and still be myself. How could I
have known what a girl
 
might do to a boy
with her mouth     if she felt
like doing what her mouth
could do? It was
a kind of miracle: the dreamed impossible—my soul finally called
to my flesh. I didn’t know
what I didn’t know    and then I knew.


^^EOP^^

I used to think
that if I loved hard
enough and long enough
passion would always win out
 
like the way I loved
cologne, venturing teenaged into
congested malls, abusing testers
only a salesperson surly enough
 
inquiring if he or she could help
me in any way, spitting
the prices of even the smallest
bottles of the scents I had
 
slathered on, forcing me out
in a cloud of confidence
that I was the Calvin Klein
Man, not the Old Spice
 
Man, not the Zest
Man, and certainly not
the My Drafty House Is Warmed Badly
by Kerosene Heaters Man
 
impervious to my real
life where I would sneak
down in the middle
of the night, passing
 
snow collecting
on the inside of the window
sill, trying to descend
the stairs silently
 
to complete the night lying
before the stove’s vents blowing
sooty warm air deep into my
sleeping lungs, clutching
 
a broken lacrosse stick
to intimidate rats so brazen 
our housecats accepted
them as equal occupants
 
until I exit those automatic
doors, leave fountains where
just out of range I envy white
families tossing entire
 
cigarette packs’ worth
of what they call spare
change, wishing for things
they could already buy if they wanted
 
laughing as those presidential
faces fall sometimes up
and sometimes down, all drowning
in three inches of chlorinated well water
 
return to the reservation
where my sister-
in-law embraces me later
the same day, drawing
 
deeply, saying she loves
the scent of burned heating
oil on men, that it reminds
her of when she and my brother
 
dated and she would hold
him long in those last moments
before allowing him to walk out
her door, meander through snowy
 
grooves, finding his way home
while she looked out windows
where ice crystals gathered
on the proper side of the pane
 
holding her breath as long as she
dared, letting his presence seep
out only when she could no longer
bear, leaving him to be a vapor ghost
 
on her window, a fog sure
to vanish even before she turned
from the window and here I am
years later living in that same
 
state, you miles away and I,
knowing how presence disperses
into air, wonder how long
I can hold my breath.


^^EOP^^

The unsympathetic wind, how she has evaded me for years now,
leaving a guileless shell and no way to navigate. Once when I stood
on a plateau of earth just at the moment before the dangerous,
jutting peaks converged upon the lilting sway of grasslands, I almost
found a way back. There, the sky, quite possibly all the elements,
caused the rock and soil and vegetation to congregate. Their prayer
was not new and so faint I could hardly discern. Simple remembrances,
like a tiny, syncopated chorus calling everyone home: across
a thousand eastward miles, and what little wind was left at my back.
But I could not move. And then the music was gone.
All that was left were the spring time faces of mountains, gazing down,
their last patches of snow, luminous. I dreamed of becoming snow melt,
gliding down the slope and in to the valley. With the promise,
an assurance, that there is always a way to become bird, tree, water again.


^^EOP^^

Why is it, in Bristol Bay, a sea cormorant
hovers, sings a two-fold song with a hinged cover
 
for a mouth, teeth set in sockets, with a hissing grind
of spikelets biting the air? Dip one.
 
The lips of vanished flames in lava coals
glow vermillion as an egg cracks. Dip two.
 
She/I feel/s a chimera leaving the eider duck. Dip three.
While still in the embryo, separating the body
 
from death she/I smell/s of arsenic, the Chugach Range
in unnatural bitterness. Why is it, man’s/woman’s nerve scarcely
 
stifled and sane, comes to prey? While they swoon
minerals of crude oil and sea spiders for tricking a way for gold.
 
Will they crawl around her/me, sink their eyeteeth in the sea,
ravaging the ecosphere and the ore gold for fuel. Drill.


^^EOP^^




There once lived a great king whose twin wives could bear him no children. A wandering sage saw the king’s grief and offered him a magical mango. She who ate the mango would be with child. As he had two wives, the king cut the mango into two perfect halves and offered one half to each wife. After nine months, each wife gave birth to one lifeless half. Horrified, the king ordered these clots of flesh to be left in the forest. A wandering demon found the two lifeless halves and cupped one in each palm. When she brought them together, the two halves fused and a whole child was made in front of her eyes—the demon named the child Jarasandha.

Years passed by and this child grew to be an intimidating and invincible warrior. In a fight with Bhim, an equally invincible warrior, Jarasandha was ripped in half by his enemy. But, each time he was ripped apart, his halves found a way to meet up and become whole. Krishna, who witnessed how Jarasandha’s flesh found its own way back to flesh, motioned to his own cousin with his fingers: toss the halves of his body in opposite directions, he
suggested.

So, when Bhim ripped Jarasandha apart once again, he swung his left half to the right side of the arena and his right half to the left. And his body found no way to return to itself.

In the Toronto airport, where I’ve arrived for a conference, I watch an older Punjabi lady—made to sit in a wheelchair behind two lines of customs officials, a security guard, a translator, and a service-staff member—scream that her son is outside the airport may she please just go tell him she is here she is here she is here please. I stand there holding her hand, my own luggage reluctantly traveling in loops on the belt. Beta—child— she says to me: please tell them my son is here and I am here what is the problem let me go let me go to him.





^^EOP^^

  In the epilogue to The Autobiography of Malcolm X, Alex Haley recounts meeting a pensive Malcolm at the Kennedy airport, watching newly immigrated children “romping and playing” in their sudden home. “By tomorrow night,” Malcolm says to Alex, “they’ll know how to say their first English word—nigger.” 
Before cable television arrived in India, America was a white nation. I imagined New England snows dusting California and Miami’s beaches stretched across Appalachia. America was a papier-mâché parody patched together by a cheaply hired prop maker. Geographic accuracy was sacrificed to the interpersonal dramas of Betty and Veronica, and the American banquet was limited to the malted and fried offerings in Pop’s Chock’lit Shoppe, where the Riverdale gang solved the real geopolitical problems of how to get Reggie off Moose’s back with the help of Archie’s fumbling charms. Here, class warfare came with a side of fries. There were rumors of distant family members “settling” in “North Dakota” or “Oklahoma”—names that put themselves together like Lego castles: hard-edged and jutting out with an abrupt L or a particularly pokey K. 
Blackness was just a rumor too. Blackness flickered in the background of photographs they sent back from these mysterious locations: here’s an uncle waving at us from a glittering Times Square (Los Angeles); here’s an aunt waving at us mid-way through the soft-focus neon breakfasts with Aunt Jemima’s maple syrup (made from maple leaves); here’s a nephew waving at us next to the poster of a red and white Michael Jordan in a quilted bedroom, his rotund brown body snuggled in tie-dye and tucked into tartan flannel sheets. Blackness was a rumor, that is, until Michael Jackson’s Bad ripped into our consciousness and suddenly, knobby-kneed pre-teens found a way to make stringy curls with coconut oil stolen from their mothers’ kitchens and started moonwalking backwards into my Social Studies classrooms, all snappy crotch and jaunty limbs. We girls rolled our eyes but we kept on watching. 
It wasn’t long before Jackson’s unsparing gaze, draped in slick black leather, began replacing the glowing pastel Ganeshes and Saraswatis hanging above study desks. But replacing an elephantine god’s soft paunch with lean, mean celebrity did not save us from our own ignorance of how blackness and brownness were connected through a struggle for economic self-realization and human rights. While kids in Chennai were rehearsing Michael Peters’ signature choreography for “Thriller” and pretending to be zombies—little exemplary half-dead spectacles—Union Carbide was industriously shirking responsibility for the Bhopal Tragedy, which choked thousands of Indians to death, and black mortality was spiking in violent, homicidal protest of the US DEA’s drug buys and cocaine busts. 
In other words, Tamilians blinked away Michael Jackson’s blackness. We kept the heat and thunder of his fat synth bass, which found its way into Ilayaraaja’s electric disco in films of the late 1980s like Vetri Vizha and Agni Natchathiram. We kept the ebullient automation of his moves, which became a muscular theme in Prabhu Deva’s blend of baggy breakdance and whimsical terukoothu folk dancing in the 1990s. But we forgot his blackness. In time, the lightning of his presence was replaced by the grey hum of CNN, Cops, Law & Order, and the dull horror of handcuffs on dark wrists. Posters yellowed, cassettes spooled out, and my moonwalking classmates found their scientific calculators and study guides again. 
But the rumors of racial difference in George Bush Sr.’s America continued to bloom and wilt in morose cycles in my childhood homes into the 1990s. In damp clusters, it grew like moss under rocks. Rootless, it stretched its stringy arms and held us by the ankles; it grew like mold between bathroom tiles; it spun itself fine and strong, webbing into corners where our brooms couldn’t reach. In time, the mossy rocks lined our after-dinner walks past the hibiscus bushes. In time, a grandmother slipped on the bathroom tiles and stayed in bed, fed conjee by a fatherless girl brought in from the village and the moss grew between her toes and drew her into the earth where they buried the nameless pets and tossed the chicken feathers. In time, the spiders hung so low they fell into pickle jars every time a child fished for a gooseberry or a slice of stony green mango from the brine. And from this brine, in time, we learned to believe that it existed. And as Tamilian families began drifting from the flashy monsoons of India to the June gloom of the California bay or to the sharp wet summers of the Keys, they carried the damp and stench in suitcases and buried it in hushed conversations. They made a poultice of moss and spider web and lodged it in the prayer books, hung it around the children’s necks like a talisman, and they said—as long as she doesn’t marry a black man.  


^^EOP^^

The age of portrait is drugged. Beauty
is symmetry so rare it’s a mystery.
My left eye is smaller than my right,
my big mouth shows my nice teeth perfectly
aligned like Muslims in prayer.
My lips an accordion. Each sneeze
a facial thumbprint. One corner
of my mouth hangs downward when I want
to hold a guffaw hostage. Bell’s palsy perhaps
or what Mark Twain said about steamboat piloting,
that a doctor’s unable to look upon the blush
in a young beauty’s face without thinking
it could be a fever, a malar rash,
a butterfly announcing a wolf. Can I lie
facedown now as cadavers posed
on first anatomy lesson? I didn’t know mine
was a woman until three weeks later
we turned her over. Out of reverence
there was to be no untimely exposure of donors,
our patrons who were covered in patches
of scrubs-green dish towels,
and by semester’s end we were sick of all that,
tossed mega livers and mammoth hearts
into lab air and caught them. My body
was Margaret. That’s what the death certificate said
when it was released before finals. The cause
of her death? Nothing memorable,
frail old age. But the colonel on table nineteen
with an accessory spleen had put a bullet through
his temple, a final prayer. Not in entry or exit
were there skull cracks to condemn the house
of death, no shattered glass in the brain,
only a smooth tunnel of deep violet that bloomed
in concentric circles. The weekends were lonely.
He had the most beautiful muscles
of all 32 bodies that were neatly arranged,
zipped up as if a mass grave had been disinterred.
Or when unzipped and facing the ceiling
had cloth over their eyes as if they’d just been executed.
Gray silver hair, chiseled countenance,
he was sixty-seven, a veteran of more than one war.
I had come across that which will end me, ex­-
tend me, at least once, without knowing it.


^^EOP^^

Lord, it’s not true
That my faith is cooling.
It’s just that people
Are saying that candle smoke
Has caused cancer in church mice.
And I also worry that candle light
Is too weak to reach your cloud.
 
Do I need a hydrogen candle?
Are the Angels into lasers?
 
Lord, as I think about it,
Lately I haven’t had much to thank you for.
 
Are you on vacation?


^^EOP^^

who by the time it arrived
had made its plan heretofore
stonewall   it had not a penny
thats not true it had several pennies
 
can you make a sovereign nation a national park how condescending
instead just tell them to honor the treaty
 
what can poetry do it
cant not not do nothing
it must undulate w/ the 2:30 pm dance music the sole
patrons at stonewall
 
there was a shooting in ohio today
the music made me feel a little anxious it was
hard thumping dance music a notch
upwards of 100 bpm notoriously the beat of life
the optimum tempo for cpr
I consider downloading a metronome real quick to test it to tap it out but
I don’t want to be ‘anywhere near’ my phone
meaning it’s in my bag on the stool 2 feet from me
 
there is an amy winehouse video on no sound at least
I think it is amy winehouse
she is at a funeral black and white
there is a stuffed bird slightly obscuring my view of the tv
it looks like a kind of tall pigeon w/ mottled brown
and russet with a white ringlet necklace and black dots
is it a carrier pigeon I wonder I sent
a text to jocelyn at standing rock several texts
 
are you still on the road
ariana and i r gonna go out there in december
sending love to you
tried calling bt yr mailbox is full
send a sign when u can xoxo 
howdy.  thinking of u w love.
hope all is well.  send smoke
signal telegram carrier pigeon 
send love to my twospirits at the
winyan camp.
 
last night we prayed for her and for zephyr and l. frank &
the twospirits especially at standing rock
there’s no sign of that struggle here but they are selling tshirts
     commemorating
the other and the six days of riots
led by transwomen of color they later tried to whitewash in that
     terrible movie
like it was all these hot angry upright downright forthright white gays
      so ready
for the revolution 
and now people are treating standing rock like burning man
 
a drink called goslings
videos by the pigeon misaligned with the music
the smell of booze in the air made both of us recoil slightly I saw
or felt it
 
I’m here to make a poem I was already paid for when I had less than $2 in
my bank account (and I joked I would go right to the bar and buy every-
body drinks ) not even enough for a subway ride and I used the 58 cents I’d
gotten for busking for the first time alone in the long hallway between the
library at bryant park and the orange line trains by the ovid quote ‘gutta
cavat lapidem’ water (or a drop of water really) hollows out
a stone.   lapidum a stone or rock ariana once described cd wright’s style
     as ‘lapidary’
I loved this as a description of writing like the hieroglyphics are
literally lapidary and I told my grandmother about it as we
were driving from mescalero to albuquerque she knew all about the
plants and the names for all the rockforms mesas or buttes or
ziggurats and I said how do 
you know all these she said by long observation and
I used to study geology in college I wanted to major in it
but they wouldn’t allow women
to major in the hard sciences then so she
began to study religion
tho she already had medicine
 
ricky martin on the beach
or is it someone younger sexier
the grand canyon splitting apart
is it an ad is it a video
even the sands at the beach
are bouncing with the beat
the tempo has stayed very similar this whole time a tick
up I suspect from 100bpm


^^EOP^^

Some lunatic with a gun killed some people at an
immigration center in Binghamton, New York. Liz
Rosenberg and her family live up there and David, her
husband, teaches in the middle school which is close to
all the action (the way, in any smallish town, everything is
close to all the action). I called Liz to see if everyone was
all right and she was in her car driving to the elementary
school to pick up Lily, her young daughter she brought
back from China a few years ago. Lily was fine, but
Liz wanted to move her outside the question of how to
make sense of the broken pieces of “someone” with a
gun walking into a public space and then firing. There’s
something called (I learned from a news report the day of
the shootings at Virginia Tech) The Talking Day which
refers to the day immediately following the day when
something wildly violent happens. No one quite grasps
the reality of the situation and everyone spends that first day
talking about what happened and reliving it as language—
not so much to understand the violence but to make a
kind of recording of it: talking about it, letting go of it,
putting it down. And so I imagine it must be with Liz and
Lily and David in Binghamton, New York today: letting
“something” go. Liz is in her car after having just picked up
Lily at school and driving back home through a town that
suddenly makes no sense and she is telling the story about
what happened when a young man walked into a building
with a gun. And for Lily, who’s had a pretty serene, un-
violent United States time so far and whose endless joy
has made her an adorable chatterbox, tomorrow could be
her first talking day. Or, if not tomorrow, some other day.
We live in a talking day world.


^^EOP^^

Moved all the way here to watch
television alone, swallowed by the grim
 
news grinning. Fuck a five year plan, first
one passes through Tiananmen the gate
 
of heavenly peace, emptied public square finery
in summer, purple cupping red azaleas
 
Happy birth upon a time, Nation!
Reveling in my love for him coquettish
 
worried, approaching paranoia
for the home country removed that June
 
The cropped photo best dilated
in our pockets black and white
 
It was a long hard road continuously reading
analysis metrics, my father knew a guy
 
worked in sales, was there and saw
them roll in like nothing else
 
Black pillars to the effective dispersal
 
I felt nothing pulling
from the airport’s narrowing gate
In the photo we still get perfectly centered
 
Longview the idiot’s
consumption guide, naturally then
 
my love for was only
 


^^EOP^^




One of the very first Indian words to enter the English language was the Hindustani slang for plunder: "loot."
WILLIAM DALRYMPLE



   It sits with a fork made from a lotus on an ivory chair eating an elephant steak in the company of bears and feral nautch girls on a monsoon evening incandescent with an appetite as mighty as railroads spann’d across seas and reclines, its cheeks burnished, its ass varnished by suns setting on bronze and sugared with saltpetre, its torso a tableaux for the annals of rectitude, the theatre for roiling or robust passage, a veritable Suez Canal towards missionary victories which thrust from such bejeweled and oiled loins anointed by coin— that emission of plump plums, lump sums into the Ganges, that coiling coy virgin maiden winding her languid locks, batting her lashes to its lashes— its spine a gentle wire. Supine, its belly swells with salt and figs with meat and treaties, it corks open a profound song— itself it sings into books heavy with truths on the chair dressed with leather and raw hides kissed by ox blood smeared with beef dung lined with raw silk woven from worms plucked from boughs basted across its pious beaming eyes its spidery ghosted lids, and its byzantine glance unmoors from its Chinese porcelain and crosses the ebony table polished with lac secreted from the cloaca of the kerria lacca set with glazed cakes eaten by pinked mouths wearing crimson robes, to its guests polished and glossed and stained by the ooze drawn to color the uncolored raw linen, the wood, the human. Then its wrist cuffed by gold and cowries and studded with coral draws a whisper- thin muslin veil dyed carmine— sucked from crushed scale of cochineal boiled in ammonia and bled into curds and rouge glinting sanguineous and turbid between bug and rug snug a thug in redcoat or a turncoat carrying urns of this stuff— from estates of cocoa coconut calico— across its face while soft éclairs of chocolate bumble out from its plumed rump choked with gum and linseed flax and cassia cinnamon and pepper like so many lines of blood underwriting the mutton and not the goat so it can sell them with a name of a place like scarves or garlanded whores moored to wharves suckled by mother of pearl or teas named after Earls and they with whole scores to settle settle for homemade cures nettles ginger turmeric— a paste or to taste—and it steals and seals in letters scented with sandal sent abroad waxed and pressed with cornelian gems honed from ground it owns and makes stone from their flesh ekes ink from their sweat soaks indigo in lye fermented with time and makes color so it can bid for its own passage, the passage, O of this soul, to India!   


^^EOP^^

She and I make a bladder bag to draw water from the ice trench.
She/I chain stitch/es a skin dressed in oil to make a new pot of soup.
She/I sew/s a badger hair rough around the top of her/my kamiks
to make the steps windward, toward the limits of woman.
She/I eat/s club root and white clover to strengthen her/my silver
body to bear a child. She/I map/s, following 1 degree from the North
Star and 60 degrees from the end of the earth’s axis on rotation
for Ukpeagvik she/I use/s a small arc of ice, cleaving into parts, reduced
to simple curves fitted with serrated edges of white flesh. She/I mold/s
to the fretted neck of frozen water into a deep urn, made like a rock shelter
or a cavern. She/I construct/s a hole on the surface of a glacier formed by melting particles
of roe and pan reservoir dust from a shelter for the ice worms. Because the earth is
molding, burning, laughing, and purging its crust.


^^EOP^^

Such were they, a dumb stuffed thing
to say, if truth is we all grow old un-
 
observed, limbs flail only halfway up
a flight, where does dark begin settling
 
my little bones. I dream and do love
to have them, blue fish
 
in a lake, my head more tipped up than down
under damp earth. Some days others like deer
 
from the shot, peeled back, how I
find trees dressed in wild
 
green light. The years come, unstitched
a face, saddled as one would a heavy beast
 
for walking. Likely I became then a member
of heaven, put up, the years come and reaching
 
their long wet hands.


^^EOP^^

Dumbfounded in hospital whites, you are picture-book
itty-bit, floundering in bleach and steel. Braids untwirl
and corkscrew, you squirm, the crater in your shoulder
spews a soft voltage. On a TV screwed into the wall
above your head, neon rollicks. A wide-eyed train
engine perfectly smokes, warbles a song about forward.
 
Who shot you, baby? I don’t know. I was playing.
You didn’t see anyone? I was playing with my friend Sharon. I was on the swing and she was—
Are you sure you didn’t— No, I ain’t seen nobody but Sharon. I heard people yelling though, and—
 
Each bullet repainted you against the brick, kicked
you a little sideways, made you need air differently.
You leaked something that still goldens the boulevard. I ain’t seen nobody, I told you.
And at A. Lincoln Elementary on Washington Street,
or Jefferson Elementary on Madison Street, or Adams
Elementary just off the Eisenhower Expressway,
we gather the ingredients, if not the desire, for pathos:
 
an imploded homeroom, your empty seat pulsating
with drooped celebrity, the sometime counselor
underpaid and elsewhere, a harried teacher struggling
toward your full name. Anyway your grades weren’t
all that good. No need to coo or encircle anything,
no call for anyone to pull their official white fingers
through your raveled hair, no reason to introduce
the wild notion of loving you loud and regardless.
 
Oh, and they’ve finally located your mama, who
will soon burst in with her cut-rate cure of stammering
Jesus’ name. Beneath the bandages, your chest crawls
shut. Perky ol’ Thomas winks a bold-faced lie from
his clacking track, and your heart monitor hums
a wry tune no one will admit they’ve already heard.
 
Elsewhere, 23 seconds rumble again and again through
Sharon’s body. Boom, boom, she says to no one.


^^EOP^^

As a kid the only black woman
in my life was my fourth-grade teacher—
I remember her not because she was black
but mostly because of her copper-colored
bob that never changed, as if a piece
of bronze had been chiseled onto her
head and neither I nor my classmates
could prove it was a wig, but we knew it was
too perfect to be real. Then you came in-
­to my home—but not the way someone
came in one afternoon while we were away
grocery shopping, leaving the side door wide
open releasing my white-winged parakeet,
my mother’s jewelry and our television,
gone. And for years I watched you go
from analog into digital; you were
the modicum of motherhood I encountered
daily while my mother stood on a production
line mouthing prayers for prosperity
and health in a room of air
compressors. You’re a super galactic
hologram—scattered light reconstructed
through the dark matter, ever-shrinking
pixels—shifting the cosmology
of the world with gigs of Gayle, and
revolutionary road trips. And now
will you quietly fade out into the space-
time continuum where not even my imagination
will find you? Your last broadcast
like the final song of our beloved parakeet
as it flew past the leafless trees toward
the vast dome of heaven.


^^EOP^^




For James Welch



The first harvest of wheat in flatlands
along the Milk startled me into thoughts of you
and this place we both remember and also forget as home.
Maybe it was the familiarity or maybe it was my own
need to ask if you have ever regretted leaving.
What bends, what gives?
And have you ever missed this wind?—it has now
grown warm with late summer, but soon
it will be as dangerous as the bobcat stalking calves
and pets just south of the river.
Men take out their dogs, a case of beer and wait
in their pickups for dawn, for a chance with their rifles.
They don’t understand that she isn’t going to make
any mistakes. With winter my need for an answer
grows more desperate and there are only four roads out.  
One is the same cat hunters drive with mannish glory
and return along, gun still oil-shined and unshot.
Another goes deeper into Assiniboine territory:
This is the one I should talk myself into taking next.
I haven’t much traveled the third except to visit
a hospital where, after the first time,
my mother had refused chemotherapy.
And the last road you know as well as I do—
past the coral-painted Catholic church, its doors
long ago sealed shut to the mouth of Mission Canyon,
then south just a ways, to where the Rockies cut open 
and forgive. There you and I are on the ascent.
After that, the arrival is what matters most. 


^^EOP^^

It seems insane now, but
she’d be standing soaked
in schoolday morning light,
her loose-leaf notebook,
flickering at the bus stop,
and we almost trembled
 
at the thought of her mouth
filled for a moment with both
of our short names. I don’t know
what we saw when we saw
her face, but at fifteen there’s
so much left to believe in,
 
that a girl with sunset
in her eyes, with a kind smile,
and a bright blue miniskirt softly
shading her bare thighs     really
could be The Goddess. Even
the gloss on her lips sighed Kiss me    and you’ll never
  do homework again. Some Saturdays
my ace, Terry, would say, “Guess
who was buying Teaberry gum
in the drugstore on Stenton?”
And I could see the sweet
epiphany still stunning his eyes
 
and I knew that he knew
that I knew he knew     I knew—
especially once summer had come,
and the sun stayed up till we had
nothing else to do but wish
and wonder about fine sistas
 
in flimsy culottes and those hotpants! 
James Brown screamed about: Crystal
Berry, Diane Ramsey, Kim Graves,
and her. This was around 1970: Vietnam
to the left of us, Black Muslims
to the right, big afros all over my
 
Philadelphia. We had no idea
where we were, how much history
had come before us—how much
cruelty, how much more dying
was on the way. For me and Terry,
it was a time when everything said
  maybe, and maybe being blinded
by the beauty of a tenth grader
was proof that, for a little while,
we were safe from the teeth
that keep chewing up the world.
I’d like to commend
 
my parents    for keeping calm,
for not quitting their jobs or grabbing
guns    and for never letting up
about the amazing “so many doors
open to good students.” I wish
 
I had kissed
Delores Jepps. I wish I could
have some small memory of her
warm and spicy mouth to wrap
these hungry words around. I
 
would like to have danced with her,
to have slow-cooked to a slow song
in her sleek, toffee arms: her body
balanced between the Temptations’ 
five voices and me—a boy anointed
 
with puberty, a kid with a B
average and a cool best friend.
I don’t think I’ve ever understood
how lonely I am, but I was
 
closer to it at fifteen because
I didn’t know anything: my heart
so near the surface of my skin
 
I could have moved it with my hand.


^^EOP^^




San José, Costa Rica



Tortillas clap against floured palms,
steaming bowls of avena, frijoles
black as the rumbling sky, arroz con pollo simmers. Against the kitchen
 
window, small clouds rise. Papá dances
to the electric beat of the marimba,
his cheek bristly against Mamá’s
neck; his thick fingers sift
 
through her wispy hair. I am nowhere
to be found, neither in the foreground nor
background. Today I sit in this chair,
in the corner of my house, covered
with a poncho of blue flowers,
looking out at asphalt roads overflowing
with rain, fogging the glass. Along the road,
steam rises like blotchy fingerprints.


^^EOP^^

The woman at the Salvation Army who sorts and prices is in her eighties
and she underestimates the value of everything, for which I am grateful.
 
Lightly used snow suits, size 2T, are $6 and snow boots are $3.
 
There is a little girl, maybe seven, fiddling with a tea set. Her mother
inspects drapes for stains.
 
Sometimes the very old and lonely are looking for an opening.
 
She glances up from her pricing and says something about the tea set
and a baby doll long ago.
 
I am careful not to make eye contact, but the mother with drapes has
such softness in her shoulders and her face and she knows how to say
the perfect kind thing—“What a wonderful mother you had.”
 
“Yes, she was.”
 
Why do children sometimes notice us and sometimes not?
 
From the bin of dolls: “What happened to your mother?”
 
“She died.”
 
The woman at the Salvation Army who sorts and prices is crying a little.
She seems surprised to be crying. “It’s been eighty years and I still miss
her.”
 
When my daughter was born I couldn’t stop thinking about how we
were going to die. If we were drowning, would it be better to hold her
to me even as she fought away or should I let her float off to wonder why
her mother didn’t help her? What if it’s fire and I have one bullet left? I
made sure my husband knew if there were death squads and he had to
choose, I’d never love him again if he didn’t choose her. If I’m lucky,
her crying face is the last thing I’ll see.
 
The mother with drapes is squeezing her daughter’s shoulder, trying to
send a silent message, but children are children. “Why did she die?”
 
“She was going to have a baby and—And she died.”
 
“But she was a wonderful mother.”
 
I’m holding a stack of four wooden jigsaw puzzles of farm animals,
dinosaurs, jungle animals, and pets. Each for a quarter.
 
“It’s silly how much I still miss her.” She takes out a tissue and wipes
her eyes and then her nose.
 
When my grandmother threw her sister, Susie, a 90th birthday party,
one hundred people came, including 5 of the 6 brothers and sisters. At
dusk only a few of us were left, nursing beers with our feet kicked up
on the bottom rungs of various walkers.
 
Susie said then to my grandmother, “Can you think of all the people
watching us in heaven now? And our mother must be in the front row.”
 
Grandma took her sister’s hand. “Our mother—Estelle.”
 
“Yes—her name was Estelle. I forgot that.”
 
They looked so happy then, saying her name back and forth to each
other. Estelle. Estelle.


^^EOP^^

Some lamp sputters
its dusty light
across some desk.
Some hand, shaking,
works the strained
rope, twisting and knifing,
weaving, tugging tight
a bellowing circle. Randy
Travis, steamy drawl
and hiccup on the staticky
AM, backs the ritual
of drooping loop.
Sweat drips an awful
hallelujah. God glares
askance, but the artist
doesn’t waver—wrists
click cadence, knots
become a path to what
makes saviors. The sagging
hoop bemoans a need
to squeeze, its craving
for a breath within the ring.


^^EOP^^

We were given a curfew on the second day.
Clouds filling windows were replaced by soot
and ash from the burned out market on the corner.
We lost the smell of buttered beetroot, Wissotzky tea
and kishke; a tendril of root infiltrated a crack
in the floorboards. We kept our distance and let it grow
in disbelief. Someone said we should kill it
before it gets too strong. Hours, maybe even days,
went by as we hid waiting for attacks and looting
to end. At times, when the door opened, a waft of wind
made its way to those unfolding leaves
waving like the curtains out of blown out windows.


^^EOP^^

My child is sitting cross-legged on the floor reading to herself.
Sometimes she is so full of need I push her to the floor.
Only once I did that and I don’t even remember the moment
right, but I was trying to wipe urine off my leg and she was
naughty like a squirrel and jumping and singing and her head
slammed into my chin, which hurt and even more than that,
it pissed me off, because she’s my beautiful child, but in that
button snap of a moment she was suddenly just one more person
and I pushed her away in a way that felt to me like setting her
down, but awkwardly, because of how she was also balancing
her feet on my feet as I tried to pour out a bowl of pee
from her little potty as a toothbrush dangled foaming
from my mouth. Somewhere in the mess of that morning
she’d become person enough to, in the space between us,
create force of momentum, and then I did not set her down,
but pushed her and she fell away from it against the wall
and was crying because I, her mommy, pushed her. And I know
this should be the poem about how I’m horrified at myself,
the poem about what in ourselves we have to live with,
but in that moment which followed two years of breastfeeding
and baby-wearing and sixty-nine hours of natural childbirth
and the hemorrhaging and the uncertain operation, after which
I pumped every two hours, careful not to let the cord tangle
in the IV. Even then when she cried and no matter what
and no matter and no matter and no matter and no matter what,
I held her all night if she cried so she would not ever know
someday you’ll cry alone, but I held her and ached and leaked
and bled too as long as it took. Of course there’ve been nights
since but sometimes it feels as if I’ve never been asleep again,
so when I say I pushed my two-year-old against a wall and I don’t
remember it happening that way but it happened and I did
and I’ve been wondering a long time now what the limit is
and when I would find the end of myself, and that day, which
was yesterday, was the end. And this day, when we played
hide-and-seek with Daddy, and touched bugs, and read Frog and Toad Are Friends twice together before she read it
to herself as I wrote this, this is the day that comes after.


^^EOP^^

When black, men drown. They spend their whole lifetimes
justifying the gall of springing the trap, the inconvenience
of slouched denim, of coupling beyond romance or aim.
All the while, the rising murk edges toward their chins.
Hurriedly, someone crafts another scientific tome, a giddy
exploration of the curious dysfunction identifying black
men first as possible, then as necessary. Elegant equations
succumb to a river that blurs quotient and theory, rendering
them unreadable, and the overwhelm easily disappears
the men, their wiry heads glistening, then gulped. All that’s
left is the fathers’ last wisdom, soaked wreckage on silver: Girl, that water ain’t nothing but wet. I’m gon’ be alright.
 
When black men drown, their daughters turn to their mothers
and ask What should I do with this misnamed shiver in my left shoulder? How should I dress in public? They are weary
of standing at the shore, hands shading their eyes, trying
to make out their own fathers among the thousands bobbing
in the current. The mothers mumble and point to any flailing
that seems familiar. Mostly, they’re wrong. Buoyed by church
moans and comfort food of meat and cream, the daughters
try on other names that sound oddly broken when pressed
against the dank syllables of the fathers’. Drained, with just forward in mind, they walk using the hip of only one parent.
They scratch in their sleep. Black water wells up in the wound.
 
When black men drown, their daughters are fascinated with
the politics of water, how gorgeously a surface breaks
to receive, how it weeps so sanely shut. And the thrashing
of hands, shrieking of names: I was Otis, I was Willie Earl, they called me Catfish. Obsessed by the waltzing of tides,
the daughters remember their fathers—the scorch of beard
electrifying the once-in-a-while kiss, the welts in thick arms,
eyes wearied with so many of the same days wedged behind
them. When black men drown, their daughters memorize all
the steps involved in the deluge. They know how long it takes
for a weakened man to dissolve. A muted light, in the shape
of a little girl, used to be enough to light a daddy’s way home.
 
When black men drown, their daughters drag the water’s floor
with rotting nets, pull in whatever still breathes. They insist their
still-dripping daddies sit down for cups of insanely sweetened
tea, sniffs of rotgut, tangled dinners based on improbable swine.
The girls hope to reacquaint their drowned fathers with the concept
of body, but outlines slosh in drift and retreat. The men can’t get
dry. Parched, they scrub flooded hollows and weep for water
to give them name and measure as mere blood once did. Knocking
over those spindly-legged dinette chairs, they interrupt the failed
feast and mutter Baby girl, gotta go, baby gotta go, their eyes
misted with their own murders. Grabbing their girls, they spit
out love in reverse and stumble toward the banks of some river.
 
When black men drown their daughters, the rash act is the only
plausible response to the brain’s tenacious mouth and its dare: Yes,  yes, open your ashed hands and release that wingless child. Note
the arc of the sun-drenched nosedive, the first syllable of the child’s
name unwilling from the man’s mouth, the melody of billow that
begins as blessed clutch. Someone crouching inside the father waits
impatiently for the shutting, the lethargic envelop, and wonders if
the daughter’s wide and realizing eye will ever close to loose him.
It never will, and the man and his child and the daughter and her
father gaze calmly into the wrecked science of each other’s lives.
The sun struggles to spit a perfect gold upon the quieting splash.
The river pulses stylish circles of its filth around the swallow. 
 
 


^^EOP^^

We are so honored that
              you are here, they said.
We know that this is
             your homeland, they said.
The admission price
             is five dollars, they said.
Here is your button
             for the event, they said.
It means so much to us that
             you are here, they said.
We want to write
             an apology letter, they said.
Tell us what to say. 
 
 


^^EOP^^

To each orphaned child—so long as you remain close enough to walk to
your living kin you will dance, feast, feel community in food. This cannot
stand. Eighty acres allotted.
 
To each head of household—so long as you remember your tribal words
for village you will recollect that the grasses still grow and the rivers still
flow. So long as you teach your children these words they will remember
as well. This we cannot allow. One hundred and sixty acres allotted.
 
To each elder unable to till or hunt—so long as your old and injurious habits
sing out over the drum or flicker near the fire you cripple our reward. We
seek to hasten your end. Eighty acres allotted.
 
To each widowed wife—so long as you can make your mark, your land
may be leased. A blessing on your mark when you sign it and walk closer
to your favored white sister. Eighty acres allotted.
 
To each full blood—so long as you have an open hand, we shall fill it with
a broken ploughshare. One hundred and sixty acres allotted.
 
To each half blood, each quarter strain—so long as you yearn for the broken
ploughshare, you will be provided a spade honed to razor in its place.
When every acre of your allotment has been leased or sold, you will turn it
on yourself. From that date begins our real and permanent progress.
 


^^EOP^^

Finding myself in a mesmeric orientation,
before me appeared Benjamin Franklin,
who magnetized his French paramours
at dinner parties as an amusing diversion
from his most serious studies of electricity
and the ethereal fire. I like thinking about
how he would have stood on tiptoe to kiss
their buzzing lips and everyone would gasp
and clap for the blue spark between them.
I believe in an honest and forthright manner,
a democracy of plain speech, so I have to
find a way to explain I don’t care to have sex
anymore. Once I was a high school teacher
and there was a boy who everyday came in late,
who only came to school at all to sell drugs
out of his backpack, upon which he laid
his head like a pillow and closed his eyes
while I pointed at a chart diagramming
the anatomy of a sparrow. The vice principal
was watching and taking notes as I taught
this class, so I slid the bag from under
his cheek, as if not to wake him, wrapped
his fingers around a pen. I was trying
to be a gentle mother and also trying
to show I was in control of an unstable
situation. The boy, also trying to be
in control of himself, walked so slow
to my desk and we stood to watch him
push everything—binders, piles of ungraded
papers, a beaker of red pens to the floor.
He was so calm. How do you like it when  I touch your things. I do not like it. I live
in a house with many blue mason jars,
each containing a feather collection or starfish
collection or vertebrae collection, and also
there is a fully articulated fetal alligator skeleton.
Each window is pressed by the design
of a sweet-gum branch, all the little orange
and red stars of its leaves, you can’t see
the perfect geometry this close, just haphazard
parabolas, but beneath the foundation
the roots mirror the branching. I have
a chart of this to pull down. The view is flat
and so quiet on the inside. Have I been
forthright yet? What I want to know is
what happens if I decide to never have sex
again? Or more precisely, can I decide
to not have sex again and still be kind?
And be a joy to others? I should mention
I am a wife. I should mention I was told
my sole purpose is to be joy to others.
The sidewalks outside are very full of people
and when I look at them I feel hopeless.
Benjamin Franklin was so jolly with his kite
and his key and his scandalous electricity.
He was so in love with women and drink
and democracy. Before I was this way,
I was not a house, I was just a jar and what
I wanted was to be broken. A cool trick
you can do that I once showed a class is crank
a wheel covered in felt against another felt
wheel. Static bristles and sparks and makes
your hair stand on end. But hook it to
a Leyden jar and the electricity fills up
in there, invisible as air. Becomes a glass
battery, until you too much the thing, then
wow! broken glass everywhere. I remember
wanting that. Do I have to always want that?
My house is blue and quiet. I can hardly
hear the squirrel in my sweet-gum tree
dancing like a sunbeam to sing his riddles:
“A house full, a hole full, but you cannot
gather a bowl full.” The air of everywhere
is wet with electric fluid, you can’t even tell,
but pop, whiz, everywhere. “In this
field,” Ben says, “the soul has room
enough to expand, to display all of her
extravagances.” The sweet gum has 10,000
sticky, spiky seed balls. They start green
but grow black and fall for want of
a barren season. They look like sea urchins.
I call them tree urchins and think it’s
a funny joke. I don’t tell it to anyone,
as I am tired of being told what is not.
Such a secret, I know, is an extravagance,
and I like best how it’s an extravagance so
small you must keep it in a jar with others
of its kind for it to ever mean anything at all.


^^EOP^^

I use a trick to teach students
how to avoid passive voice.
 
Circle the verbs.
Imagine inserting “by zombies”
after each one.
 
Have the words been claimed
by the flesh-hungry undead?
If so, passive voice.
 
I wonder if these
sixth graders will recollect,
on summer vacation,
as they stretch their legs
on the way home
from Yellowstone or Yosemite
and the byway’s historical marker
beckons them to the
site of an Indian village—
 
Where trouble was brewing.
Where, after further hostilities, the army was directed to enter. 
Where the village was razed after the skirmish occurred.
Where most were women and children.
 
Riveted bramble of passive verbs
etched in wood—
stripped hands
breaking up from the dry ground
to pinch the meat
of their young red tongues.


^^EOP^^

       when the cultivators of corpses are busy seeding
plague across vast acres of the land, choking schools
       and churches in the motley toxins of grief, breeding
virile shoots of violence so soon verdant even fools
       fear to tread in their wake :: when all known tools
of resistance are clutched in the hands of the vile
       like a wilting bouquet, cut from their roots, while
 
the disempowered slice smiles across their own faces
       and hide the wet knives in writhing thickets of hair
for future use :: when breathing in the ashen traces
       of dreams deferred, the detonator’s ticking a queer
echo that amplifies instead of fading :: when there-
       you-are is where-you-were and the sunset groans
into the atlantic, setting blue fire to dark white bones.


^^EOP^^

the 14-year-old girl was treated like:
        (a) a grown woman.
        (b) a grown man.
 
the bikini-clad girl was handled by the cop like:
        (a) a prostitute.
        (b) a prostitute by her pimp.
 
the girl was slung to the ground like:
        (a) a sack of garbage into a dumpster.
        (b) somebody had something to prove.
 
the girl’s braids flew around her head like:
        (a) helicopter blades.
        (b) she’d been slapped.
 
the black girl was pinned to the ground like:
        (a) an amateur wrestler in a professional fight.
        (b) swimming in a private pool is a threat to national security.
 
the girl’s cries sounded like:
        (a) the shrieks of children on a playground.
        (b) the shrieks of children being torn from their mothers.
 
the protesting girl was shackled like:
        (a) a criminal.
        (b) a runaway slave.
  liken it or not
 
          —mckinney, texas, june 2015
 


^^EOP^^

I broke at last
the terror-fringed fascination
that bound my ancient gaze
to those crowding faces
of plunder and seized my
remnant life in a miracle
of decision between white-
collar hands and shook it
like a cheap watch in
my ear and threw it down
beside me on the earth floor
and rose to my feet. I
made of their shoulders
and heads bobbing up and down
a new ladder and leaned
it on their sweating flanks
and ascended till midair
my hands so new to harshness
could grapple the roughness of a prickly
day and quench the source
that fed turbulence to their
feet. I made a dramatic
descent that day landing
backways into crouching shadows
into potsherds of broken trance. I
flung open long-disused windows
and doors and saw my hut
new-swept by rainbow brooms
of sunlight become my home again
on whose trysting floor waited
my proud vibrant life.


^^EOP^^

The bottoms of my shoes 
     are clean 
From walking in the rain


^^EOP^^




(for Niyi Osundare)



Something in altitude kindles power-thirst
Mere horse-height suffices the emir
Bestowing from rich folds of prodigious turban
Upon crawling peasants in the dust
Rare imperceptible nods enwrapped
In princely boredom.
 
I too have known
A parching of that primordial palate,
A quickening to manifest life
Of a long recessive appetite.
Though strapped and manacled
That day I commanded from the pinnacle
Of a three-tiered world a bridge befitting
The proud deranged deity I had become.
A magic rug of rushing clouds
Billowed and rubbed its white softness
Like practiced houri fingers on my sole
And through filters of its gauzy fabric
Revealed wonders of a metropolis
Magic-struck to fairyland proportions.
By different adjustments of vision
I caused the clouds to float
Over a stilled landscape, over towers
And masts and smoke-plumed chimneys;
Or turned the very earth, unleashed
From itself, a roaming fugitive
Beneath a constant sky. Then came
A sudden brightness over the world,
A rare winter’s smile it was, and printed
On my cloud carpet a black cross
Set in an orb of rainbows. To which
Splendid nativity came–who else would come
But gray unsporting Reason, faithless
Pedant offering a bald refractory annunciation?
But oh what beauty! What speed!
A chariot of night in panic flight
From Our Royal Proclamation of the rites
Of day! And riding out Our procession
Of fantasy We slaked an ancient
Vestigial greed shriveled by ages of dormancy
Till the eyes exhausted by glorious pageantries
Returned to rest on that puny
Legend of the life jacket stowed away
Of all places under my seat.
 
Now I think I know why gods
Are so partial to heights—to mountain
Tops and spires, to proud iroko trees
And thorn-guarded holy bombax,
Why petty household divinities
Will sooner perch on a rude board
Strung precariously from brittle rafters
Of a thatched roof than sit squarely
On safe earth.


^^EOP^^

In my medicine cabinet
the winter fly
Has died of old age


^^EOP^^

Hurrah! to them who do nothing
see nothing feel nothing whose
hearts are fitted with prudence
like a diaphragm across
womb’s beckoning doorway to bar
the scandal of seminal rage. I’m
told the owl too wears wisdom
in a ring of defense round
each vulnerable eye securing it fast
against the darts of sight. Long ago
in the Middle East Pontius Pilate
openly washed involvement off his
white hands and became famous. (Of all
the Roman officials before him and after
who else is talked about
every Sunday in the Apostles’ Creed?) And
talking of apostles that other fellow
Judas wasn’t such a fool
either; though much maligned by
succeeding generations the fact remains
he alone in that motley crowd
had sense enough to tell a doomed
movement when he saw one
and get out quick, a nice little
packet bulging his coat pocket
into the bargain—sensible fellow.
  September 1970


^^EOP^^

Useless! Useless! 
—heavy rain driving
into the sea


^^EOP^^

Just when he thought to loom the backyard for bud &
Just when he came to admire, or thought to dote over
Already he rues stick-thin arms, whose petals brave the late
Whose middles freeze; we’ve gone without
All ramose till now, empty skirts anxious to round back for
It’s the fourth year lips have gone without any such
Already hips full of leaves and none
Else, years by last, the lone — it splat behind
My back, it came to ache as the rake clawed at
We’ve gone into partial burn, without even
No matter for bloom, the seasons no longer allow
The trouble with doting over blossoms is
In a swollen tub of ruth, wanting nothing but his


^^EOP^^

it lyked to eat salmon w/ its
fingers like a bear
and then use those fingers
to clean its glasses
it cried and it looked like a raccoon   I believe
it wanted to cultivate this look


^^EOP^^

the bear was born
thrown from its side by killer-of-enemies
its rage scratched open several rivers and the gulf of mexico
an aspect so to speke
made fulsomely as it were one
whos habitat
full somely made
reaches all its leaves and feathers to the smoky air
a tanager on an elm in oahu
really reminded of the grand canyon
by the souvenir mug of the muleskinner
& the horse & the name angel


^^EOP^^

I stood in a longhouse
with a woman who may or may not
be Mohawk. Some shift their opinions
about her like meteorologists, as if
her blood were a storm system tracked
in its comings and goings. But the father
of her two sons was, without question, Seneca.
We knew that, in Haudenosaunee country, a father
is to some degree irrelevant, that her own
shifting identity would impact her sons’ lives
like a gene vulnerable to betrayal, causing
certain, terminal conditions. She waited
on an elder she called Steam (warning I was not
to call the elder woman by that name). Steam
(not Steam) would observe the boys, understand
their natures, give them their Creator names defining
their lives during the next ceremony. I confessed
my namelessness, confessed my longhouse- and fluency-
deficient community, and confessed that my clan
mother, three hours away, did not know me well
enough to give me a name, confessed my community followed
a more casual ceremony. You find your name after a social misstep,
a dubious facial feature, a birth defect. Names offer
the name-givers comfort, that your challenge is harder
than theirs, no matter the truth. 
Our names are a convoluted toughening of our skins. My name
is not like Steam (no one is forbidden to use it). No one
calls me Batman because of my status, my utility
belt, my impressive batpole, my agility, my muscles,
my profile in spandex, my virtues, but because I wore
the cape to an older age than I should have, and could
continue to wear it now, as that shit is not going away
any time soon. Even kids who only know Christian Bale
or Michael Keaton, lurking in latex and leather hood,
still think Batman is my name. 
And this is why I have no memory for when or how you became
the Bumblebee, what it means, beyond the literal.
You soar in gardens, spend days ensuring growth,
and if metaphors are at work here, this one seems true
enough to keep you in amber wings, fuzzy yellow rings,
black lacquer torso, and sensitive antennae. 
What metaphor suits the night I left on the Amtrak
for Chicago, past 1:00 a.m., while you stood
on the platform, watching those cars pull out,
the night I wanted to leap from the train, stay? 
I cannot invent new names for the ways we slow,
struggle, attempt to maintain the illusion of futures
without measure, defy actuary numbers and because I have
gone closer to the light than you have, the story is
easier to craft and finesse than it should be. 
Pollination trails are smaller than those I’m forced
to fly in, and lying in Little Rock, Santa Fe, Manhattan,
Minneapolis, Seattle, hotel rooms, the ellipse of your name
trail winds me home, waiting, dusted in pollen and history.


^^EOP^^




For Edgar
The submarine’s inside was dim.
— Ryūnosuke Akutagawa, tr. by Will Petersen



in my youth, I hitched a ride to San Diego, across
chirping desert and distant night, I gazed upon a slow-moving
dark, encasing a convex cerulean cavity 
each night, I stood beneath the sky for hours mesmerized
at the perplex reformatory, twinkling lights of broken
glass fragments spreading against a glistening sunset 
a faceless man behind a lost reflection of glass
at a drive-up window informs me, too bad, you know nothing of your own past 
how far will I walk against the night?
conforming to a captivity I had never realized 
some years later, under the kitchen table, they all huddle,
as the rampage continues toward the back of the house,
a clash of debris from the other room recoils
and broken sounds escape the barricade of doors 
I remember I returned in 1970,
all they remember is me sitting at the edge of my bed,
with the war still in my hands


^^EOP^^




For E.P. Kazhe/Botella
The dread, however, was not of death’s agonies.
— Ryūnosuke Akutagawa, tr. by Will Petersen



it is prohibited to whisper the names of the dead,
as it encourages them to linger at the doorstep,
and she has already lingered, far too long 
 


^^EOP^^

Noted to be the definitive bright morning of 10,000 calendars. 
The church bell melted. 
Rage of unrequited love became a terrible serpent. 
The morning star lowered like an enemy’s flag. 
A vampire’s mattress tumbled out at the outskirts of town. 
Ancient lanterns, suddenly thrown through the air, 
somewhere deep in the mountains. 
That night, in a snowy rural area, an elderly, powder-faced woman 
appeared on doorsteps in search of wine. 
Her origins, neatly wrapped in the cold dressing of a snowflake’s breath.


^^EOP^^

1 
I don’t understand this kindergarten
assignment: “Draw Your Clan.”
The three letters live in abstraction.
A friend suggests mine looks like his, minus
legs, and that day I believe my clan is
a species of amputee Snipes, birds
forced to fly the skies forever, and I
wonder if we are meant to symbolize
endurance or something beyond
my five-year-old comprehension.   2 
My mother explains we are not legless
birds and if she had a more worldly
vocabulary she would have suggested
we were ambiguous, not quite a fish,
more than a water snake, but she says
we are among the few. The last Tuscarora Eel
died out a generation ago, so we are left
Onondaga Eels among the Tuscarora,
voiceless as well as legless.   3 
I find an encyclopedia photo,
see jagged rows of razor teeth
in a mouth perpetually grinning
and when I show it to her, she says
clans are a system to keep track
of families, so we don’t inadvertently
marry our relatives, and that we have no
more affinity with eels than anyone else
on the reservation has with their animals.   4 
“If I threw you in the dike,” she says
“you’d drown as fast as anyone else,” done
with this lesson. I remember older cousins,
swimming between my legs, and suddenly I am rising,
their hands grabbing my knees as my balls collide
with the backs of their necks, and they break
the surface, toss me into deeper water, probably
watching to make sure I surface, after they’ve had
some amusement at my struggle.   5 
In wet darkness, I imagine opening
my eyes and mouth, taking water in,
filling my lungs, discovering gills
like Aquaman or Namor, the Sub-mariner.
Knowing I had better odds of dying, face down,
no voice to call out for help, I am
never quite brave enough to try it, not daring
enough, even, to open my eyes when my face breaks
the stillness of river water contained.   6 
But I flip on my back, ears below the surface, listen
to mysteries, breathe shallowly at that level, and float,
wondering what it would be like to glide the depths
on fins, knowing if I were there, I would desire
legs and lungs, and then I fill my chest to capacity,
and dive, loving and begrudging the ache I find there,
the throbbing of my chest begging for release,
and I swim back up, eyes still closed, wondering how
long it will take to find the surface again.


^^EOP^^

Taken:  “duck foot skin;
an owl with five owlets;
nesting minks;
caught in a fish trap.
A bird egg found in winter.”

^^EOP^^

To be a bride of my own lamentation
I wear a dress not of time’s poisoned quills
but feathers of discontent — kingfishers
ghosting in cornstalks, my field of frozen flutes.
The edge of descent, digression’s highway
brings a particulate ash to my mouth,
starry metals of the meadow’s cold snap,
ravens in the sycamore scorched to black.
I follow their echo’s loop and chase.
I master the map of never, raft
its fragments, mouth the brightness of human’s
leftover snow, details of fever-clouds
where the convent dissolves in violence.
I wear the canyon like a blank eye,
lay before the never-returning light
my silhouette, fossil of the drowned town’s scroll.  • 
Here, where your ghost is always departing
the ebb and flow of terrestrial tides,
I follow your echo’s loop and chase,
vortex streets of a cylindrical sound
infinite in its arrangements of light.
The evening veil, a partial reveal — 
how I appear to myself looking past
this fact of being underway. Each day
I stow my earthen materials
in preparation for the never-end.
In the snapshot of my dead friend, hanging
in the room where loved ones refuse return:
a gradual reduction of color.
Running out of time, neck-deep in water,
we knew no one was coming to help us
in the same way one denies language
to come from a picture. I imagine
love a revelation, not of mind — 
the blue gauze of planetary motion — 
a tone-on-tone painting of a body
floating on the sea’s shifting horizons.
It is a question of legibility.
When I became tired of depicting
poetry, I became aware of
another kind of plane, the kind
good for dwellings and their narrative escape.
Here children sit up all night by the flames — 
the orphan boy from blood-stained pottery
who singed his head and burned out both his eyes.
That was your life, a prefix for fire.
Spider will weave a ladder to your heart,
it is said, even though you are sleeping,
intoxicated by abandonment,
a bitter wind reminiscent of a wave.  • 
In the last days of my marriage to god,
I wandered his spiraled library
to read in the dark blank imprints of trees.
Relentless navigation through the stacks
of shell-tempered mortuary offerings,
sandstone saws recovered from the caves.
I lingered on the stairs of the convent
to write these things, to recollect myself.
Around midnight the mountains returned.
The clouds dispersed into semicolons
and I with them, into a new language,
its boat temporary, invisible.
I knew I would be traveling like this
for centuries. This was my first attempt
at vanishing. I would return before
anyone noticed poems to be found
in the forest, not the mind.
There’s a canyon between this version of me
and the shadow in the corner that is mine.
I wear this canyon like a blank eye.


^^EOP^^

try again. so the lesson goes. less a foot. an arm. an eye. easier to lose one of two, to split a pair, to untwine.

other injuries are more difficult. a broken septum, an amputated tongue. consider the spleen. once ruptured the body is maligned, capillaries flooded with something other than. the greeks considered the spleen the organ of compassion, but the french recognized melancholy, the mottled flesh, the ache of. it is not, after all, the heart but the spleen that is the source of our greatest suffering. the heart is that which we cannot live without. it must be whole, intact. if our heart breaks, truly breaks, it must be replaced. but the spleen, that abalone nestled behind, within, can be carved down to a sliver of itself. it can live on somehow, a mere fragment of.
 
•


every day dawn finds herself naked and wonders if she has not in fact lost herself entirely in the night, her clothes, precepts, selfhood. what comes of a preposition, of love, some penetrated interiority. in this new and sudden opening, there is the fragile pink of sky, the lip of wind. dawn is not alone in her discomfort. the sun too is heavy with the previous day’s misfortunes. neither can bear the tentative movement of the other. she would withdraw safely into the darkness but sun is thick limbed, blocking the door. dawn walks backward toward the window, her legs shimmering with light. she will fall — she always does — upward, into the buoyancy of it. there will be witnesses. it does not matter who. for dawn there is only the swarm of light, the heady rush of it. everything else is incidental.
 
•


there is a story we tell. a story about suffering. not because we are only suffering, but because that is the story we have been taught to tell. take a beetle for instance. it talks of nothing other than the leaf it chews. the angularity of it. the soft brush underneath. there are many beetles. far more than there are humans. somehow our voices always drown them out. take crows for instance. they have been known to fish. not with their beaks but with fiberglass poles left idle by drunken fishermen. or maybe they are just sleeping. either way the crow speaks only of fish. the cold flesh. the fragile meat. in the story i tell myself there are often buffalo. not because they are prolific, but because they occupy the expanse of my memory, its continent. the buffalo are only a metaphor. snow is also a metaphor. bodies blanketed in white. freezing. we are all rigid with it. the story. tell something different. something about the rain. the sound of it. like walking skyward. away from one’s origins. what has been culled from one atmosphere falling gently into another.

•


energy is an attribute of objects. we often mistake the boulder for something other than. he is drawn to the laboratory dome, a concrete formation sitting cross-legged on the mountainside. as if protesting movement. as if unmovable. he finds breathing difficult, the opening and closing. he avoids people who demand such things. there are those who objected to nuclear fission, to anything being split in two. inside the concrete building, he finds the guts of the machine, metal tentacles wrapping around the bulbous head of an octopus. he stations himself at the tentacle’s tip and measures the distance electrons travel when driven from their source. a hundred years ago scientists believed that fission could split the world into sequences of light. they were right. he scatters particles, drives elements far from their nucleus. to create such structural injury. we continue to.


^^EOP^^

ix 
There I was, all spread out for the taking,
bloomed wings waiting for winter
sleet. It was a long season of drinking whole
creeks and nothing else. We churned desert
into desert. What I’m saying is, neither the desert
rat nor damselfly can bear the nosebleeds: shoal-
laced face bearing down just in time to overwinter.
There I was, all spread out for the taking. 
In truth, nobody wants water this thin.
One swallow, and we’re off to dig for more within
a hollow womb. This morning we sip water,
discussing the trauma in our blood: saltwater — 
there it rests, in droplets, on my breast skin,
“Oh,” I say. “My tears,” rubbing them deep within.   xi 
At church I sat salvaged: I said to send me
away wearing nothing but satin and lace.
We both felt secondhand. It was knee-
length, and it wore me cheap. I couldn’t embrace
the old woman who once wore it, couldn’t see
my wrists even. And my neck, it was braced
up all in lace. The woman next to me says,
“How beautiful.” I say, “This beautiful,” then split
a hair down the middle. I lied, “I made it myself,”
then stood up to fade through painstaking
humiliation. As a child, a girl, I saw through myself
to age 45. It was then when I first noticed the aching
of my hands, how they were soon to set themselves
away — they came and went, as if they were lace for the breaking.   xiii 
I was reciting Alfred, Lord Tennyson on my back,
in a canoe, floating the holiest way I knew — 
so close to ghost, and went pale for a moment
before finding myself wandering among high pines. 
I didn’t expect to emerge in white already
with my heart in his hand, just as normal
as a shell rests on my chest. Didn’t expect
to hand it over so early on, at the boundary 
of our properties in a dream: in the grasses
where he ended and I began. I’m feeling very still
now that we’ve crossed over into the pale,
where we are soon to thread, soon to embellish, 
then loop back into each other: braided the way
we were taught to approach each other — the same way.


^^EOP^^

act 1, scene 1: do you know what it means for our survival? 
Fog spun into silk
              on the knee of the comptroller,
              propelled toward the crest of Ontario,
              the old, faded star, steambreath onto the windshield. 
To orient in the finest sense
              of cackles, mute chrysanthemums,
              funneling inordinate nakedness,
              absorbed, absorbed, immediately absorbed. 
Ohhhhhhhhhhhh,
we stay
limber,
each line
choreographed
from a tremendous mouthful
of swamp, skunk cabbage
              brining at the jowls,
              acquiesced to pestilence,
              and exaggerated diffidence. 
Do you know what it is to clamp your shell
              an extra foot into the silt riverbank,
              kissing the soles of passersby,
              silky grains churning the earth over? 
Makeshift ceremonial dances,
              fine textiles culled from thrift store bins
              display brightly-colored throats who feed
              stacks of cash killed on recycled names.
There is a golden tapestry
              on the berry-stained
              bottom of Wealth Woman’s
              basket of abalone.
              Beneath it are the exhausted
              faces of her babies
              grown old in the length
              of the inhale, and a facsimile
              remains from all the cycles
              spilled over, since nature
              cannot acid wash, since
              frizz canvassing the ozone
              always carries over. 
Geometry for days, countless days,
              spin-cycled through a craftsman’s
              circumpolar hands. There’s always
              another grotto or chamber
              where things dwell, they say.
              Wandering skitterers we are,
              the Northern Lights vacuum pried-open skulls.
                            We cover ourselves with hides and entrails,
                            overripe elderberries, looking to steal a moment
                            of letup from the glare. The limbs of the Old Ones
                            shunt aside bare toes, stripped solid
                            and indifferent as a bear’s den
                            or an ant’s apartment. 
Don’t be so much in charge, the frogs say,
              of coalescing wolverine trails
              huddled in 60-million-year pellet tracks
              when the wetlands dried out. 
The way soaked, green corpuscles
              rasp each other’s mouths and hands
              braiding the woof of God’s mind,
              that’s how it is, says
              the giant rat’s captive wife. 
Even if you can only faintly hear
              the eighth narrative told in the corner
              of the babbling wooden-slat house,
              that is enough leftover hooligan grease
              for the gods with killer whale ganglia. 
Knuckles rasp proscenium floorboards,
              splattering herring peck at scops owl’s waist,
              spruce branch
              lowered,
              scrapes conglomerate bedrock.  Mother-in-law’s atonic hands lunge for stewed milt. 
One can conclude it’s a virus
              to plant burdensome layers
              of topographic crust on self-renewing
              limbs, like there was more to it
              than rustling fingers at the end of the line. 
All components must be in order,
              or it’s an ulcer here, a bladder infection
              there, a baked-out parking lot,
              fizzing in trampled-over, chastened hairlines. 
Hold, hold, hold, hold in your palms
              the Steller’s jay that beats its wings
              on glaciers lying high and straight
              over rivers slicing into cool nettles. 
Sea lions suck up a quick breath, dive
              and waft on the outskirts of ballerinas
              who gyrate in like-mind
              to classics bubbling up from Sedna’s citadels. 
I’m here to show you what you can do
              with this sandbar dialect,
              says the humpback whale
              and the goatsbeard moss, and the ore
              of iron oxide in the shoreline cliff.
You must trust, she says,
                            your swimming blood, joints
                            lumbering in shadows, the dolphin
                            clicking out to you, far above ground.
                            And we should feed just as much as eat,
                            says the heart your body formed around.


^^EOP^^

The Ozarks are where defeated assassins, the unholy,
and monsters come to retire.
The proper soil and crooked moonlight grow back
the disemboweled, the decapitated,
while we collect arrears in child support for our demi-god children. 
The procession of taillights lined deep down the logging trails.
Along the way, there was a gentleman arguing with his soul
over his suicide. 
I, tongue of snakes.
Cut up, dipped in powdered sugar,
scattered to the ants in the deepest corner of Mt. Nebo
as an insult, bind my ghost to the mountain. 
Typhoon collected the few precious scales left of me
from the undertow.
My southern accent-muscle burned up
from haunting your life/house. 
Now, let daybreak be my head and the year, my whole body.
An online southern Christian university ordained my smoker’s
cough to be a dove.
My favorite exorcism:
The demon, steeped in corn bread philosophy,
does not have enough ass to carry off the jeans he advertises
as he kneels down to the priest and holy water. 
Years ago, as a child, I climbed the levee and made a hole in the air.
That’s where I will rest, but the gate is not wide enough.
Like my burial site, I am party-size.


^^EOP^^

1 
Late fall the white fur grew up your spine
thick as the tail of a marten. You built up the fire,
wrapped your legs with skins, but how that
chill wind broke through sill and jamb. 
We stuffed paper in every crevice — an uncle’s will,
the writ that changed your name, a certificate
of Degree of Indian Blood and one that said O positive. Still
we shivered, your eyes yellow in the lantern’s light. 
Always, they were out there, in a field of boulders
the size of bears hunched over. O, you were silky
with fur, with a sharp smell I could not get enough of.
I fell into a dream of milk and skin, 
on the bed of pelts in the winter cabin. When I woke
they had taken you or you had gone with them.
And didn’t I, so green with sleep, track you
the three days until new snow fell?   2 
I packed flint and tinder and a compass
whose face shines in the lowest light.
I learned a song to map the way
and one to call you back.
I crouched over every footprint,
sniffing. And here was a broken branch and here
something like hair caught by a bramble.
I followed and followed —  all the yellow hours,
until I came to untouched earth and waited
in the clearing for the snow to come down white
as the winter blanket you long had wanted.   3 
In the spring when you
come down hungry from
that other mountain
the space between one rib
and the next deep enough
to lay my finger — 
how much of you will
remain or linger — 
bone or mouth or memory
of the first sadness of humans?
Will you dig from the crevices
the paper where they
wrote you down as this
instead of that? Or startle
at the clatter of plates?
The creak of the wooden bed?
Will your skin shake off
its fur, your claws remember
they were fingers? And the hands,
meaty as paws, soften into
what I once could stroke or suckle?


^^EOP^^




These words of two, three years ago returned.
— Ryūnosuke Akutagawa, tr. by Will Petersen



one day, Coyote sees Duck walking her ducklings,
Coyote asks her how she keeps them in a straight line,
Duck says she sews them together
with white horsetail hair every morning
and tugs on the line gently,
until the horsehair disappears,
that is how she keeps her ducklings in a row 
as usual, Coyote leaves smiling, she sees a white horse
grazing in a nearby field,
she plucks a few strands of tail hair
and returns to her burrow 
the next morning, one by one
she begins to sew her pups together 
when she finishes, she gently tugs on the horsehair
and drags their little bodies along the ground,
Coyote tilts her head in dismay and becomes distraught,
she realizes she has killed her little pups

^^EOP^^




I am not murdered, and I am not missing, but parts of me have been disappeared.
— Leanne Simpson



They too know all too well that some cracks were built just for us to fall through.  We live in a world that tries to steal spirits each day; they steal ours by taking us away.

From Industrial Schools to forced assimilation, genocide means removal  of those who birth nations — our living threatens. Colonization has been choking

us for generations. I tell my girls they are vessels of spirit, air to lungs expanding; this world cannot breathe without us. There are days  I wish

I didn’t have to teach these lessons, but as an Indigenous womxn  silence is deadening. There is danger in being seen, our bodies are targets

marked for violence. We carry the Earth’s me too inside us,  a howling wind, our mothers & their mothers swallowed these bullets long ago.

The voices ricochet I wish I were invisible I wish I were invisible  I wish echoes  in my eardrums — we know what it’s like to live in fear. Colonialism’s bullet sits cocked,

waiting behind a finger on trigger. We breathe and speak and sing  for survival. We carve out in lines; we write — I know joy I know pain I know love

I know love I know — lessons we’ve carried throughout time. Should I go missing: don’t stop searching; drag every river until it turns red and the waters of our names

stretch a flood so wide it catches everything. And we find each other whole and sacred, alive and breathing and breathing and breathing.


^^EOP^^

Chorus rumbles constant throughout night storied roots curl around obsidian arrowhead dissolved into shaft groove you unbuckle the stems from your leg 
Coda’s systemic sameness & design monsoon shovels clay onto hand pushes up arm, pericardial shift dams its build you prostrate in an office chair 
Massacre song foundation roll fields hypoxic grasses scribe a hill slope horripilation a pronghorn horns the air stirs skin cells 
Unpeel bison hide bundle piece stem into its chamber pillar a room with red cedar smoke 
Confusion forms to recall its palms air push different if not warranted you hear only past reflections bounce off the keystone surface: a beast skips on a butte thrown across a wheeling prairie oak shadow outline casts to your interior walls angled from captured leaf veins 
Unmoved trailer homes center scene cottonwoods bend your head  you thumb forward then walk


^^EOP^^

Someone once asked me, what are the words I do not yet have —  ....     ....     ....     
verbs that will story our bodies into something more
than missing, more than squaw or lost, beyond statistics: 1 in 3 Native women will be raped in her lifetime. 
Daily ritual: my hands search and sift through layers
of tiny earthquakes, shifted verdicts not guilty not enough evidence not prosecutable not our jurisdiction I dig. Native women are 2.5 times more likely to be sexually assaulted compared to all other races.   I dig. We are vanishing lines in history books, treaties;
laws do not protect us. I dig until mud and earth find home
underneath my fingernails. I’ll plant something new
in the absence burn vanish underreport 
Invisible, our ghosts starve, while the rest of the world keeps on eating. A recent government study found that there were 14 federal human trafficking investigations in Indian Country between 2013 and 2016. During that same period the FBI investigated 6,100 elsewhere. 
Let us poem a place where you cannot erase us into white space. ....     ....     ....     
Let us dig to remind ourselves our roots are ancestral
and there is nothing deeper
than these sacred, dirt-covered hands.

^^EOP^^

As I       toss & roll 
these bones 
at the 2nd,  3rd & 4th vertebra 
the curvity of my neck 
where something 
of  a       winged   fused 
bowed   & fossilized 
merged   kink-bended 
wrongly & fused  bowed 
& fossilized    then merged 
bended   slouched    in a 
hunchbacked   crooked 
pain    into   a pinged 
pang    where   needles 
& cracks at my side-to-side 
forced   hanging   sluiced 
movement   of   ivory 
scalloped   cervixes  at the 
nape   & snaps   snaps 
I rebound   at the fear 
& instinctively   quake 
with vanquished surrender 
in numbness   & wake  then 
mumble   you’re part of me 
now   leave   & it slaps its tale 
then    a V formation following 
& decelerates   the sea waved 
source   of   vigor  110  years old.


^^EOP^^




For Julien Poirier



Eke out a few more bars for the jewels behind doors. Lutes and harps lay up to bolster language out from underneath. More absentmindedly walking the room, swishing about beyond argument or caging names. Calling out over the whole wet season, commercial speculations (cycles). I love that edge the wall makes — casino game-board green — my love comes bursting out the center of the glass (foiled) I abandon my trap in fragments. The grand terrace band (it’s waning) finale of synchronized dives, straight to my deepest forest overnight, this unfinished, uproarious music for vacuum.


^^EOP^^




’inept’ipéecwise cilaakt: (I am wanting to) hold a wake / (I am wanting to) hold the body



Had this body been made of nothing 
but its bright skeleton & autumn- 
blown skin I would shut my eyes 
into butterfly wings on a mapped earth. Had the gods 
even their own gods, I could re- 
learn the very shape of my face in a puddle of sky- 
colored rain. Extinction is to the hands 
as the lips are to the first gesture 
the tongue carves into the slick mouth 
just before prayer. In every way 
the world fails to light the soft inner 
machine & marrow  of the bones in motion — I imagine 
smudging my tongue along a wall like the chest 
I dare to plunge in- to, the Braille of every node 
blooming out as if the first day- 
light of wintered snowfall. This night —  
like any fleshed boy I dream of a lyre strung 
with the torn hair of hímiin & in place 
of my dried mouth — there it is. Whispers 
in the blue-black dark after c’álalal  c’álalal reach out toward my teeth to strum 
this wilting instrument. & once awake, I’m holding 
its frame to build a window back in- 
to the world. Had this body 
been held after all these years, I would enter 
you to find my frozen self 
& touch. Like the gutted animal we take 
in offering. & live.


^^EOP^^

I begin the day like any other
day: a decade staring back 
in the rearview mirror
of the wrecked pickup truck: you 
standing so tall you’re already
headless: until I turn around 
the cornfield blurs into the torn
edges of an atlas: pull your hands 
out from under me to anoint this god-
given country of yours: mottled bones 
singing the anthem of a star-
spangled nation: this land 
given enough time to list its own
possibilities: atrocities 
like a blade of dusk resting
on my throat, I bruise: by standing 
I practice the sacred: & kneel
how the body was built 
toward the bottomless insides
of ghosts: the small of my back 
the sacrum: they say, the five
disciples with pocked faces 
unlike your self-inflicted gunshot
but a single entryway: an emptiness 
full of faith: rise to me as only you
would after god has left 
you with these entrance wounds
with no way out: the purpling field 
that goes on & on: recognizable
as a heartbeat: a century- 
long orbit around a cage
of stained glass: broken, you 
gather me in your image
of failed flesh: piecing mirror 
after mirror back together through
the night until nobody forgets: one 
hundred years of this landscape behind
& before us continues to stir — even if 
the earth under our knees, under every
American sky, had been turning west- 
ward for centuries.


^^EOP^^

                    
                    
                           *     *

       *     *

       The
               third
          arrow flew
                           upward
                    and stuck

       we rode back

           sun birds
                      bedeviled
          the great stem
       its reflected
                           words

            fast thunder
         hills
       a molten
                      mass
       small clouds
                  of stones
                      green rushes
       waylaid
                     spirits onto
       lava beds

                      post removed
              stone broken

                     face turned
           down
       to earth

       *    *

       *    *

I dropped out

the little hangnail
blanket of a
                     door

        sun strapped
        to my back

so everyone could feel

I was sinking

       *    *

       *    *

I dried out

            woke up

sprouted wings

            and flew away

       *    *

                    Looking Glass is dead
                    The circular blue paper is the sky
                    We see some green spots which are pleasing
                    Are the commissioners clear as I am?
                    I gave them a blue flag which they pretended to cherish
                    I live in hopes I do not have two hearts
                    The Illinois River will rise
                    A single warrior to write beyond without me
                    Death at the hands of the long guns
                    Did I say death? Or the springs are drying up?
                    Find the break where blood runs clear
                    Through the love you bear your gallant little band


       *    *

         “Not to reverse history
            but to draw out the strength” *


Write in the corridor
to be no speaking
Sing in the hall
to be no dancing
Cry in the street
to be no leading
Break into the house
to be no sleeping
Feel in the closet
to be no running
Fight in the dome
to be no screaming
Lie down in the dark
to be no changing

       *    *
 
Are the commissioners clear as I am? The dampness of night pierces my shield. Two dead men push a stick through my buttonhole. The sun looks down on me as complete. I want you to look and smile — red with iron black. With all of my heart I thank my black-robed friends for their kindness. Columns of steel rise. I was glad to hear the black robes had given you this shimmer of elongated nights, left to waver in the void. They know how to die in battle. They are a twist in the black mirror, that river between the city and the mist. We will produce no sane men again. They come back different and the same. They roam over hills and plains and wish the heavens would fall. You issued the first soldiers and we only answered back, seeking air. I have sent many words that were drowned along the way. The wind is full of bottles and the air aggressive, a red feather placed into black hair.
 

* Joy Harjo in a 1989 interview with Lewis MacAdams


^^EOP^^

The Age of Gold cracked me up last night,
asters and sparrows to be exact, 
that unrelenting knot in
the choral fire. It’s good exercise, to get out 
on stage, to stand in the silvered chamber
and deny emptiness, when the pocket falls so deep 
one could mark anything out over the top. 
The India ink drops continuously,
its likeness, still Helen as phantom
not the truth of the state of her body 
but being awash in a sound uprooted. 
The desk is still a symbol I pile things on,
pin down elegies, illegible dates, introductions scrawled 
on slender backs of envelopes, receipts, small machine-like
cloud chambers, talon disconnected. 
Sunlight burns my feet putting away
the wet mop, where I am stopped 
from almost killing myself. All that wobbling of the lens nonsense, I will cling to the truth of the soundtrack 
tearing through the unveiling:
Jeanne Moreau’s scepter coated in dust a darkness poured from the open door, crowned 
enameled teeth of Tyrannosaurus rex  • 
Their portrait is crushed
to the point of flowers 
Their lines are reaching
arms out from the center 
Their lace is torn over
the image at points 
a flame-like insistence
flaring this all up from behind 
one piss-driven, lifelike icicle
the diamond district through a downpour 
past the love-sick dungeons
of Dante, a cleaving after in Sappho, 
what remains of a dialogue?
The small, blobbed cellular enclosure 
slipping it into strings
letting it wither  • 
No god but the act 
creator eternally rested
in light  fears for my life
dissolved in the booth   largely unknown
fire exit back/ of the hotel closet door
satin sheets 
light foot thunder 
lover impaled/ outside of that world 
cutting young poets 
much slack 
and the box for the board
missing: 
remains of the maze 
spit out from a star


^^EOP^^

We didn’t know my mother was driving
back to her childhood, with a ring
of keys, a compass, and a tiger 
panting in the back seat. Soon enough
the tiger was behind the wheel, circling.
And each circle spun further and 
further away from us. When she calls,
the tiger has parked the yellow-striped taxi
on the highway’s rough shoulder. It’s time, 
she says, for this dream to be over. Time
to go home, sleep in her own bed.
If the compass ever worked, she’s forgotten 
how to read it, and the ring for the keys
is broken, the keys melted down
for their metal. If I would just call someone 
and tell him where she is. She has money —
she can pay someone to drive her home.
If only a road sign were in sight, but no, there’s 
only scattered chert and farmland
and a man across the road who is not my father.
Behind the wheel the hungry tiger’s 
yellow eyes are slightly open. Behind the wheel
the tiger snacks on the summer of 1970 and
the entire works of Iris Murdoch. 
Caught in his teeth are recipes for chocolate mousse
and coq au vin, my brother’s first arrest, the one-
room schoolroom where her mother taught. 
So who to call? The tiger, sated for the nonce,
has started snoring. The quick drive by,
today disguised as children. The tiger snores away.


^^EOP^^

This is the deepest part of the world. 
Bird don’t fly here, but there is the sound of wings. 
The smell, just a struggle in the earth underneath the musty floorboards. 
Monsters hatch fully-grown from their eggs. Snaky legs indicate chaos. 
I carry sad omens, 
slobber down the psychic’s legs to her feet pointed backwards. 
I roll off the back of a skull strapped on top of a fox who shape-shifts into the irresistible. 
A Christian, Oklahoma-shaped and melancholic, caught at the entrance of a ditch 
as the best breath of me tornadoes into the next county.


^^EOP^^

Can’t hear things well if they are things whispering. Nothing gentle to
hand on back of hand. A horsehair bow across gut string. 
A heart is a physical object singing in the chest. Chamber doors
oxygenating blood rushing through. Salmon through river climb. 
When one writes of light as a painted smile across face. You call bullshit
to the interpretation. A post re-posted significant meme image locked to
words. 
Speak of Soul? Sounds like a grifter’s hustle. Don’t do it.  
Anyways, you try to place yourself into the nature poetry experience. 
In your nature placement, you’re constantly thinking of how you don’t like
to shit outdoors. You like a toilet throne and a stall and toilet tissue. 
Your mind ruins beautiful poetry expressions by expressions before a
flush. Yes, if you see a nature painting you ponder a spot to express self.
Think of hole digging and burial afterward. A courtesy thing. Some mass
crushing flowers. Or smeared across a granite slope. Is not a waterfall one
constant flush? 
You mean, if you were to see this world through black-light vision,
knowing everything covered in shit, this planet would be a beautiful glow.


^^EOP^^

when it rains it pours
the rain it raineth everyday
pull up the reins, rayned in by reason, rule, and reverence
if the aim is total abject embarrassment
of shiny-looking objects tenderly gathered for the pome’s
sunset quinceañera
a star winked at me btwn the apricot and the cypress
2 crows atop them like a punter on the mizzenmast
u better step up your game, havelok
by what means of studye and devocyon
what is love but a constellation
of significances
it liked to eat salmon w/ its fingers like a bear
and then use those
fingers to clean its glasses
it cries and it looks like a wolf   I believe it wanted
to cultivate this look


^^EOP^^

Small red tin box sealed in shrink-wrap, cut open
with pocketknife, pried apart, its goods aerate the
office. I pluck white sliced chalky cylinders; let them
simmer in my mouth. I exhale peppermint scent
through my nose. Cut open the official letter. A map
in letters on a white page. My teeth grind mints.
Photocopies slightly off alignment, I blur lines.
Equations disperse family through land documents,
position each generation. I am only fourth in line.
Some plots are gumbo after winter thaw. Sections
stitched together with extended relatives. This ritual,
personal death papers drafted. I am partial to this
grassland; the place of deer marks and porcupine
quills, ledger extrapolates history. I refold estate
document, place it back into its envelope.


^^EOP^^




For Arthur Sze



(Qin) Dim Sum equivalent to: dot, speck heart. 
Stone piled on stone I finish my meal.
In this early sunrise I see shadows where a cairn of rocks
used to stack in the direction of eastern light. 
In late morning, I lit red candles and placed them
next to a three-hinged mirror, as a way of seeing
shadows of shadows. 
Milkweed grows on the side of the road in ditches,
reminiscent of professors’ soft words, amazing the brilliant
contemplation and thought pattern as you learn, slowly. 
In my body neuron-zipped words and more words.
My lexicon building from nothing to something good.
Embossed tattoos like small notes on sheet music. 
Dots and lines, strands and strings I rest on the note D,
increased by one half as my orchestra director signals,
dashes and spaces for letters as grace notes in Morse code. 
Notes in staccato igniting instrumental waves of burning wood,
a fiery spark over and speck dust played in harmonics,
as a coot hovers over a brook dives in comes back with a fish. 
No one would ever know its true beauty and calmness,
the setting sun across an arctic lake, unless it is witnessed.
As speckled day owls, brants, and mergansers float in the sunset. 
To learn you must be open, diligent, and willing to be an individual.
11,000 murres with webbed feet land also without any fear of predators.
But still, on the page grow spotted mushrooms and morels. 
Examine the distortion and effects of the warming earth.
The change of the ice age with purpose as the warming earth today,
but I take heart in sun along with the core of a gingko tree’s light.


^^EOP^^




''At one time, I dreaded everything I was making.' 
Yayoi Kusama (Winter 1999)



First it is just a measling of the tablecloth
but soon it spills
in all colours, all gaiety:
                           desk        floor        lamp        flowers
          tatami, my underwear
 
then dares to paw across
         Mother’s face, so
smilingdelirious.
 
Twenty years
in a twelve square metre room
with the thuds of tennis balls
the only music
 
tells me
that suffering
is necessary
 
and more powerful
than healing
 
and I wish
to cover all territory
for once—hospital beds, chinaware,
bed linen, your bland skin
 
with the pattern and fear of all my dots—
by the old wharf on Naoshima
I make my yellow wartime pumpkins.
 
I know my home is not a country anymore,
just a festering colony of the mind:
 
these shuddering trees
that come and talk to me each night,
the whispers of the white nurses
and the star-dances
of my Japanese kaleidoscope.
Come haunt me still. Do what you may.
I won’t return. I’m not afraid.


^^EOP^^

I don’t mind the ring roads
or the strange intersections,
 
filled in with radio music    tarmac
skirting streetlight and         the dissolving      moon.
 
Wing mirrors tell
of running trees.
 
My heart races
in the heave of the wind.
 
In the pivot of glass everything
is so small and manageable.
 
I think of an old song,
of purple cows in far fields,
 
I wonder what it’d take
to cover miles and miles
with no maps or destination.
 
It is not easy anymore
 
to forget or be free of the bear
that roams the place where I come from.


^^EOP^^

Among heart-shaped leaves
the white fish gleams, red tail. 
Soft lotuses sleep. 


^^EOP^^




(Skellig Michael) does not belong to any world that you and I have lived and worked in: it is part of our dream world…then (heading back) we were pursued by terrors, ghost from Michael…
                                               George Bernard Shaw



                     I
 
The ferry furrows
the foam,
leaving a wake
that quickly settles
and forgets us,
as it has forgotten
all those
who’ve opened these waters:
fisherman, monk, pilgrim and pagan,
some foundering here.
Our mainland
world diminishes.
There is respite.
A cloud engulfs us
out of nowhere
as if the miraculous
were about to appear.
The veil lifts
to reveal the small Skellig
and Skellig Michael
rising like chapel and cathedral.
 
                      II
 
We forget speech, hypnotized by the climb,
concentrating on narrow, rock-hewn steps
that spiral up like the gyres
of the Book of Kells, whirling in labyrinths
of knowledge, turmoil and eternity.
They lead to the beehive huts and oratories
packed with a congregation of sightseers
who whisper in disbelief and reverence
at how those sometime monks lived
in this wind-tugged cloister of shells.
 
We browse in each dome’s live absence
and picnic above the graveyard
that’s no bigger than a currach
with a crucifix for helmsman
navigating his crew to the island of the dead.
We’re eyed by the staunch, monkish puffins.
Our tongues loosen, but, in keeping
with the somberness of this sun-haloed place,
we chat about the world with an earnestness
that would embarrass us on the mainland.
 
You tell of medieval monks charting world maps
with countries drawn as humans gorging upon
each other’s entangled bodies. We go on to
the lands and demons of the world of poetry.
I’m flummoxed when you ask what poetry is.
I recall how the earliest musical instruments
were hewn out of bones, and that poets
carve their words out of those gone before.
They are the primitive musicians who beat
and blow words back to life. More than that I don’t know.
 
                      III
 
[…]
 
That dusk at Dún an Óir we slaughtered even
the pregnant, whimpering women methodically
while a bloodstained sun drowned in the ocean.
Each fetus struggled in the belly
of each slain mother as desperately
as a lobster dropped in a boiling pot.
Had shed blood been ink, I could still be
quilling The Faerie Queene, but I did not
allow a drop to blot a mere sonnet
that you, trapped in complicity, can never
quite break free of. Admit it, hypocrite!
In your time few are not guilty of slaughter.
Even the page you’ll pen this upon is of pine
that Amazonians were shot for. I could go on. 
                                                                                   (Edmund Spenser)
I lifted the pitch of my grief
    above the storm-lashing waves
for my world breaking on the reefs
    of foreign, land-grabbing knaves,
 
who ignore dependence upon
    the lowliest plants and creatures
as the hermit crab and cloak anemone
    depend on one another.
 
But no matter what, you must
    keen for the world’s theft
as I keened mine, despite knowing
    soon no one may be left.
 
                                                                                   (Aodhagán Ó Rathaille) 
Lend an ear to one of your own kind
   and do not let yourself be caught
by the winds of lust, like Dante’s starlings
   blown this way and that by every gust.
 
I myself was borne on this wind
   as I rode across country,
always wary that around the next bend
   my life would catch up with me. 
My rakish ways squandered energy
   that I should have instilled in song,
more worthy of the muse-gift given to me
   than my odd aisling,
 
Pay particular heed to me, especially
   since your word-talent is less than mine.
I’m still too bushed to eke out a last line.
                                                                                    (Eoghan Rua Ó Súilleabháin) 
Sing up front,
cold-shouldering
the fashionable
low key of your time,
closed, cautious and crabbit
as a farmer.
 
Sing as open-throated
as my curlew keen.
I supped the red wine
of Art’s blood
as he lay slain,
already becoming Cork mud.
 
Sing as full-throated
as my unmatched plaint;
matching my words
to his cold body
that would never again
rouse to my touch.
My hands wept
that day’s icy rain
as I swore to undo
that kowtowing
dribble of a man
who slew my Art
of the winged white horse.
 
The spirit of that mare
I rode fleeter than any hare,
fleeter than any deer,
fleeter than the wind
through Munster’s open country.
 
Sing your provenance,
our elder province.
                                                                                     (Eibhlín Dubh Ní Chonaill) 
I sang not for my own or for beauty's sake
as much as to keep our spirits fired, 
knowing as long as we sang we'd not break, 
refusing to allow the country be shired.
But it was too much when even our lands
turned hostile and drove us like lapwings
in the hard winter, together in dying bands,
our swollen bellies pregnant with nothing. 
Even the birds seemed to give up singing. 
So I lay down and relinquished song.
But I should have kept up my amhrán-ing, 
adapting and transmuting their tongue. 
Transform the spirit of where you belong, 
make something right out of what's wrong.  
                                                                                     (Tomás Rua Ó Súilleabháin) 
Tell of those weather-sketched
    Attic islanders
who half-tamed their school
    of rocky Blaskets,
water spouting from the blowholes
    of cliffs.  
Tell how they were forced
    from their Ithaca,
still dreaming in the surf-rush 
    of Irish,
the inland longing for the lilt
    of the sea. 
In them uncover the destiny
   of everyone,
for all are exiled and in search 
    of a home,
as you settle the eroding 
    island of each poem.  
                                                                                        (Robin Flower) 
[…] 
The islands' standing army
of gannets fiercely snap,
stab and peck one another.
Few could match
the spite I unleashed 
on any who encroached 
into my territory. I spat 
with petrel accuracy. 
I should have had the wisdom 
of the sad-eyed puffins 
who let everyone come close,
sensing few mean hurt, 
though when forced to tussle
they'll show their worth. 
So learn from me. 
When I come to mind
don't recall how, feisty, 
I knocked nests of words
over the edge,
splattering on the rocks 
the crude squwaks of other 
ravaging, wing-elbowing birds; 
rather think of the winged poems 
I hatched, seen, 
regardless of time and place, 
gliding and gyring 
with their own grace. 
                                                                                          (Patrick Kavanagh) 
Life when it is gone is like a woman
you were glad to be quit of only to find
yourself years later longing for her,
catching her scent on a crowded street. 
Tell us of the seagull plundering your picnic 
before it wakes you. Tell us of the rain
tapping a pane while you're ensconced
by the fire cradling a pregnant brandy glass.  
                                                                                            (Louis MacNeice) 
Can you still hear a distant train whistle blow? 
Wet my whistle with a slug of Guinness.
What is the texture of fresh-fallen snow?
Do girls still wear their hair in braid?
What's tea? What's the smell of the sea?
Tell me. Tell me. I am beginning to fade.
          
                                                                                             (Dylan Thomas) 
                      IV 
The alarming, silhouetted bird
has a preternatural quality 
as it flutters about
my head, drawing me
from sleep's underworld. 
I resist its pull. 
Everything turns
into dream's usual montage. 
Another figure emerges 
but says nothing, 
as if that's what he came to say. 
His face merges into
one of a gagged female. 
She shimmers and vanishes. 
Dolphins break
beyond Blind Man's Cove,
returning the dead
to Bull Island, transmitting
their encrypted, underwater Morse. 
The savant local ferryman
informs us that Skellig Michael
was once a druidic site. 
His oil-wrinkled hands tug
the engine cord,
coaxing our boat
out of the cliff-shaded cove.
We withdraw
into the distance, 
leaving a disgruntling sense
that we've only touched the tip
of these dark icebergs. 
 
   
 


^^EOP^^

To imagine a morning
 
the first
sounds from the street
 
and the house, its halls
 
scarifying
consciousness
 
Antique glass
smudges limbs
 
(more blue
than green)
 
flared out
over a roof
 
To imagine
the raw circumference
 
of a field
as it wakes
 
what we make of it
 
where our senses
send us
       
 
Gray oscillates gray
and the mountain
 
a line
lodged within it
 
gone slack at the end
 
      
No need
to mention
weather
 
The yard—
the measure
 
An unkempt
garden bed
convulses
 
synchronous
with traffic
 
flashing through
the fence
  
    
Stone bench
in a ring of weeds
 
Shadows ring—
a sound
 
Bees doused in
viscous sun,
erased


^^EOP^^

You said I will pull you out of my body in 237
ways. What you wanted was beautifully to
sever things. Here love: the same things. changed.
 
Finally: a taxonomy of afterthoughts. As though
you were the one who was
sleeping. Breathing in the marrow of would.
 
You, who are a valley of no, I hear the music leaking. (How she.
How she. How I.) You say low key and I do not believe you.
I forgive everything: the perseveration of skin.
 
My hands that are a chopping block and I
cannot touch him. I cannot touch him
without not touching me.
 
Because if you leave, and you are already leaving, there are three.
But you say less than three. And the couch, in your absence,
is crenellated. And who is going to watch us as we leave.
 
To add to the list of changing things: life preservers are no longer
about preservation. They have become less holy. P F D =
personal flotation device. Endlessly possible. Unlike wood.
 
Stacey May Fowles wants a lover who will hit her.
(I do not believe in submission.) I want you to erase me.
This is a kindness. A kindness you tell me. A kindness I do not deserve.
 
On the floor. By the bed. Hotel Congress. March 19, 2005.
Room #23. We are a long way from disintegrated. You said Now.  Look at me. And I did. And you bloomed.
 
(When my mother died, I will say.
Many years after my mother has died.
But I will not believe her. I'll be like my grandmother who
 
despite my parade of girlfriends and her profession
that nobody should be mean to them, still doesn't believe in being queer.
  I don't believe in being dead,
I'll tell my dead mother. And just like you
she'll repeat herself. Happy New Year. Happy New Year. Happy New.)
 
I expect there will be a morning when you walk up to this very gate
while I am sitting here. I know this. I know you less each time I see you.
 I know this like I know you are more lonely than glass.
 
To your languishing. To your bubbly.
To your recent. To your hologram. To your desperately.
To your seeking. To your dictaphone. To your you.
 
Neuromuscular facilitation is just another way of saying
Vancouver. Always is yet a matter of roller derby. Just
in love with you. You, more than sleep.
 
In the top drawer is a photograph of them touching.
It is not so much that it is a photograph.
It is that it is a depiction of what. not could.
 
I want to tell you about my body. About testosterone
as unwitting art historian. About recovery. Me(n). What it feels like
underneath there. The part you cannot know. but should.
 
Either way. It's a house. It's a house
like everyone else has. I take things away.
I don't take them for good.
 
How delirious must we sound when we are falling. I miss you, you can't even imagine. And how bad
at math. Less than three. Less than three. Less than three.
 
And what if. I completely remember
it wrong. What if I remember there were two
of us. And then what if. there was only one death.
 
I do not believe in the existence of holes
that lead to nowhere. Muscle memory remains an enigma. Still, you can
touch her. You cannot touch her without not touching me.
 
(And still) you are not not a part of me. The world is
uncharacteristically unresponsive.
I could thank you. You stay with me. like grass.
 


^^EOP^^




with a mournful but driving feel, in Bm, 2/2 time



in the dark, in the bitter wind
listen to a dream
grandmothers stand
shoulder to shoulder, on the rim of a hill
bend as one, and grasp one thing together 
ask them, in the dream world, why
do they cry? they will show you in reply
their shawls of many colours, spread these wings
sweep you in, teach you how 
once a year, in the dark of the year we wash
the whole world in a day—for one day, we cry    until they're home, until they all are home   
from one dawn to the next mourning
for the broken wailing for regrets 
love lost, wrong words, wrong actions
unbalanced moments and all the cracks between heart
and heart, parent and child
lover and beloved friend, nation and nation
creature, and creature of another kind 
for what we choose and what we neglect to choose
for what we wish we'd known
for each hand unclasped tongue unbridled
one whisper falling short of heard   until they're home, until they are all home   
the bread far from   the hunger                                         the apology
the confusion            the broken road 
       
these things we gather in this blanket
bone and sand and sage
we wash the world, between us
hold this blanket, fill it with our tears
and when we have cried
from one dawn to the next 
then we will rise, and we will dance    until they're home, until they all are home   
lay your hands upon the truth of beauty's loss
heavy, soft as moss, this blanket
full of tears and dust and dying
becomes ocean cradle, healing, dark
the promise, washed clean by our sorrow 
today crying out, as we're birthing tomorrow 
not so much redemption
as the law of moon and season
calls for justice 
one day, the lawmakers must
exit their echoing halls, fall in
with the grandmothers dancing
carry it                 cry it clean   until they're home, until they are all home  
until light through their bodies
translates to rainbows hung over the land 
until light through their bodies
translates to rainbows strung over this land 
until light through our bodies
translates to rainbows shining over our land   until we're home, until we all are home


^^EOP^^

I’m back again scrutinizing the Milky Way           
    of your ultrasound, scanning the dark                                                                 
        matter, the nothingness, that now the heads say           
   is chockablock with quarks and squarks,
gravitons and gravatini, photons and photinos. Our sprout,   
 
who art there inside the spacecraft                
    of your Ma, the time capsule of this printout,                
        hurling and whirling towards us, it’s all daft           
   on this earth. Our alien who art in the heavens,
our Martian, our little green man, we’re anxious     
 
to make contact, to ask divers questions           
     about the heavendom you hail from, to discuss                     
         the whole shebang of the beginning and end,           
    the pre-big bang untime before you forget the why
and lie of thy first place. And, our friend, 
 
to say Welcome, that we mean no harm, we’d die              
    for you even, that we pray you’re not here                     
       to subdue us, that we’d put away           
   our ray guns, missiles, attitude and share
our world with you, little big head, if only you stay.


^^EOP^^

1. 
Bridge’s absence gave the creek a new aspect.
Uncrossable, irascible. Crosser stems
on the bank with her will and form,
extension “Phantom of incapacity
which is me.” Bright roar of water,
x of indomitability.
 
 
2.
 
The bridge is not an x. It bridges nothing.
The turmoil is only a portion.
 
 
3.
 
Bridge on the grass is brideless.
Tufts of terra like a bloom in air.
Rational slats, a surface’s accretion,
slat system. Grass tints it, heliotropic
emanation, sharp, up, or complex
occupation in shiving rain.
 
 
4.
 
Creek’s uncrossability, a new beauty.
“It looked like the process of a thinking,
deep run.” It became the suffering of form
and mute suggestion. The syllables
were not perennial. They broke and grew.
 
 
5.
 
The blue pants of the crosser were neither sky
nor water. They orient to the body
as form and boundary. The crosser’s green shirt
neither grass nor leaf-thought.
Desire to not get wet, another hurt.
 
 
6.
 
“Glamour of limit, where the rocks just slant”
down the bank, in a wet
 
stratification, and the creek
spills blows and goings
and is omniform leaving, a prime of seem.
 
 
7.
 
High water as a contour of relation
swells, hurls. The creek which was other
but not antipodal, or refusal. “The wish
to touch it with my phenomenal hand”
loves it as material.
 
 
8.
 
The bridge made the force containable.
Bridgeless the crosser sits, and very still.
“My phenomenal body crosses and longs.”
Ceaseless body of the audible.


^^EOP^^

                                           #1 [COLLEGE]
 
We packed your satchel with sweatshirts,
Soccer equipment, and The Elements of Style,
Loaded up the Hum Vee, a sad drive to JFK
And the cross-country flight to starting college,
where fortunately due to Advanced Placement
Courses you’ve already been awarded your MFA
And published your first book.
As we pulled out of the driveway, I slammed
On the brakes, and not on account of Jubilation,
The neighbor’s cat. “Stacey,” I said, “we have jumped the gun.”
“I didn’t know we had a gun, Pops,” you said.
“This is a figure of speech, a melonaphore.
But you can’t go to college yet,
Stacey, you’re barely by my count five years old.”
“That’s all right, Daddy-O, nice try.
But my name’s not Stacey.”
 
                                             #2 [PUPPY]
 
Love this puppy and your love will be repaid.
I can’t stress how little this will teach you about life.
Which it will. Which is a lot.
Sometimes, when you’re sad, I won’t know what to say.
Desire will cut into the bone.
So much we need to cover before you’re on your own.
This is a tea kettle, where goldfish won’t feel at home.
When I was your age, before you were born,
A war was almost certainly about to break out.
The Russians turned out to be just like us,
Only worse drivers, which is a lot like us, too.
I had a pet once, too, you know. An accordion.
Very tough to train, stained with fluids as it was
About which nothing further need be said.
Your questions matter. No, they really do.
I have no clue as to the white carnations,
No reason to suppose the stars were not meant for you.  
 
                                              #3 [FISH]
 
“Do fish sleep?” I am so glad you asked. Once
Upon a time fish did not even catnap.
Childhood has reached a certain point.
More specific than that, I cannot be,
Or less. When you drive to Chartres
You can see it coming at you far away.
Never pass up a cathedral if you can.
Drink lots of water with the strawberries.
Leap before you look too hard, which makes
Things swim in your head, like fish that never sleep.  
 
                                           #4 [BIRDS…]
 
“Time’s come to talk to you about the birds.”
“And the bees?”
“What do you know about the bees?”
“Was just asking.”
“A falcon is one bird you can’t keep in a cage,
I can’t explain why, though I might point
To history for many instructive precedents.”
“You have trouble explaining, Dad.”
“Anyway, what I like about birds is, they’re much
Like dreams—they fly in through a window
Where you didn’t know there was a window before.”
“I get it. We open to the known and discover
Mysteries left in their place, like putting under the pillow
A tooth that fell out and you come up with the cash
When you need it in the morning, for school.”
“Let’s stay focussed, Amy.” “Sure, Reginald.”
“I mind it that you call me Reginald, who’s he?”
“Someday, Dad, I may fall in love.”
“Let’s go back to the birds. I don’t want to say
Love is for the ornithologists, though such thoughts occur.
Maybe the real topic is experience.”
“I knew that.” “When?” “You told me.” “I never.”
“Didn’t have to.” “That’s how, you just know?”
“Life’s a vale of tears, Pops, except when it’s not.”
“Hence, sweetheart, some birds thrive in cages.”
“Name three.” “I want you to try on some wings.
I want you to take flight. Like the day I gave birth…”
“What?” “The day I gave birth to you was the day of days.”
“You feeling OK?” “The epidural worked like a charm,
I felt like I was swimming in air.” “I think you’re confused.”
“I wouldn’t be the first, but when they handed you to me
You nursed till you fell asleep.” “You’re talking about love.”
“And some bees sting.”  
 
                                              #5 [BOND]
 
Once we had a bond, a sacred trust.
I carried you on my shoulders, we watched
The finches dart and feed, I read The Odyssey 
To you, which OK was a stretch, but who cared
You did not exist? Certainly, not me.
But take the example of Homer.
Would you just give me a chance?
There’s an old dog called Argus
Who waits for the hero to show before he dies.
I’m getting to the point. If we never had a dog
I would wait for you to arrive from a journey
Forced upon you by chance and fate.
You see, the whole thing’s about waiting.
There you are off-stage readying yourself
For a grand entrance into a life none of us
Heretofore presumed. I myself ache
Barometrically in concert with the coming storms.
If you never are, I have something left over
Even if it’s only me, watching you wade in, as if
You were a great swimmer and this world another shore.


^^EOP^^

I found my father’s favorite Swiss army knife
in a box he sent me with no note,
just James Bond videos,
nothing else.
What was the message?
 
The message was there wasn’t one.
 
This world violent, full of sex,
the movie’s zeitgeist, era after era, a new Bond
double-o-seven-ing in.
 
Divorced dad Sundays
at The Greenwich watching
the British Secret Service save the world.
 
I thought he sent the knife inadvertently,
but now I see it was code—
 
he was boxed in
without a knife
to cut himself out.


^^EOP^^

I still see those men haphazardly standing
around the comps’ floor, mostly silent,
lost in their latest urgent jobs,
looking up and down as if nodding yes
 
from what they call their composers’ sticks
as they set inverse words and lines
of each page that could be taken for
Greek scripture, declaring:
 
In the beginning was the Word and the Word
was made cold type and the Word was
coldness, darkness, shiny greyness
and light—and the Word dwelt amongst us.
 
                                      *
 
Oh, I know these men would laugh this off.
They’d say, if they simply didn’t throw
their eyes to heaven, that they were just ordinary
characters trying to keep the devil from the door,
 
and with luck have enough left over each week
to back a few nags, and go for a few jars.
But they can’t say anything or set anything now.
They are scattered from that place that’s not
 
the same any more and many have left
any place we know of in this life,
calling to mind the old names for printing: The Mysterious Craft or simply The Mystery.
 
                                          *
 
I set them up in another city, another country
that’s as far away in distance
from that city as it’s far in time.
But they are still composing,
 
cracking the odd joke above
their sticks and galleys on some floor
of some building that is eternally busy
inside me even when I’ve forgotten
 
that I’ve forgotten them; forgetting
the world behind the word—
every time I read the word world I wonder
is it a typo and should I delete the l.
 
                                          *
 
Now again I hanker to know the quality
of each letter: the weight, the texture, the smell,
the shiny new type, the ink-dark shades of old,
the different types of type, the various sizes
 
within the same font, the measures in ems,
picas,  points and units. I’d set the words up,
making something out of all this
that stays standing—all set as masterly
 
as the words those men set that reveal
something of the mystery behind
and within these letters and the wonder and
the darkness, but with the lightest touch.
 
                                          *
And the umpteen ways things can foul up
are beyond telling. Maybe the type is off,
or the typesetter may not be up
to the work, if only out of a hangover
 
setting an ! where there should be a ?
or a b where there should be a d,
or miss aspace or a line or dingbat.
And the proofreaders don't catch the error,
 
passing the copy on as clean, or the make-up man
fouls the assembly page, or the stoneman errs
as he fastens the page of cold type and furniture
with the chase, turning the quoin’s key.
 
                                          *
 
Not to speak of the evil eye cast by
fellow composers ready
to knock the words of others, or the bosses
writing on the composition: Kill.
 
Old Shades, keep my words from such eyes
and fretting about that pied world and let me go
on regardless. And even if I foul up and the stewards
are right to set Kill on my last page and my words
 
are distributed and thrown in the hellbox,
the real achievement will be that I tried to set
the words right; that I did it with much labor
and not without a font of love. But that said,
 
                                          *
 
grant me the skill to free the leaden words
from the words I set, undo their awkwardness,
the weight of each letter of each word
so that the words disappear, fall away
 
or are forgotten and what remains is the metal
of feeling and thought behind
and beyond the cast of words
dissolving in their own ink wash.
 
Within this solution we find ourselves,
meeting only here, through The Mystery,
but relieved nonetheless to meet, if only
behind the characters of one fly-boy’s words.


^^EOP^^




If you care about yourself at all, come to your own aid while 
                                   there's still time. 
                               Marcus Aurelius 3.14



Citizen of Rome, you are the center of the universe.
Problem is, circumference is—take a guess—me.
 
“Some things are impatient to be born
While others are impatient to die.” Don’t say
 
I did not warn you. Next time they swear
Shit happens, pop them square in the nose.
 
This will not help anybody, but helping is
The farthest thing from my imperial mind.
 
If you keep your spirit blameless and pure
People will drape you with laurels but
 
No one will have sex with you in backseats
Or marble mausoleums or anywhere else,
 
A small price to pay for honor and respect
Though not for me, being an emperor with no clothes.
 
Just pretend today is the last day of your life
And act accordingly—not that such strictures
 
Apply to Yours Truly, sports fans.
The forces of evil march on the fortress
 
Of your self. I wish I could explain why.
But what if evil did not exist and what if
 
Your self was no fortress, see what I mean?
Stoics get a bad name. Not in touch with feelings.
  Too rigid. Know-it-all cocksure mothers.
So the Stoics retain PR firms, don’t tell a soul.
 
If you really knew what was good for you,
And you do, why do you care I’ll flail you alive?
 
True, pissing off your emperor is a poor plan,
Even one like me mounted bare-assed on a steed.
 
Once upon a time, children…The story peters out.
Circus revels and gladiatorial raves—
 
Seen one, seem them all. Life is tiresome,
When will it end and will we ever notice?
 
I wish I knew. Really, I wish I cared.
My pal, Marcus Aurelius, natters day and night:
 
“Living is more like wrestling than dancing.”
Guess he never saw me take Molly at the club.
 
And he says we always have the option of
Having no opinion. Right. Like he knows.
 
OK, then, where did I put my pants?


^^EOP^^




           The goal of the Meisner acting technique has often been described 
           as getting actors to "live truthfully under imaginary circumstances."
           Here are some acting games we have found useful. 



I.
THE REPETITION GAME:
The Moment is a Tricky Fucker

^^EOP^^

It must be difficult for God, listening
to our voices come up through his floor
of cloud to tell Him what’s been taken away:
Lord, I’ve lost my dog, my period, my hair,
all my money. What can He say, given
we’re so incomplete we can’t stop being
surprised by our condition, while He
is completeness itself? Or is God more
like us, made in His image—shaking His head
because He can’t be expected to keep track
of which voice goes with what name and address,
He being just one God. Either way, we seem
to be left here to discover our losses, everything
from car keys to larger items we can’t search
our pockets for, destined to face them
on our own. Even though the dentist gives us
music to listen to and the assistant looks down
with her lovely smile, it’s still our tooth
he yanks out, leaving a soft spot we ponder
with our tongue for days. Left to ourselves,
we always go over and over what’s missing—
tooth, dog, money, self-control, and even losses
as troubling as the absence the widower can’t stop
reaching for on the other side of his bed a year
later. Then one odd afternoon, watching something
as common as the way light from the window
lingers over a vase on the table, or how the leaves
on his backyard tree change colors all at once
in a quick wind, he begins to feel a lightness,
as if all his loss has led to finding just this.
Only God knows where the feeling came from,
or maybe God’s not some knower off on a cloud,
but there in the eye, which tears up now
at the strangest moments, over the smallest things.


^^EOP^^

                              lunatuna
                              fluttering
below belly
pasiones swooping
                              down deep
gathering storms
                              treasuring
rainergías pacíficas
marítimas, montañescas
                              abotona tu vientre, maja
easles b ready
                              to capture flight
entre tus aguas claras
                              allow flow
               …reflect…
                              clama la milpa
               eye your center
cherish thigh
               hug torso
                              b one
               with duende within
               discover
                              sun risa raza roja


^^EOP^^

When I was a troubadour
When I was an astronaut
When I was a pirate
You should have seen my closet
You would have loved my shoes.
Kindly consider my application
Even though your position is filled.
This is my stash of snow globes
This is my favorite whip
This is a picture of me with a macaw
This is a song I almost could sing.
When I was a freight train
When I was a satellite
When I was a campfire
You should have seen the starburst
You should have tasted my tomato.
I feel sorry for you I’m unqualified
This is my finest tube of toothpaste
This is when I rode like the raj on a yak
This is the gasoline this is the match.
When I was Hegel’s dialectic
When I was something Rothko forgot
When I was moonlight paving the street
You should have seen the roiling shore
You should have heard the swarm of bees.


^^EOP^^

                              what for the rush and bloody pain
                              what for the blooming and the rain
                              what for the quest and odyssey
                              what for the swimming and the sea, see
                                    there b no shore or beach that anyone
can reach
                    and breathe, inhale, exhale, and love
all seems to ooze the stress that greed has carved in us
surely our species should be meek
    before our motherearth’s volcanoes
    storms and huracanes
    tornadoes, floods and tremors
and there we b secreting poisons for all leggeds, wingeds,
fish and even trees
 
                              what for the rush and bloody pain
                              we’ll surely die, but then
 
                we dig deeper in our heartmindspiritbody
and nurture glow and warmth
                    and light and peace and patience
and gladness and gardens
                              and gather all in oneness
and end the pain and bloody rush
     desiring naught
                              expecting naught
                    missing naught
simply being being
 
     we truly have no choice…though
 
we imagine, dream, hope, want
             being all that we are we are all that is
              and that is all there b
 
 
césar and corky
                                         this b my writ to chávez y gonzález
          carnales de las sonrisas grandes
                                         de las carcajadas llenas
                         de murales
                         de cuadros, ensayos
                         matadors de pendejadas
                         terminators of guandajos and juanabees
                                         hermanos, jefes
          your “death” is but our “birth”
                          porque amasteis
                                         entregasteis
y hoy, como siempre,
                          sois imprescindibles


^^EOP^^

Dawn marks the wall
 
a thin flange of
off-blue
 
An imagined
silence
 
Always an imagined
silence
 
The speed
at which sleep’s
fogged dialogue withers
 
into the present
noun-scape
 
This rift valley
 
A volley of
seasonal beacons
 
Window
where mind
 
finds orbit
 
     +
 
All a world can do
is appear
 
The window
intones
 
A room
whose walls
 
warp with sun
 
What’s seen
is dreamed
 
We think
ourselves here


^^EOP^^

In the apparent
vacancy beyond
each line, you might
sense the poem
 
waiting to think
itself. Imagine
the surface of a twilight
pond in wind,
 
shifting and changing
the sky, then
going still
as a concentrating mind,
 
the far trees
deepening
in its reflection.
Like the poem
 
the pond’s alive—
its beauty (the sudden
scintillation of a hundred
thousand wavelets)
 
and music (the percussion
of a beaver’s tail)
arising from what is.
And when the pond
 
accumulates
the darkness,
which it loves,
it challenges your eyes
 
to find the light
that without darkness
you could not see.
Wild campsites
 
you never noticed
now appear
along the far shore.
It’s not only itself
 
the poem waits for
moving line by line
into its own dark.
It waits for you.


^^EOP^^

Your first dog is ever your one dog
And no story has a happy ending anymore.
We have all wasted lives, sometimes we waste
Our own. Some nights are long ones, some
Never end at all. I don’t know how we can fall in love, which implies landing,
Whereas love promises everything but.
That’s why I like to listen to birds call
At dusk to each other from the acacias
But then I recall it’s still daylight and I
Hear them in the absence of the trees.
When I am traveling by train over mountains
All I think of is the sea. My father was
Never quite so alive until he died and now
He’s immortal. Somebody must do the calculus,
Somebody must work out the logic of the logic
Of this spectacle because spectacle’s the last
Word anyone would use for dreams that don’t cease,
For the sound of weeping coming from the next room,
Only there’s no next room and we’re the only ones
There, though just for a moment and a lifetime more.
Listen, I will tell you a secret, the secret you told
Me once on the train into the mountains
On the journey to the shore, a time long ago when
We spoke and never met. That secret, which is ours.
Some nights are so long the old dog comes home
To us who remain there waiting and waiting
Even if we’ve never been here before, where we are.


^^EOP^^

It's true: I have it
though I hardly approve
of anything it does.
 
Supposed bend of light
or smudge where two odd
angles cross. I hardly see—
 
can hardly do a thing
with it. White zone of
no flesh pressing
 
into no. So low, I can’t
scale or measure it. I used
to think: OK! A clean sharp place
  to keep. Or: I'll grow a thing! to keep, for me! But
no. It's just a ward
 
to mark & mount, a loop
I lope around with, so
I count
 
myself a realm
of realms. I vote & vote.
Turns out, we agree
 
with everything we
do, almost. We sweep
the precincts
 
of ourselves: the rooms
between each rib
& under them
 
till we reach the fat
red condo where
our blood leans in.
 
We live here now. Half
heart, half townhouse.
Come on down.
 
Turn on that sweet TV.
Our mise en place, our rugs
& nooks: we’re full
 
of stuff. We paint
the furniture we couldn’t
live without. It’s true
 
at last: we have it all
though we hardly know
what any of it does.


^^EOP^^

In a patch of sunlight
a decapitated grasshopper
twitches. The sunlight twitches.
Sky the size of a sky imagined.
 
Squint to see the quarter moon
—shallow gash on blue horizon.
Squint to hear beyond windows
wafting muzak. I’m half-awake
 
in this field of turned-on particulars.
A wreck of yellow blossoms
under a barn-door window.
 
A barn door without the barn.
 


^^EOP^^

As the father turns away from the thought
of his failure, the hands remove
his glasses and rub his eyes over
 
and over, drying the nonexistent tears.
Unknown to the one who is troubled
about losing his hair, his fingers stroke
 
his baldness as he speaks. The body,
our constant companion, understands
the loneliness of the hostess in her dark
 
driveway, embracing herself after the guests
who promised more and soon have gone,
and even visits the old schoolteacher
 
who reads the same happy ending to each
new class, working her toes in her shoes.
How could the people of the kingdom
 
not have known the curse of sorrow
was nothing more than a long sleep
they had only to wake from? In dreams
 
the body, which longs for transformation
too, suddenly lifts us above the dark
roofs of our houses, and far above
 
the streets of the town, until they seem
like any other small things fastened to earth.


^^EOP^^

What I’ve come to discuss is mostly about shadows
and the airs left behind in caring, discarding,
the long inhibitions of whereso and when.
Alabaster, a dark quire, in its many pages and premises
the maze, from which move
tendrilled purples and contusions, magnificent
fuchsia receivers of false content,
the splayed flower, arterial, like the premise of a door
is where it leads to or from. Communication
of vessel, vial, capsule, hull, a tiniest nil
fires the neurons from their swooning stall,
is not a healing but adaptation to same
a quickening in deleting of sensation
a prior sizing. Stacked leaves (green shadows)
are givens in the columned garden, what work is needed
to determine that shape? Some hysteric
trope of repetition, rage for accretion,
dazed by its own mute replication,
like the minute lines of a hand. They are
its cries (writes Ponge, among others),
the tongue inseparable from its utterance (langue).
We weep to hear it, a language forgot.
I was saying I keep speaking
from some chamber sound deleted, which is why
I never call or write. In that theatre are many eclipses
and moons refracted in pinholes and wheels
wherein revolve astonished birds, and the Queen of Night
sleeps a rest restorative and profitable, and
andante allegro, the dead ships never sail.


^^EOP^^

how can I tell you
baby, oh honey, you'll
never know the ride
the ride of a lowered chevy
slithering through the
blue dotted night along
Riverside Drive Española
 
poetry rides the wings
of a ’59 Impala
yes, it does
and it points
chrome antennae towards
 
’Burque stations rocking
oldies Van Morrison
brown eyed girls
Creedence and a
bad moon rising
over Chimayo
 
and I guess
it also rides
on muddy Subarus
tuned into new-age radio
on the frigid road
to Taos on weekend
ski trips
 
yes, baby
you and I are two
kinds of wheels
on the same road
 
listen, listen
to the lonesome humming
of the tracks we leave
behind


^^EOP^^

After a winter of gluttony & grief
I'm back on plan for good this time.
I’ve ballooned to a specific kind of ugly
 
the kind you hope to hide
with body spray. But it gets worse
after a winter of gluttony & grief.
 
I’ve shown up for meatballs. For lemons
whipped to weeping. Now I land my balloon
for the specific kind of ugly
 
salad oil is. Happy date night, darling.
Happy coconut water + nutritional yeast.
After this winter of gluttony & grief
 
spring comes, stabbing her hard stem
of anger in the throat. Even garlic scapes
are flat balloons, their ugliness specific
 
as my penmanship: green tubes of spice
& hate. My body speaks the ugly testament
that took all winter. It says: Gluttony & grief  balloon, darling. Only kindness is specific.


^^EOP^^

Prologue   Willy Loman’s reckless daughter flies quietly, fluttering like a silk-moth behind me
  blocking my life, my scenes in whichever stage direction she wants.
  Sometimes at night I can feel her dialing into me, her ringing calls like an imperial decree.
  When she sleeps she crashes, like a car into the guardrail of my ambition.
  Her curse like a poison I cannot smell, an asphyxiation of the self by the self, that hell and hard sell.
  Split personalities, we dream through the night, of our merger and acquisition, in her half-moon light,
  Not even my husband can feel her there between us—a secret contract under seal.
  When I awaken, her irises touch mine; an awful, indecipherable fault line.
  She’s a character in search of an author, a devotee, trying to recount her history through me,
  until I channel her. She’s like a phantom limb, hymn to the invisible. Her shameless whims,
  the subtext of my lies. Under her tinted hair the forest murmurs, becomes a thought, or prayer.
  Until her thoughts tumble into mine; colors bleed. In the morning, I’m overwrought—
  My patrilineal kin, she begins to wear thin, when she undoes hospital corners I’ve tucked so gently in.
  Her cool white rising is meringue completing— the high-pitched silence of our congealing.
  She was always ceremonially unfolding his white shirts, unpressing the folds
  in my circumstance. I did and didn’t want her. I kept trying to catch her, then let her slip. Any intent
  to have her near made her more invisible. Her electric breasts overfilled my brassieres. An interaction, our dialectic—
  She never removes her hat upon entering the door to my personality. Ma semblable, ma soeur!


^^EOP^^

I’ll conjure the perfect Easter
& we’ll plant mini spruces in the yard—
my pink gloves & your green gloves
 
like parrots from an opera over the earth—
We’ll chatter about our enemies’ spectacular deaths.
I’ll conjure the perfect Easter
 
dark pesto sauce sealed with lemon
long cords of fusilli to remind you of my hair
& my pink gloves. Your gloves are green
 
& transparent like the skin of Christ
when He returned, filmed over with moss roses—
I’ll conjure as perfect an Easter:
 
provolone cut from the whole ball
woody herbs burning our tongues—it’s a holiday
I conjure with my pink-and-green gloves
 
wrangling life from the dirt. It all turns out
as I’d hoped. The warlocks of winter are dead
& it’s Easter. I dig up body after body after body
with my pink gloves, my green gloves.


^^EOP^^

woodstove of my childhood
 
where potatoes cut like triangle chips were fried
in manteca de marrano
 
woodstove of lazy autumn smoke swirling away
to nowhere
 
woodstove of December
evacuating the cold chill at sunrise
 
woodstove of celebration and mourning
 
of post-World War II Korea y Vietnam
 
woodstove corner that kept vigil over
drunken nodding remembrance
 
woodstove corner where uncles primos compadres
gathered on visits from Califas
 
woodstove corner with a warm ear for nostalgia
 
where Mama Ane stirred the atole and wrung her hands
thumb over thumb praying for her children's children's children
 
woodstove that witnessed six decades washing its face at the vandeja 
that saw western swing dancing in dim lantern flame
 
that watched Elvis come in from across the llano strumming
a mail-order Stella and singing in Spanish
 
woodstove
of the feast lamb tied up under the crabapple tree
 
of early sour cherries ripening above the cornstalk horizon
 
of neighbors bartering a cup of sugar
in exchange for mitote and conversation
 
woodstove of rain tenderly pouring into the afternoon
and salt sprinkling onto the patio from the mouth of the porch
 
woodstove of the nighttime crackling softly
 
of harmonious harmonica medleys
blowing before bedtime prayer
 
woodstove facing John F. Kennedy's
picture on the wall
 
woodstove of Protestant Sundays
ringing without bells
 
woodstove of dark earth
fat worms and acequias
 
woodstove of 1960s propaganda
and all the rich hippies knocking poorly at the screen door
 
woodstove of private crazy laughter
 
of woodpeckers pecking through rough-hewn
barn timbers only to meet the sky
 
of rabbits nervously nibbling evening away
in the arroyo
 
of the water bucket banging and splashing
all the way home
 
woodstove of the water drop sizzle
 
of buñuelos and biscochitos and flour on the chin
 
of chokecherry jam dropping out
from the end of a tortilla
 
woodstove
that heard Mentorcito's violin bringing in the new year
 
that saw Tío Eliseo bring in an armload of wood
 
that heard Tío Antonio coming down the road
whistling a corrido and swinging his cane
 
woodstove of the blessed noontime
and Grandma Juanita heating up the caldito
 
woodstove of the sanctified and untamed holy spirit
 
of the dream awake dreamers
prophesizing in the beginning how the end would come
 
of creaking trochil gates left open forever
 
of twisted caved-in gallineros rocking
in weeping April wind
 
of abandoned orchards waist deep
in desánimo
 
of teardrops that held back the laughter
 
of the penitente procession moving through the hills
for the soul of the village
 
woodstove of the wounded faithful proudly
concealing their scars
 
woodstove of armpit farts and bedtime giggles
 
of pitchforks and axes under the bed in case of intruders
 
of coffee cans filled with everything but coffee
 
of ten cents for a cream soda at Corrina's
 
of strawberry Nehis and a bag of chili chips at Medina's
 
of a handful of bubble gum acá Santos's
 
woodstove of genius wisdom dressed up as the village idiot
 
of hand-me-down stories locked away
in the dispensa
 
of bien loco local heroes cracking homeruns
Saturday afternoons en la cañada
 
woodstove
of all that and more of all that disappearing
 
as children played hide 'n' seek in that abandoned goodtime feeling
while stumbling on the footsteps of tradition
 
woodstove that heard the fall of a people rising in silence
 
that died of a loneliness without cure
that cured itself in the company
 
of the so many more lonely
 
woodstove of my childhood


^^EOP^^

Because the only view we have is the one
that looks down on the knees. Praise perspective.
Praise shared disdain. Praise space made by connective
tissue; the synaptic cleft; elbowroom
at the dinner table; polite conversation;
lies you push through your teeth. Because dissecting
a dog's heart won't change the way it thinks. Praise redirected
traffic. Praise the gnarled lip that defends
the gentle bones. Because your mother was
a seahorse. And to think of her thin is
to empty all the ice from the tea glasses;
to strain the soup by driving it through your hand.
Praise tablecloths; sway-back chairs; the plastic
folds that protect slice after slice of cheese.


^^EOP^^

I.
Serious smiles a lot.
At least that’s what they say,
His Mum and Pop
Trying to be proud
As all the nurses gather round
To squint into the cloud
Of little Serious on the ultrasound. It’s likely just the way he’s bent,
The head nurse finally thunders
Into the awe and argument
Swirling through the crowd
Where someone mutters half-aloud In all my years…
 
Serious never hears.
Serious spins and spins
With his dumb dolphin grin
In the best bed there is,
Where there’s no guilt and no sin,
No child more inner than this;
Nothing to will
And nothing to want,
No body you both are and haunt;
No drug of disappointment
Or feeling that there’s never now
(Or do these seep in somehow?);
No suffering the world’s idiocy
 
Like a saint its pains;
No traffic and no planes;
No debts, no taxes,
No phones and no faxes;
No rockslide of information
Called the Internet.
 
Serious isn’t. Yet.
 
 
2.
Serious hears a sound.
Not unusual, in itself, nothing to be concerned about.
Here and there there’s been a shout,
A song he seemed to be inside,
The weird whale-calls of her gas.
This, too, shall pass.
 
Then it comes again,
And with a far-off force
Which a shrink less serious than he
Will have him dream is a drain
That all his impurity
Is slowly drifting toward (Down, Serious says, down!) 
Beyond which he’ll be clean,
Feel no pain…
 
Then the dark erupts in a rain
Of blood and muck
He seems to mostly be,
Holding on for all he’s worth,
Which isn’t much, finally,
Little wizened thing
Plopping out to an earth
Where cries of agony
Dwindle to equivocal joy (It’s, it’s…is it a boy?) 
And some clear world lies
Just beyond the eyes
You can’t quite open;
 
And everything is wet,
And loud, and broken;
And all of life is one huge tit
You’re meant to somehow suck.
 
Serious staggers to his feet,
Slaps himself harder than the doctor did
And says, I’m fucked.
 
 
3.
Serious is learning silence
In the way most children learn to speak. Poshlust!
He gasps after his first feeding, Götterdämmerung in his first dusk,
His whole body writhing with a kind of violence
As if the world had wounded him,
Words his bleeding.
  Anomie, Deus absconditus
Drift into the air above his crib; Accursed progenitor, quintessence of dust
Dribble with the pap onto his bib;
As day by day, and week by week,
Serious wrestles with this difficult gift,
Forgetting, which, it seems, he is on this earth to do.
  Boob, ass, oaf,
Riving out of him like greatness going off; Ninny, crackpate, clunkhead, gorm,
Leaving him gasping and bent; fragments, sheep, rabble,
All falling, falling from him
Backwards into babble...
 
Finally Serious lies there, spent,
Language like some immense ghostly mobile
Bobbing just above his bed,
All power of movement gone as well:
 
Useless little buglike arms, buglike little fingers,
This heavy, heavy head.
 
And now if there’s something Serious can’t quite taste,
Or if he feels too acutely his own waste,
Or knows too acutely what he can’t tell,
He screams and screams
Until the world knows what Serious means.
 
 
4.
Serious goes to school. Just try it, his Mum says
As she lets go his hand
And wipes a last glaze
Of doughnut from his nose,
And Serious, insofar as Serious can,
Does give it a good try,
Though it’s hard to understand
Why they keep taking a break
From taking breaks, or why
They can’t simply walk
In line down the hall,
Or what, finally, is at stake
In a game of kickball.
 
It’s time to draw a tree.
What a relief to work alone,
Serious thinks, as he picks a scab
For just the right tinge of sky,
Breaks his sugar cookie
To make a place of stone,
And fashions out of bread
A man with a huge head
And huge, ruined wings,
Gasping at all the ruined things
To which he’s tumbled.
And calls it: Cookie, Crumbled.
  Oh my, the teacher says
When she walks by, Those are interesting trees. 
Serious closes his eyes and sees
As in a vision of doom
Himself drowning in schools,
A whole ocean of fools
Nipping, nipping at him
With their tiny, tiny teeth.
And Serious sighs
With a prophet’s wisdom
As he climbs up into his seat,
Stares out across the room
And like a prophet cries: You’re all going to die!
 
The class is a tomb.
Serious, rigid, waits.
A girl in pigtails giggles,
Then another near the back.
And as if along a fuse
The giggling goes
Up and down the rows
Till someone makes a crack
About his coat and tie
And the laughter detonates.
 
Serious climbs slowly down
Into that inferno of sound
Which the teacher’s shouts
Are only driving higher,
Packs up his lunchbox, his dignity,
And his copy of Sartre,
 
And strides with a prophet’s gaze
Through all that derisive fire.
Only once does he turn,
Briefly, to look back through the blaze
At the iron fact of his art,
Smaller from here, but unburned.
 
 
5.
Serious loves his Mum.
And then he doesn’t, quite.
It’s that way with everything—
Baths and plums,
The blessèd silence of night.
  Would you like to help with this?
His mother asks
As she rolls out biscuit dough
And cuts it with a glass
Or folds the clothes
Still warm from the sun.
But Serious knows
He was born with a task,
And though he touches the clothes
And tastes the dough,
Serious says, No.
 
Serious stays in the bath
Until his skin is shriveled and cold,
Eats himself sick on plums,
Feels in the dark
The dark he becomes,
And cries out in the night for his Mum.
 
 
6.
Serious is older now.
He just is. Thank God, Serious says,
For whom childhood, that stupid carousel that never stops,
Always had an element of disingenuousness:
The tristesse of lollipops,
The sham of naps;
Fools dandling you on their laps
So you can play horsey, which damn sure isn’t serious;
And all that endless business
Of pretending to be curious
About the most obvious things:
What’s night? Where’s Mama-Cat?
What’s wrong with Pop? Can God die?
Why, why, why?
 
To hell with that,
Serious thinks, as he sits incinerating memories
One by one,
Saying their names as he feeds them
Like photographs to a fire:
Here he is in a baseball uniform
Squinting back the sun;
Here in a blue tuxedo with a ruffled front;
And here, Lord, with pimples.
He pauses a moment.
Do memories have names?
And what, exactly, are these flames?
To hell with that!
Done.
 
Serious owns a car, pays taxes,
Contemplates a pension,
Has a crease of gray along his temples,
But he is young, young.
He develops headaches, begins sleeping badly, and relaxes,
You might say, into the constant tension
That he really always was,
With far, far too much to do
To look anywhere but onward,
Or to answer the questions of a child
With anything true.
 
 
7.
Serious isn’t Stupid,
Though they go to the same gym.
Serious sees him dropping weights
Or picking his butt and thinks,
At least I’m not him.
Nor is he Mean or Vain,
Those chiseled twins
With matching boots and belts,
Nor Smug who notes their sins,
Nor Shallow noting something else;
He isn’t useless Timid
Who no matter what won’t complain,
Nor fat-assed Nice sweating honey
On all the machines,
Nor Self-Loathing who smudges mirrors,
Nor Whacked who licks them clean.
Serious isn’t Funny.
 
Serious spreads his towel on the bench,
Sits down in front of his own image,
And Serious strains at a serious weight.
And never, not once, when he’s seen
In myriad mirrors around the room
That everyone else is straining too,
Has he caught himself too late
And finished with a roar
And more strength
Than he’s ever had before: I AM NOT YOU!
 
 
8.
Serious has a date with Doom.
It’s not the first, and seems unlikely to be the last,
For they get on quite well, Doom and he,
Share similar pasts
And similar ideas about what life should be.
It seems, in fact, that this might just bloom.
 
And what a relief.
After Morose and Mad and Neurotic;
After almost falling for Grief,
Who was so exotic
She made all the others seem tame.
Then to discover she even lied about her name.
And to sleep with another Serious! That was odd,
Like wrestling with an angel,
Though it was hard to tell from that rough unsated tangle
Which one was Serious, and which one God.
 
But how easy it is to be himself with Doom,
Serious thinks, as he puts the wine in to chill
And sets two glasses on a tray,
Who always wants whatever Serious wants
And always agrees with what he has to say;
Who doesn’t need to hear that whole spiel
About “going too fast” or “needing more room”;
And who doesn’t probe and pry that long needle into his brain
—What do you feel? What do you feel?—
Until it’s all Serious can do not to stand up and scream: Pain!
 
Lucky to be alive.
And if he still has no clear idea where she lives,
And never knows quite when she’ll arrive,
Still, something about Doom feels right
To Serious, and he looks forward to their dates.
He checks himself in the mirror, dims the light,
And waits.
 
 
9.
Serious is a traveler.
“Traveling broadens the mind,”
The man beside him says,
His tray table down and seat reclined
Even as they're taking off,
And Serious, who has his eyes closed
So he can do what Serious does,
Begins to cough.
 
               What do they say, what do they fear, 
               Is this song joy or grief? 
               This is a man, this is a god. 
               Who are you and why are you here? 
               To leave, to leave.
 
The meal is over,
Which Serious declined.
In the shell-roar of the cabin
He eases somewhat, is surprised to find
He could almost drift away.
“What line of work are you in?”
He hears the man beside him say,
And Serious begins coughing wildly again.
 
               What is that smell, what was that sound, 
               Isn’t that ice on the wings? 
               This is the air, there is the water, 
               But what do you do on the way down? 
               You scream, you scream.
 
How far they must have gone by now,
That old familiar world miles behind,
The man eats an orange,
And now he eats the rind.
He eats his plate, his plastic fork, chews
With animal relish his Styrofoam cup,
Leans over to eat bittersweet Serious too,
Who startles and wakes up.
 
               Look at the desert, look at the green, 
               Is there an end to that ice? 
               Here is a place, and here is a place, 
               But what is the space between? 
               It’s life, it’s life.
 
 
10.
Serious is married.
What a weird wind this is,
He thinks, so still at times,
Then stinging the eyes to tears.
And how he seems both more and less
Himself, and how it seems at once all of loneliness
And something he can hold.
Or is it he who's being carried?
He shivers, and reaches out for her again.
Or is it she who reaches, she who's cold?
What is this wind?
Where are these years?
 
 
11.
Serious experiences loss.
Just like that.
Flat.
Serious experiences loss,
 
As if he’d come to some sheer cliff
There was no way around,
No way to cross,
And found,
On the other side
Of a deep canyon, himself,
Experiencing loss.
 
Serious, when the man is gone,
Tells himself that he tried,
Tells himself that he cried and cried
For all he was worth
To the man sitting on the other side
Experiencing loss,
Who one day simply vanished, or moved on,
Or slipped off the edge of the earth
And died.
 
 
12.
Serious doesn’t speak French.
This embarrasses Serious,
Because insofar as he lives anywhere,
Serious lives in Paris.
 
He feels the city stare,
Feels himself sweat, and shake, as he tries to wrench
The little that he’s gleaned
Into the lot that he desires;
Feels shopkeepers look at him as if he were a liar,
Waiters as if he were unclean;
 
And feels, in truth, not at all serious,
As if he had a huge balloon for a head
And helium squeaks for a voice,
As if gravity could be merely a choice
He were making, and he might instead
Simply stop, let go, and drift away.
 
Finally Serious, opposed to epiphanies,
Has one he can’t resist.
He is Serious, and to be Serious
Is to know something utterly or not at all,
And to know, moreover,
That as you let your half-knowledge fall
From you, it does not exist.
 
Just like that Serious is himself again,
Saying weighty things
About the flowers in the stalls,
Pondering a splendid mirage
Called the Seine.
 
And if he wakes saying fromage,
Or in some shop feels
Right on the verge of translating please,
Serious knows it’s a dream,
And knows from childhood what to do.
Point and scream
Until the damn fools give you cheese.
 
 
13.
Serious has some culture.
He knows some things.
And if, as he begins to speak,
He should feel the immense wings
Of ignorance shadowing him, that dirty vulture
That squawks in drawl and drips tobacco juice,
Serious knows what shelter to seek.
 
Pick a name and Bach is better.
Modernism was powerful but diffuse.
Life’s drained out of pictures since the Renaissance.
Technique! Technique! Technique!
And about all that spastic flatulence
Called contemporary art,
Well, Serious hardly knows where to start.
 
Serious sits through opera without a yawn,
Chews up books on which weaker teeth would shatter;
He can tell you where one brushstroke lies,
List the reasons courtly love is gone,
Pluck the speck of subject matter
From Henry James.
Serious knows some things.
 
He thinks and thinks and thinks
Until his ignorance shrinks
To the tiniest of flies
Alighting somewhere in the Louvre.
Carefully, carefully, Serious creeps
With his massive swatter,
Saying, Don’t move. Don’t move.
 
 
14.
Serious believes in nothing.
It’s a nice day, what should we do?
What are you thinking?
What’s been bothering you?
What’s that you’re drinking?
 
Serious spreads the paper on his lap
To confirm what’s new under the sun,
Hears a tap, tap, tap 
Against the windowpane.
  Nothing ventured, nothing gained,
Floats up from childhood like a bit of ash,
And Serious, pausing, can almost see
His old preacher, that atom bomb of idiocy
Who every Sunday would explode.
Still, Serious thinks, there’s a truth to set you free.
But who could survive the blast?
  Tap, tap, tap.
 
Serious skims the sports pages,
Reads about a storm that rages
Far out at sea.
Some talking dog is taking office,
Some country wiping out monuments, expunging its past.
  Tap, tap, tap.
  Goddammit, Serious says, midway through a war,
And thinks again of that old bore
Who talked and talked and talked
Until you felt your head loll and sway
Like some huge flower on a tiny stalk
That one good breeze would break;
 
And how you’d see him afterwards eating chicken fried steak,
Chicken fried man,
With a tiny transistor radio in his hand
So he could listen to the football game;
And how his face seethed and writhed with what seemed pain
If he saw you coming to his booth,
And he stared off as if some great truth
Were finally, finally coming clear in that chicken fried brain
And like a prophet he was going to stand up and shout—
Until what plopped innocuously out
Was your own name.
  Tap, tap, tap.
 
Serious puts aside the news of the day
And walks to the only window there is.
But there’s no wind, not even the grass stirs.
And anyway, there’s no tree.
Serious shrugs and turns away.
Must just be me.
 
 
13.
Serious sees a child
In the playground across the street,
Sees his huge stupid head and huge stupid feet
As he tries to keep up with the games,
And hears his sonar screams
Of delight amid the other children's screams,
And hears his timid weeping when they call him names.
 
Serious sees the child standing apart sometimes
Driveling to himself in silly rhymes,
And sees him pretend to look intently at the sky
If Serious walks by,
Or sees him simply stop and stare.
 
Gradually Serious starts seeing the child everywhere,
In a store standing in an aisle,
In the subway while
Serious is trying to work on the way home,
Or laughing with his family in a restaurant
Where Serious eats alone.
 
Serious knows the truth.
This child wants something, his whole nature is want.
And it begins to be annoying,
This novice cringing, all the imbecilic and cloying
Tactics of being cute,
The whole hangdog way he has of panhandling pity
With his freckles and his missing tooth,
Sitting all fidgety in his Sunday suit
Or babbling happily as he’s leaking snot;
 
And then the air he suddenly puts on of being serious
When it’s so obvious he’s not.
 
Serious sees the child in the playground
Standing to the side,
Sees his face whiten and his eyes go wide
As Serious crosses the street and strides
Until his shadow swallows the child
And leans down close enough for them to kiss. I don’t have time for this,
Serious says, I’ve got too much to do.
 
And the child says, Who are you?
 
 
16.
Serious kills himself. No, no,
Shivering out of a dream,
Starlight and the hard glitter
Under the bridge’s beam,
Serious, Serious,
Don’t go.
 
Serious crawls out of bed,
Feels the cold in the floor
And thinks, suddenly, of lovely Mad
(Where can she be?)
Who’d bolt out of sleep and scream Farmers get up at four!
It’s three.
 
Serious makes himself a cup of coffee,
Which he doesn’t drink;
Tries and fails to read,
Tries and fails to think.
Serious sits, and holds himself still,
Minute by minute;
Until the dawn finally comes
And he is in it.
 
 
17.
Serious lives alone.
It’s better this way, he tells himself,
As he takes a pan from the pan shelf,
A spatula from the spatula drawer,
And fries two eggs the way he likes them:
Yolks of stone.
 
No more gnats of chatter over breakfast.
No more breakfast. It’s noon.
No one prancing by with only panties on
When he’s almost, almost broken through,
Or singsonging outside his door Serious, O Serious, where are you?
No more!
 
But what, finally, does Serious do?
He sits, ignores the ringing phone,
Looks at a wall
On one of the last warm days of the year,
And settles back into the lifelong call
Of being serious,
Which is to see, within that whiteness,
Leaves being gently blown,
And to feel their colors as they fall.
 
 
18.
Serious gives a speech.
He sets his papers on the podium,
His glass within easy reach, Tap, tap, taps the microphone.
How vast this venue is.
How absolute this darkness.
  To be serious is to be alone!
Serious cries out with a triumphant look on his face,
Waiting for the echoes to end
Out there in all that space,
Which the words at once define and extend.
It takes a while, but they do die.
The spotlight lasers in.
He blinks hard, starts again.
  To know in every hand another’s touch,  To hear a silence words only intensify,  To feel not too little but too much  This attenuated world—
 
Serious begins to sweat,
Feels the back of his shirt grow wet;
Looks down to see his papers swirled
And scattered, the glass on the floor, broken.
What’s with this fucking light, he thinks,
Or was it spoken?
He glares out at the dark, impassive crowd
And as if by force he could make them wake
Hears his voice growing loud:
  Whatever you most treasure you will break,  Whatever you hold closest you will let go,  There is no place that you will not leave!  But to be serious—
                                  Serious says,
Quietly now, because he has them, they are his—
  To be serious, to be truly serious, is to know  That what you call your losses you cannot grieve,  For it was never quite these things that you wanted —This treasure, this touch, this one place— But by such life to be haunted.
 
Brilliant!
No notes, no flaws.
Serious stands back and waits for applause.
The hall is silent, utterly silent,
The heat tropic.
 
Serious looks around, confused,
Turns to the man who introduced him
Then can’t remember being introduced;
And even given his credentials,
This suddenly seems a most unlikely topic.
 
Serious tries to get out of the light,
But the light goes where Serious goes.
He blunders to the edge of the stage,
A cliff
Breaking off into a dark
in which there's no movement, no voices, not one sigh.
 
Serious feels the rage
Draining out of him, and feels a chill, and whispers, Where am I?
 
 
19.
Serious nears an end.
It’s cold and getting colder,
And Serious, older,
Sits outside thinking of his good friend,
Who like so much of Serious is gone,
And thinking of that godforsaken dawn
After the one night of his life he spent outdoors.
  Tell me,
His good friend said
When Serious staggered out to the fire, Which form would you say is higher, Tragedy or comedy?
 
And Serious, who had stumbled full-bladdered
In the night from a dream of bears,
Then dreamed himself the object
Of a dozen hungry stares,
Who had swiveled, pissed into the tent,
And sworn such things it would take a life to repent,
Serious, exhausted Serious,
Was silent.
  Because it’s been troubling me, Serious, that the answer can only be tragedy. To be conscious is to be conscious of Losing whatever it is that you most love, And thus an art that's truly great Will always have one deepest truth to tell, Which is, my friend, this life is hell.
 
Serious looks at the sky. It’s late.
A small wind blows
The trees, and Serious, shivering, knows
He should head inside,
That he is not well.
But sitting here, letting his eyes close,
Serious can almost see that lake
Aflame with the early sun, and smell
The sweet burn of that wood,
And feel the way it seemed his heart would surely break
Were it not for the strange lightness in his head
As his friend smiled and said, But maybe earth is the heaven of the good.
 
 
20.
Serious talks to God.
There’s no one else left.
His mind is mash,
His world is ash,
And Serious occasionally forgets himself,
Though he is not, not Bereft,
That sniveling idiot two doors down
Who sits up late
With only ashes in the grate
And talks to God.
  See? Serious says. See? Nothing.
Serious spreads his arms magnanimously
As if to give God the floor.
God declines. Thou know’st the first time that we smell the air We wawl and cry,
Serious says, louder than before. And then we wawl and cry some more, And then we die, And then we rot!
Again he waits in case
There’s disagreement. There’s not.
 
Serious scoffs, goes to brush his teeth,
Forgets briefly to avert his eye
From the mirror’s glare
And finds his father there,
 
That gentle baffled man
Who, when there was no hope,
When he couldn’t even stand,
Carved from a piece of soap
A silly yellow duck
And set it in a little yellow dish.
Serious feels a tingling in his hair
And mutters something close to a prayer, I wish, I wish...
 
The lights go out. Goddammit, Serious shouts
As he trips and falls
To his knees on the floor,
Banging his head on the door
As he tries to rise. GodDAMMIT! Serious cries.
 
The lights come on.
His father’s gone,
But there, at the edge of the sink,
Balances the little duck in the little dish
No serious person would ever keep.
Serious tries to think,
Steadies himself as if at some brink,
Decides he needs sleep,
That’s what he needs,
Crawling fully clothed into his bed
And pulling the covers to his chin
Because, it seems, there’s some strange wind
 
That’s somehow gotten inside.
So unlike Serious,
To leave a door unclosed.
 
Yet here it is, gathering strength
As it blows his books
On the floor and it blows
Right through his body and it blows
Behind and below and above
And out of the whirlwind a voice cries
 
                    Love
  What? Serious says, as he tries
To sit upright and looks
Wildly around him,
Raising his fist in the air. The things...I have lost—
 
Immediately he is tossed
Back against the wall
By the force of a storm
That has no source, no form,
And hears again the call
Out of nowhere:
 
                    Love
  My God! Serious screams,
Unable to help himself, What maundering politician, What decerebrated pop star,  What stupid puling poet  Couldn’t tell me that? 
Struggling to get out of bed
He starts to cough, then choke,
A riot in his heart,
A riot in his head
As he falls off the edge to the floor. Who do you think you are, 
He gasps. Is this...  Is this some sort of JOKE?
 
Suddenly the strange wind is quiet,
But no less strange the calm that comes after.
  I’m serious, the voice says.
 
And Serious dies of laughter.
 
 
EPILOGUE
The dead man’s famous.
No one now remembers him alive,
Or knows his name, or anything he did.
Still, a few stories survive
After all this while
Of a weird-looking man
With a weird-looking smile
That had, it’s said,
Almost a kind of life to it,
Though the man was seriously dead.
 
And some remember how all the flies
Vanished for miles;
And some say no, no, but the buzzards had weird smiles
As if they knew something.
And some tell of an old woman
Who would come and whisper in the dead man’s ear,
And smooth the dead man’s hair,
And if the door opened, disappear.
There are even stories of that grim mortician
Who thought the smile undignified
And tugged and tugged so hard
He slipped and fell inside
Right on top of the dead man,
Whose lips, he swore, seemed to soften,
Seemed to somehow kiss.
And some remember this:
Before the lid was sealed on that coffin
And the nails driven,
There were on that face real tears.
And some say he smiled like a man forgiven.
 
The dead man never hears.
The dead man spins and spins
With his dumb dolphin grin
Through all the places where he is
When people talk of him again:
In classrooms or in planes,
In boredom or in pain;
In front of screens
Or in the spotlight’s glare;
In days too mild to bear
And in the long nights where
The dark grows steep,
The wind wild,
And a mother rises from her sleep
To calm her serious child.
 


^^EOP^^

Habits accrue
in circular pattern
and living occasion
swollen among what
the dead have to teach us
 
So, ear, be an instrument for thought
Tide, bring some
little green thing to dust
behind my eyes
 
Touch the hotpoint
and drag the tongue
over the fat belly
of a flapping fish
 
Sticker book
of farm animals
Sticker book of ole timey cats
What is life and how shall it be governed?
 
With blind devotion
and endurance in the impossible
for guts in everything for roots
in plain sight
 
Share a lung
Accumulate none
Say hello to the crow
 
There are certain chord progressions
one should avoid


^^EOP^^

When is a poem one word? Even at 17 he was Baraka
           on the court, Coltrane gold toned, a kind of running riff,
more than boy-child, man-child, he was one word like Prince.
            How back in those drunken days when I still
ran in bars & played schoolyard ball
            & wagered fives & tens, me & my colleague
the psych-prof drove across Eastern Ohio
             just to see this kid from powerhouse St. Vincent,
grown out of rust-belt-bent-rims, tripped
            with the hype & hope & hip hop
blaring from his headphones, all rubber soled
            & grit as the city which birthed him.
We watched him rise that night scoring over 35,
            drove back across the quiet cut cornfields
& small towns of Ohio, back to the places
            where we slept knowing that Jesus had been reborn, black
& beautiful with a sweatband crown rimming his brow.
            He was so much more than flipping burgers & fries,
more than 12-hour shifts at the steel plant in Cleveland.
            More than the shut-down mill in Youngstown.
More than that kid selling meth in Ashtabula.
            He was every kid, every street, every silo, he was white
& black & brown & migrant kids working farms.
            He was the prince of stutter-step & pause. He was the new
King. We knew he was coming back the day after he left
            his house in Bath Township. He never sold it.
Someone fed his fish for years. Perhaps our hope? Fuck Miami.
Leave Wade to wade through the Hurricane rain. LeBron is
remembering that woman washing the linoleum floor, that man
          punching his punch card. He drives a Camaro, the cool kid
Ohio car driving through any Main Street. He is the toll-taker, &
            he is the ticket out.
He keeps index cards documenting
            his opponents’ moves. One leans forward before he drives.
One always swipes with his left hand. The details like a preacher
            studying the gospel. He studies the game like a
mathematician conjugating equations, but when he moves he is a
            choreography,
a conductor passing the ball like a baton. He is a burst of cinders
            at the mill. He is a chorus of children calling his name.
            The blistered hands of man stacking boxes
in Sandusky, the long wait for work in Lorain.
A sapling bends
            & reaches in all directions
before it becomes a tree. A ball is a key to a lock.
            A ball is the opposite of Glock.
America who sings your praises,
           while tying the rope, everyone waiting for Caesar to fall,
back-stabbing media hype city betrayed
            by white people with racist signs.
            I watch the kids play ball
in the Heights, witness this they say. We will rise. I watched
            LeBron arrive & leave, I walked, I gave up drinking
as he went off & won a ring. The children’s chorus calls out sing
            brother, sing. Everything is black. Storm clouds gather
out on Lake Erie. But the old flower-hatted women
            at the Baptist church are heading out praise cards,
registering teenagers to vote. To turn a few words into a sentence.
He is a glossary of jam, & yes he is corporate
            chugging down green bubbly Sprite, running in Beats head
phones, he is Dunkin his donut, he is Nike, witness, ripped.
            On a spring day in Akron a
            chorus of children is chanting his name on the court by the
chain-link fence. He is forged steel, turning his skinny body into
            muscle, years of nights lifting, chiseling, cutting, studying.
Watching the tape. To make a new kind of sentence. He is passing
            out T-shirts, this long hot bloody summer he was returned
to the rusted rim along the big lake. He is stutter-step. He is
            spinning wheel. He has a cool new hat. He is speaking of dead
black children. He is giving his time. To make the crowd
            sway like wind through a field of corn.
            Does LeBron think of dying?
            Does the grape think of dying as it withers on the vine by
the lake? Or does it dream of the wine it will become?
He is wearing a shirt that says I Can’t Breathe.
They said he was arrogant. I said he was just Ohio.
            He married his high school sweetheart. Bravado laid out
on the court. No back down, he is Biggie with a basketball inside
            of a mic, no ballistics, just ballet. He is Miles Davis cool,
quietly cerebral, turning his back, tossing up
            chalk like blue smoke, blue notes, blues. He is Akron,
Columbus, he is heart & Heat turned to lake effect blizzards,
            freighters frozen in ice, looking for work & no money to eat.
He is Ashtabula & Toledo. He is carrying so many across the
            river, up through Marietta.
            The grapevines are ripe in Geneva.
            He returns, Man-child, Man-strong, Man-smart, Man-
mountain, Mansfield to East Akron, minus into Man, or should we
            say Mamma raised? Single mother fed, shy child, quiet child
who grew, who suffered & taught his body to sing, his
            mother worked how many shifts, doing this, doing that,
never gave up for her son. He is third shift at the rubber
            plant in winter, he is farm hands & auto parts piecework
& long nights the men at the bar, eyes on the television.
            The lake tonight is black as newly laid asphalt.
There are no ellipses. He is turning paragraphs
            into chapters. Long ago the hoop Gods made this deal
at the crossroads, Old Scratch is flipping the pages
            of his program & waiting high in the stands—to belong to a
place most people would call
            nowhere, to show the world how tough we truly are,
twelve-hour shifts at the Rubber plant in Akron. How he is, how
            he is a part of this asphalt court we call Ohio, & how we
suffer, & how we shine.


^^EOP^^

It is not pain that holds me back, but time
With its sad prefigurations and smell,­­­
Its flowers and echoes, rivers and crime.
Even now, without a future, I tell
Myself lies in future tense. As my hair
Thins, I collect combs. When clocks chime, I groan.
The falling world finds pleasure in despair
Because to suffer means to be alone,
And I suffer through all the accidents
Of change as though I were settling a score,
As if to disinvent what death invents.
I once built a castle, now I do chores.
To pass the time I rearrange my things.
To fall asleep I recite names of kings.
 


^^EOP^^

You hold onto life like a hostage. You're deeply embedded.
You're an actor slipping into a new script. You're a comma
Whose purpose is to mark the moment when prose is suspended,
Where begins a poem's pensive silence or some dark drama.
 
You're a Charles Dickens character in the opium den
Of a long life. All you want is to sleep through the nights after
Satisfying intercourse, but your mimesis may have been
Caught by sexually transmitted diseases. Disaster
 
Is an evening when you're so hungry every apple core
Evokes grocery stores. Being the only one and only,
They can't clone or disown you. The only thing you lack is your
Adult teeth, beneath the rotten teeth of what makes you lonely.
 
And the truth is that devolution concurs with disposal
Till it emerges, when entourage lobbies for Decalogue,
And hype is the new preparation before its proposal,
Calling for the removal of all shoes, shirts, and demagogues,
 
And the zealous anti-Orientalists who refuse to
Use anyone's last names first when denying them service at
The sperm bank, where the preferred euphemism is "super glue."
Remember the joke about the butcher who couldn't get fat?
 
Rejuvenated vaginas and enhanced penises squeak
Thanks to Puritanism gone gaga vis-à-vis bling-bling
À la bada bing. People piled up form a sexual peak.
Two condoms put up their dukes inside a contraceptive ring.
 
Champagne is the new organizer for your political
Campaign to conceive something tantamount to FASD
Of the spirit. Were you surprised or did you wax critical
When you emerged from the driveway to your domesticity
 
Without any disease but your family's questionable
Cultural history? Is it such a mystery that your
Mediocrity's latently poised to emerge? That you're full
Of traditional vulnerability? You'll pace the floor
 
Until you face (at a number of paces proportional
To the gravity of the insults that have been thrown your way)
Yourself dressed like a clown. Your brain will halt to urbanely sprawl
And then catapult your past beyond your future like a clay
 
Pigeon across a clear blue sky, toward a lemonade stand
At which the theory of other minds attempts to explain
Why petroleum prices fluctuate with body count and
Meaningful relationships end in kaleidoscopic pain.


^^EOP^^

Sound of the rain so I know
there's constraint
sound of the train
so I know commerce
has not come to a standstill
now they raise the barrier
now they set it back in place
 
What coats the bottom
of the surface of the sound
when the swifts come in
when the clerks come home
who will bathe the children
who will bake the bread
 
when the luff is tight
when the mainsheet
starts the boat underway
 
whatever you do don't
let the tongue slip
from its moorings
 
what's that song?
love lift us up where we belong
 
I ate the pill
and the pill was real
 


^^EOP^^

White-Mexican looks like a Latina,
not my label
a question
from a Guatemalan student
who's come undone
in my ESL class,
doesn't get my kind
I try to describe
how I grew up
in Caucasian corn country
surrounded by houses
on cul-de-sacs
that all looked the same,
how we were alone
in a town of 5000,
one black family,
one Indian family,
one Asian family,
and one household of Mexicans,
no two, us and the Renterias
to whom we were related by marriage
before and after my divorce,
and they were mixed;
still, it was a good living,
happy in our cocooness,
our oneness,
separated by money
one direction
color on the other:
classes, classes, classes,
day and night
we took lessons:
piano, jazz, tap, ballet,
the dance team, trumpet,
trombone, tennis, Finishing School,
and one awful summer golf;
Christened, Confirmed, Cathechismized;
it all cut me in several places,
molding of head and heart
making me ultrasensitive,
then and now,
an observer of the outside,
an outsider among my own kind,
my very shade,
mysterious aloof
black haired beauty
who can't speak Spanish,
living among blue eyed dyed blond bombshells,
who held up her head higher
because she's shy not stuck-up,
understood, undenied, sacrificed to at any price
by my beloved little brown parents
who taught me well
gave up so much
so their daughters could shine
and they'd swell with pride
at the life they had given us,
on Sundays we basked
in mutual admiration after mass
singing our church songs while making breakfast,
according to the unspoken doctrine in our house of:
fast first eat later after communion,
we intruded with our Mexican music
bellowing out the open windows
the smell of bacon frying,
pancakes baking, coffee
and eggs scrambled to order
it wafted out on beautiful summer mornings
out of our house in Pleasant Hill, Iowa,
perched on the highest spot
one could reach on the East Side of the street
for first and second generation immigrants.
 
January 25, 2001


^^EOP^^




For Alma Banda Goddard



my cynical feet ambled
prepared for indigestion
& blank faces of outrageous innocence
knowing I'd have to walk over years of media
declaring we're vanished or savage or pitiful or noble
My toes twitched when I saw so few brown faces
but really when one eats racism every time one goes out one’s door
the appeal of talking about it is minuscule
I sat with my back to the wall facing the door
after I changed the chairs to a circle
This doesn't really protect me
but I con myself into believing it does
One of the first speakers piped up I'm only here because my friend is Black & wanted me to do this with her I've already done 300 too many racism workshops
Let it be entered into the Book of Stars
that I did not kill her or shoot a scathing reply from the hip
I let it pass because I could tell she was very interested in taking
up all the space with herself & would do it if I said a word
They all said something that I could turn into a poem
but I got tired & went to sleep behind my interested eyes
I've learned that the most important part of these tortures
is for them to speak about racism at all
Even showing up is heresy
because as we all know racism is some vague thing that really doesn't
exist or is only the skinheads on a bad day or isn't really a crucial problem
not as important certainly as queers being able to marry
or get insurance for each other
When they turned to me as resident expert on the subject
which quite honestly I can't for the life of me understand
or make any sense out of
I spoke from my feet
things I didn't know I knew
of our connections
of the deadly poison that racism is for all of us
Maybe some of them were touched
but my bitch voice jumps in to say NOT MUCH!
I heard back that someone thought I was brilliant
Does that mean that I speak well
Or that she was changed
It's only her change
I need


^^EOP^^

Love of air and water
Joined in apprehension,
Perhaps you know what's there
By way of fear, for while
 
Living in pursuit of
And going always forth
Toward something that trembles.
Its knowledge is your mind.
 
What do you think about
The great ocean's sullen
Aristocrats—these small
Headaches and dark affairs
 
That bathe themselves in your
Staging grounds, where you go
To contemplate how what
You want became your mind?
 
The black oblivion
Offers no reprieve for
You, hunter—in its keep
Your ears have grown too sharp,
 
So sharp you almost hear
Your own heartbeat over
The subtle whispers of
Water’s dismal gardens.
 
Everything about you
Is overblown, even
Your mouth is uniquely
Talented at its tasks,
 
Gathering for slaughter
Animals in their sleep,
Speaking without a sound.
Noah had seven laws,
 
You have only one—eat
To build life out of death,
Survive above all things.
The fatalistic moon
 
Filtered down upon you
Seems an imitation
Of lives you will not live.
Would you be its hero?
 
Would you call out against
The morning’s weaving light
That shames the night before
The passing of its cool?
 
Would you be at the beach
When the invisible
Becomes a glow, to surprise?
Inland, workers dreaming
 
Of unitarian
Proposals lose no sleep
To fear about your mouth.
It is their wayward friends,
 
Who wandered too far west
Into fevered chaos,
That wake up with your name
As screams exploding dreams.
 
The inland ether holds
Clouds in your dismal shape.
Lucky are those who know
Nothing, who cannot see
 
Hell outlined in vapor.
Somewhere a piano
Plays a sorrowful song
Half-written by the hate
 
That a grieving loved one
Would stick into your heart.
Such are the arts of men.
Beware. Your time is near.
 
Someone has learned lessons
You didn’t mean to teach.
A crowd is gathering.
Your skull is their kingdom.


^^EOP^^

When you walked in
it was like recognizing
 
the moon when he returns.
His lover bites his cheek; she
 
has no choice. All we see
is the dissolution, then await
 
the reconstruction.
Each time, the sky
 
yanks her into his orbit.
I want to say I’m sorry.
 
I want to say You win. Our bodies are like
 
the confessional booth these
poems are stuck in. Even
 
the priest can see that sin.
You’ll be all spit and honey—
 
or maybe I’m the poisoned
flower gnawing on its own
 
lip because it has no hands
to reach for you. Only words
 
that are as useless as the pollen
for saying anything. I continue
 
to serve them even with your hands
around my throat from across
 
the room. Your voice is home,
I answer it like a bat guided
 
across the atmosphere. This
is a narrative that cannot end
 
well but wants to, but must.
I’ll continue to go down kicking
 
and you’ll be sweet as anything
until you bite back. No, it can’t
 
end here—we won’t let it.
Billions of years have passed
 
since an asteroid last hit
the moon: clearly some
 
magnetic fields can be sustained.


^^EOP^^

When you asked if it rained bees or poison
you were asking the wrong question. Again.
 
You still didn’t understand the difference
between hurricanes and flooding. Thus between
 
gods and humans. Between your slum-
lordy digs and the shacks I pass that cling
 
to old boards and huddle around each family.
The yards marking the care of home.
 
Everywhere something is falling on
someone and I watch like an autumn
 
tourist tripping through the Berkshires.
I reach to catch a leaf. I try to straighten
 
a Pisa-like sapling. The wind wraps around
us both like a question mark and leaves
 
me standing, the sole witness on this end.
I’m telling you about a place of silence.
 
You want it all to be a metaphor. I’m watching
a front porch crumble. Still, someone sits there.


^^EOP^^

Somehow, I am still here, long after
transistor radios, the eight-tracks my father blared
 
driving from town to town across Ohio
selling things, the music where we danced
 
just to keep alive. I now understand I was not
supposed to leave so soon, half a century
 
a kind of boulder that I’ve pushed up the hill
& now for a moment, like Sisyphus
 
I watch it roll.
I walk through the snow.
 
I breathe the dirty East Side wind
pushing past the Russian church, the scent
 
of fish & freighters & the refinery
filling the hole in my chest—how many years
 
have piled since I last stumbled out onto the ice
& sat down to die.
 
Only to look up at the geometry
of sky—& stood
 
to face whoever might need me—


^^EOP^^

Flaunting in the atrium, ostentatious at the gates
I saw a shooting star thru a window on Alcatraz Ave
& cladding struck up against those who demand
We stomach the stick and tend the commode
They're selling trees in the paint store! trees in the paint store
Datebook chips in the soft skin of our wrists
On NBC, CNN, and NPR broken windows are weeping
We'll have 35 apples and shrieking in the thickets
Aloft in the air golden and golden the dial among the mounds
So much is stunted in understanding of what a light can be
They storm the scrimmage line and clear-cut bran and germ
We want the petal unto itself, the unalterable vessel
The arc end of the precipice grows 1.9% annually
What was popular music like before the crisis?


^^EOP^^




For Kelly Morgan



ever do is die
Her brother was thrown out the window
by Black men he was drinking with
His cousin was stabbed near the store
She got shot
Nobody knows where he ended up
She hasn’t heard from her brother in 17 years
He killed himself when his wife left
Her son was hit by a car of drunk whites
Her uncle went off a cliff in the dark
Her grandmother died in the hospital
because they gave her the wrong medicine
Her baby was born addicted & died
My brother died as a baby
Her mother died of an overdose
She doesn’t know how her mother died
but no one has seen her for a long time
She was put in foster care because her parents died in a car wreck
I close my eyes & keep praying
sometimes there’s nothing to do
but brush back the tears
& keep on folding the laundry


^^EOP^^

I can smell the sweet scent of my own sweat
as I blow high with the breeze and swing,
I pump my legs like a child again my skinny kid’s butt
holds me down, keeps me grounded
when adults threaten to pull me off.
My chain breaks as I tempt to kiss the sun,
my knees have a life of their own bending
as if my very existence depended on it,
and it does, for I’d rather be a nut flying high
over people’s heads than on the ground dying
touching the earth, staining the water
with my unclean mind, my hands washing red
off the money so I can sleep off my power trip
and back stabbing toys.
I was an old soul at five spouting off
about the filth of my generation.
I knew greed was the root of all evil,
competition in close cousin.
I had my doubts about civilization as I found it
and convinced my sister Tricia to wear
flannel jammies zipped to the throat in the summer
to protect us from the babysitter’s bloodsucking
husband while our parents went out for supper.
 
July 2, 1998


^^EOP^^

We lived in the long intolerable called God.
We seemed happy.
 
I don’t mean content I mean heroin happy,
donkey dentures,
 
I mean drycleaned deacons expunging suffering
from Calcutta with the cut of their jaws
 
I mean the always alto and surely anusless angels
divvying up the deviled eggs and jello salad in the after-rapture
 
I mean
to be mean.
 
Dear Lord forgive the love I have
for you and your fervent servants.
 
I have so long sojourned Lord
among the mild ironies and tolerable gods
 
that what comes first to mind
when I’m of a mind to witness
 
is muriatic acid
eating through the veins
 
of one whose pains were so great
she wanted only out, Lord, out.
 
She too worshipped you.
She too popped her little pill of soul.
 
Lord if I implore you please just please leave me alone
is that a prayer that’s every instance answered?
 
I remember one Wednesday witness told of a time
his smack-freaked friends lashed him
 
to the back of a Brahman bull that bucked and shook
until like great bleeding wings the man’s collarbones
 
exploded out of his skin.
Long pause.
 
“It was then,” the man said, “right then…”
Yes. And how long before that man-
 
turned-deacon-turned-scourge-of-sin
began his ruinous and (one would guess) Holy Spirit-less affair?
 
At what point did this poem abandon
even the pretense of prayer?
 
Imagine a man alive in the long intolerable time
made of nothing but rut and rot,
 
a wormward gaze
even to his days’ sudden heavens.
 
There is the suffering existence answers:
it carves from cheeks and choices the faces
 
we in fact are;
and there is the suffering of primal silence,
 
which seeps and drifts like a long fog
that when it lifts
 
leaves nothing
but the same poor sod.
 
Dear God—
 


^^EOP^^

In the next room, Peter’s gloved hands crack
cordoned-off spines: he has been granted
permission, his agent’s call his pedigree.
So the tour itself is only the docent and me.
He is docile, eager to please, leads me
up the stairs and takes me to the bed. The coverlet is authentic, he says.
He lectures me on the heating system, offers
an anecdote of a broken casserole, recites
all of the Welty lore he has rehearsed.
She taught him when he was young, and now
he serves her legend, lets me lean in
toward the books—I cross the line
of what’s allowed, never touching.
He shows me photos—two loves lost, one
a married man—then on the way down,
pauses before a feather in a box,
reciting Yeats’s “Leda and the Swan.”
He begins to weep at Let her drop, adds, Like Welty’s loves! Now I stop—
is he comparing her to the god, or Leda?
He cannot bear her, her Unfulfilled Love.
I cannot bear this either—how dare he conjure up
for her such disappointment, such wasted longing?
I want to be the mirror of her photographs,
to be her figure of my own conjuring. I want
to believe I, too, could be happy here, in this
solitary house, in this small town, amidst
the rows and stacks of books. Untouched.


^^EOP^^

I believe that witness is a magnitude of vulnerability.
That when I say love what I mean is not a feeling
nor promise of a feeling. I believe in attention.
My love for you is a monolith of try.
 
The woman I love pays an inordinate amount
of attention to large and small objects. She is not
described by anything. Because I could not mean anything else,
she knows exactly what I mean.
 
Once upon a time a line saw itself
clear to its end. I have seen the shape
of happiness. (y=mx+b)
I am holding it. It is your hand.


^^EOP^^

a bullet has passed through 
spent the time elsewhere
to need, tenderly, potential
does not need to be bought, cannot
in fact refute the cause, rather catches


^^EOP^^

Prisoners
guilty or not
always look the same when they are released—
patriarchs dethroned.
 
This one just passed through the gate
head bowed despite not being tall
his gestures like a Bedouin’s
entering the tent
he carried on his back all day long.
 
Cotton curtains, stone walls, the smell of burnt lime
take him back to the moment
the cold war ended.
 
The other day his sheet was hung up in the courtyard
as if to flaunt the blood stain
after a wedding night.
 
Faces tarnished by sun
surround him, all eyes and ears:
“What did you dream of last night?”
A prisoner’s dreams
are parchment
made sacred by its missing passages.
 
His sister is still discovering his odd habits:
the bits of bread hidden in pockets and under his bed
the relentless chopping of wood for winter.
 
Why this fear?
What can be worse than life in prison?
 
Having choices
but being unable to choose.


^^EOP^^

the target is a record of the past history of the target  
or forever hold your or told you so complacent
mention repeats numerous trills in memory
sugar and spice in the bag suppressed
supposedly on an axis allow for the idea to rest


^^EOP^^

I’m waiting for a poem,
something rough, not elaborate or out of control,
something undisturbed by curses, a white raven
released from darkness.
 
Words that come naturally, without aiming at anything,
a bullet without a target,
warning shots to the sky
in newly occupied lands.
 
A poem that will well up in my chest
 
and until it arrives
I will listen to my children fighting in the next room
and cast my gaze down at the table
at an empty glass of milk
with a trace of white along its rim
my throat wrapped in silver
a napkin in a napkin ring
waiting for late guests to arrive. . . .
 


^^EOP^^

Among the personal objects inside a 2100-year-old Chinese tomb,
archaeologists found nine acupuncture needles,
four gold and five silver.
Long before knowing why,
ancient doctors knew that pain
must be fought with pain.
 
It’s quite simple: an array of needles pricking your arm
for a properly functioning heart and lungs.
Needles in the feet to ease insomnia and stress.
Needles between your eyes to fight infertility.
A little pain here,
and the effect is felt elsewhere
Once, a group of explorers set out to plant a flag on the South
      Pole,
a needle at the heel of the globe, in the middle of nowhere.
But before the mission was completed
a new world war had begun.
The impact of the needle was felt in the world’s brain,
in the lobe responsible for short-term memory.
When Russia used ideology as acupuncture—a needle over the
     Urals—
it impacted the pancreas and the control of blood sugar:
America paid tenfold for whiskey during Prohibition,
and at post offices, copies of Joyce’s
“immoral” Ulysses were stored for burning.
The universe functions as a single body. Stars form lines of
     needles
carefully pinned to a broad hairy back.
Their impact is felt in the digestive tract, each day
a new beginning. How can you begin a new day
not having fully absorbed yesterday’s protein?
I was a child when my first teacher
mispronounced my last name twice. That pricked me
      like a needle.
A small needle in the earlobe. And suddenly,
my vision cleared—
I saw poetry,
the perfect disguise.
 
 


^^EOP^^

Last time I saw myself die is when police killed Jessie Hernandez 
                                      A 17 year old brown queer // who was sleeping in their car 
Yesterday I saw myself die again // Fifty times I died in Orlando // & 
                        I remember reading // Dr. José Esteban Muñoz before he passed 
I was studying at NYU // where he was teaching // where he wrote shit 
                        That made me feel like a queer brown survival was possible // But he didn’t 
Survive & now // on the dancefloor // in the restroom // on the news // in my chest 
                        There are another fifty bodies that look like mine // & are 
Dead // & I’ve been marching for Black Lives & talking about police brutality 
                        Against Native communities too // for years now // but this morning 
I feel it // I really feel it again // How can we imagine ourselves // We being black native 
                        Today // Brown people // How can we imagine ourselves 
When All the Dead Boys Look Like Us? // Once I asked my nephew where he wanted 
                        To go to College // What career he would like // as if 
The whole world was his for the choosing // Once he answered me without fearing 
                        Tombstones or cages or the hands from a father // The hands of my lover 
Yesterday praised my whole body // Made angels from my lips // Ave Maria 
                        Full of Grace // He propped me up like the roof of a cathedral // in NYC 
Before we opened the news & read // & read about people who think two brown queers 
                        Can’t build cathedrals // only cemeteries // & each time we kiss 
A funeral plot opens // In the bedroom I accept his kiss // & I lose my reflection 
                        I’m tired of writing this poem // but I want to say one last word about 
Yesterday // my father called // I heard him cry for only the second time in my life 
                        He sounded like he loved me // it’s something I’m rarely able to hear 
& I hope // if anything // his sound is what my body remembers first. 
 


^^EOP^^

Lord of wondrous workings, grant us understanding—       now at the hour of closing.
 
A chosen few are called,
     their eyes toward you lifting—
they stand exalted in their trembling       now, at the hour of closing.
 
They pour forth their souls;
     erase, then, their straying—
and grant them, Lord, your absolution       now at the hour of closing.
 
Be a shelter for them
     through all their suffering;
consign them only to rejoicing       now, at the hour of closing.
 
Show them your compassion,
     in your justice turning
on all who brought oppression to them—       now at the hour of closing.
 
Recall their fathers’ merit
     and count it as merit for them;
renew their days as once they were,       now, at the hour of closing.
 
Call for the year of grace—
     the remnant flock’s returning
to Oholìbah and Oholàh—       now at the hour of closing.
 


^^EOP^^

Work out. Ten laps.
Chin ups. Look good.
 
Steam room. Dress warm.
Call home. Fresh air.
 
Eat right. Rest well.
Sweetheart. Safe sex.
 
Sore throat. Long flu.
Hard nodes. Beware.
 
Test blood. Count cells.
Reds thin. Whites low.
 
Dress warm. Eat well.
Short breath. Fatigue.
 
Night sweats. Dry cough.
Loose stools. Weight loss.  
Get mad. Fight back.
Call home. Rest well. 
Don't cry. Take charge.
No sex. Eat right. 
Call home. Talk slow.
Chin up. No air. 
Arms wide. Nodes hard.
Cough dry. Hold on. 
Mouth wide. Drink this.
Breathe in. Breathe out. 
No air. Breathe in.
Breathe in. No air. 
Black out. White rooms.
Head hot. Feet cold. 
No work. Eat right.
CAT scan. Chin up. 
Breathe in. Breathe out.
No air. No air. 
Thin blood. Sore lungs.
Mouth dry. Mind gone. 
Six months? Three weeks?
Can't eat. No air. 
Today? Tonight?
It waits. For me. 
Sweet heart. Don't stop.
Breathe in. Breathe out.


^^EOP^^




"The wild will keep calling and calling forever in your ears. You
cannot escape the 'little voices.'"
—Frank Wild



1.
Here I rest, in South Georgia.
A few feet of evolution away
lie the graves of whale hunters, pointing north.
A white fence shields them from elephant seals
and their apocalyptic screams that each day warn
of the end of the world, or maybe the beginning. . .
 
I survived five expeditions to the Pole.
The one before last, “Imperial Trans-Antarctica,” nearly killed me.
For two years I put up with the ice—no man can reap or sow
       these fields.
And, unlike farmers, I didn’t even need to ask God for rain,
because ice is sated
and more desolate than the Sahara.
 
I survived distance. Wrote one message after another
beginning with a capital letter and a "PS." at the end.
My own personal post office under my pillow
closed for two years already, on holiday.
 
I survived six month-long polar days and nights;
to this day, I don't know which one was worse.
 
My epitaph is simple. Carved in granite:
                         FRANK WILD
                         18 April 1873
                         19 August 1939
                         “Shackleton’s
                          Right Hand Man”
From those cast away here
by a defect in the engine of the ship
or nostalgia of the womb.
  
2.
Ah yes. . . in the beginning was the ship. The ship stuck in ice.
      Endurance. 
Ships are women. They prefer soft seas.
In the best-case scenario, she’s called La Santa Maria 
and she throws you, like Columbus, on some foreign shore.
 
But if you get too close to her. . .
 
The very day after
we washed her deck with warm water and soap,
warmed her arteries with gin,
stroked her lower back with our surrogate songs,
shaved our beards and exposed the illiterate lines on our faces,
she took off.
 
And from the shore,
we saw how she broke her ribs, sinking,
aft first, so fast we didn’t even have time to pray,
leaving behind her ash-tree fragrance
and faux pearls on the water.
 
“Such a woman!” someone laughed bitterly,
“She knows when to leave so as not to be forgotten.”
  
3.
A woman, naturally, has no business there.
Antarctica is a masculine continent—
male penguins keep the eggs warm,
the moon stands up on the street to urinate
after being kicked out of the tavern,
the cold like a cut-throat razor, dulled for three thousand years,
and the sled dogs, the Huskies,
we kill with a single bullet
so they won’t starve to death. In this way
we instill a little character into the new land
before the arrival of Conquistadors, thieves,
assassins, missionaries, prostitutes,
the first invading army of every continent.
 
Antarctica is a man’s continent,
because only a man chooses to break into the darkness of the mind
by conquering the body,
as Amundsen and Scott did, their glory
reaching to the apex of ecstasy.
Zero degree of geographical latitude,
utter collapse. 
 
4.
Hunger is overestimated. The stomach functions much like the
     brain:
when it has nothing to think about, it feeds off memories.
It can last three days just thinking of a single biscuit.
But those who have a better memory, meaning a much stronger
     acidity,
can go on for months
remembering a slice of prosciutto, two fried eggs,
sweetly folding their eyelids like napkins after a meal.
 
Then hallucinations begin. Banquets. Easter supper.
Feet move impatiently under the table;
the scent of rosemary wafts from a platter
and two clean serving hands with burns here and there.
That's when you feel grief-stricken
and you attack the seals and penguins with your
alpine knives and shoes like a madman
in an empty amphitheater.
Or is this, too, a hallucination,
and in this case not ours
but Antarctica's?
 
And when clarity finally returns,
both stomach and brain
notice only their own deep wrinkles.
 
 
5.
Blubber, blubber, seal's blubber.
Blubber that keeps your spirits alive, rendering it for fuel, for light,
blubber to mask the body's foul odor,
—a mixture of doubt, hope, and ammonia.
And if you have nothing better to do,
think of a cow's thigh hanging at the butcher's,
its delicate streak of fat
like a silk ribbon.
 
I survived even this sarcasm.
 
And every night, before bed,
we read recipes to each other
one of a few things we secretly rescued
from the ship before she sank,
as if these items were her lingerie.
 
What a show it was!
What pathos in pronouncing prosciutto, sugar, omelet!
What sensuality in milk, parsley, cinnamon!
We made these words up ourselves.
Nothing exists until its moment of absence.
 
But first, in order to warm up our mouths
like actors before going on stage,
we'd repeat mechanically, palates dry,
"Bless us, O Lord,
and this food we've received through your mercy.”
 
 
6.
It was the Romans who spoiled the word
studying rhetoric
before anatomy and mathematics: Vir bonus dicendi peritus
“The good man skilled in speaking" (Marcus Porcius Cato)
 
But in Antarctica, words are measured differently: by calories!
With a simple greeting you lose five calories,
just as many to keep a fire burning for a full minute.
And a Ciceronian argument can consume a whole day’s
      nutrition;
think carefully before you open your mouth.
 
The word is overestimated.
 
Sometimes it’s enough to avert your eyes from your shoes
to imply “gangrene”;
and a vague exchange of glances between men
is enough to understand that the ice is cracking beneath your feet
and death is closer than your fingers.
  
7.
Stretched smooth from end to end—such is Antarctica. In fact,
even a baby’s skin looks withered by comparison.  
No emotions. No regrets. No warnings.
Either fight or die.
 
My father was like this more or less. A teacher at a village school.
In classrooms that smelled of sheep-wool pullovers
drying on the body. And eyes that moved freely
in their hollows, like toes
inside an older sibling’s shoes.
 
Unlike the Romans,
my father preached about justice and honor
his hands folded behind his back.
His shoulders seemed twice as wide
as his worn jacket.
 
I inherited his sharp, gray gaze
and his soft voice.
Eyes that say “Go” and a voice that says “Stay.”
You never know which one to trust.
 
 
8.
And mother? Oh, she was simply Captain Cook’s niece,
—the great James Cook—
from morning to night
when she washed, swept, dug potatoes from the garden,
fixed her husband’s tie on Sundays
even from her bed, while in labor.
She never spoke of this. As it wasn’t necessary.
People speak of what they have, not what they are.
 
She was a tailor. Measured everyone's perimeter with a glance;
erred only on the width of one’s neck, an unknown strength.
Her large scissors followed
the white chalk line on the cloth so precisely. "Snip!"
She said little. Her silence followed the white outlines
of another tailor,
over a fabric much older than she was.
 
But now that I think of it,
how did the poor woman respond to her friends asking,
"Where is your son?"
"He's exploring the world."
"And what does he bring back from there?"
"Himself, alive, I hope."
"What's the point of returning empty-handed after two years?”
 
Was she at least a little proud of me? Of her Frank?
Certainly not. She was Captain Cook's niece.
The past always conquers.
 
 
9.
I was the first of thirteen children.
And as a rule, each of them
eyed one of my belongings.
One eyed my bed near the window
that overlooked the water where frogs lived
and asparagus grew on the shore.
Another eyed my green jacket bought with borrowed money,
poker cards, a fishing net,
my wicker chair with the damaged back.
Another whistled my favorite tune:
"What Will We Do with a Drunken Sailor?”
without reaching the refrain.
And yet another envied the basement
—that place I occupied in my father’s heart—
 with its elm door hanging by a single hinge.
 
But the time hasn't come to leave home just yet,
until your own brother begins to use your shaving kit
and dreams of the same girl.
 
 
10.
What shaving kit? Antarctica makes you grow a double-beard
as if you were a hundred-year-old grave.
And, while you remember wasting time waiting in line at
      barber's
another beard grows, a red one.
 
Here, each body part works for itself:
the stomach, hands, intestines, eyes. . .
The unity of the body is overestimated, too.
 
Only skin pulls everything together like a sled.
The skin? Which skin? Man loses his first skin
to his first love, like the snake early in spring
on a thorn-apple bush that blocks the way.
From that point on he stops counting the rest.
  
11. 
I don’t know why it was named “Elephant Island,”
when it answered the ocean with the cries of a she-wolf.
We could only make out her sly teats under her belly. After
      some time,
if she didn’t kill us first, we’d begin to cry like wolves ourselves.
 
Twenty-two people. Packed next to one another under two
      inverted boats
like notes in Bach’s “Come, Sweet Death, Come Blessed Rest,”
with more pauses, a dramatic suffocation between breaths.
A dry, calcic cough was a sign of life. Or the delirious mutterings
        of someone
dreaming aloud of “ice” in the middle of ice,
after they had cut off his toes.
 
But the hardest moment arrives in the morning,
when, with shut eyes and plugged nostrils,
as if drinking your own urine
you recycle the same lie for four months straight:
“Men, pack up your stuff! The boss might arrive today!”
 
And they obeyed me. Packed carefully each day from the start,
leaving nothing shap in the folds of their bags,
nothing that would spoil the line between fact and fiction.
 
It was a time when
routine grew more powerful than hope.
 
 
12.
Fish in the ocean toyed with our citizenship.
On the seventh mile, we left our medals behind, class ranks,
along with the dogs, potatoes, and a camera.
We made fire out of money
and kept only a single metal coin each
so that archaeologists might trace us more easily centuries later.
On Elephant Island, we had to bid farewell even to tobacco,
tobacco which reminded us of village alleyways
and walks home after midnight.
 
Time glided above us without touching a single strand of our
     hair—
nonexistent, as if gliding above ancient cities,
exposing the solemnity of our white bones
and crickets on absent walls.
 
That’s when the ten commandments deserted us:
“Do not steal,” “Do not lie,” “Do not covet,”
“Honor your parents”. . .
save one of them perhaps,
the one about the holiness of Sunday.
 
We already had nothing. We belonged to no one.
An entirely new species: HOMO ANTARCTICUS.
A scientific proof that “forgotten” and “free”
mean the same thing.
 
 
13.
Two years after returning from the world of the dead,
you find your house taken over by another tenant
and the rent tripled,
the commemorative plaque nailed to the gate:
“Here lived F.W.”
And your lover, or better, ex-lover,
for the same reason,
in the arms of another
three times more handsome.
 
You see your own image sold at an auction.
Artifact. Original. “Brrramp. Sold!” The price so high
you can’t afford it. But even if you could,
you're an illegal customer,
holding a death certificate in your hand.
 
And you find your parents turned into winter trees
their eyes fixed on a large cloud of plaster.
They don’t expect visitors. Best not disturb them.
Let their leaves fall quietly where they will
let the crow's nest remain in the armpit of a branch,
where it has always been.
 
Perhaps you should take a shortcut, start over.
Or you know what? There’s a war going on nearby, they say.
Go there instead!
But this time die better.
 
 
14.
War’s never satisfied with flesh;
Fresh, branded, smoked,
with or without blood
blue blood, dark, thick, whatever kind.
And frozen blood like yours
could store at minus 40 degrees Celsius,
viruses from 1914 unscathed,
and the map of the old Empire         
and Scott's hurt ego 
and old coins minted with the head of Edward VII,
and Browning’s poetry and the epic of the unknown,
like an envelope inside an envelope,
all making you the ideal candidate.
 
Back on the ship, ammunition everywhere,
sailing through the cold Northern seas
where you had to learn a new language.
A new language is like a fish:
first, you need to remove its spine
in order to chew it.
 
Unlike in Antarctica,
one’s purpose in war is clear: kill or be killed,
though sometimes it’s the same difference.
 
Baltic nights gave you what Antarctica refused you:
the other half of the celestial sphere.
You meet Vera, the widow of a tea plantation owner,
a character out of a Baroque novel, her pupils blurred with dusk,
and the ritual of mourning fitted perfectly to her body
like a final journey. 
 
 
15.
A man charmed by a glacier,
who knows too well the flawless forms of her body,
feels her eavesdropping gaze even when asleep,
her clean and distant breath
and her heart, a piece of ice, that melts inside a cigarette case
heated for drinking water,
finds it difficult to marry a real woman,
to marry Vera.
And Africa.
 
I bought land. Barren. Hundreds of acres. In Zululand.
I didn’t fare well with tobacco. Planted cotton instead,
chose bodily peace rather than meditation.
My nearest neighbor lived 45 miles away. White, of course.
And my fate, never blended with the blacks,
those beautiful statues, wrapped in straw.
I heard them nod off during lunch break,
like the oars of a boat,
in complete sync.
They knew where they were heading.
But I didn’t.
 
And I was right. It didn’t take long
before drought, floods, worms
destroyed everything. The bank left me only my own beard
and the malarial shadow of a baobab. Apart from other things,
Vera filled out divorce papers. The woman in the yellow dress,
yellow as quinine, yellow as the sigh of a hinge at dusk,
the woman married to the hero
who now can’t even manage a small plot of land.
 
 
16.
The man in front of me
—my master I call "Boss"—
is newly shaved, and dressed in a striped tie and jacket
as if the Prince of Wales or Fred Astaire,
a style that arrives here two years late.
He asks me to serve whiskey to clients at the bar
and chat them up
using their jargon, gestures,
sentences uninterrupted by mosquitoes,
and the abstract rhetoric of the Depression years.
And, to be frank,
he pays me for the latter.
 
But what do I know,
what does a survivor know about the art of living,
for which new instincts are needed, new muscles
and other kinds of heart valves?
 
Furthermore,
how can I obey such a spick-and-span boss,
having known the smoky gods of Antarctica
who recognize each other solely by the nose
and can end rebellions with a glance
and count the deaths as members of the crew?
How can I take orders from a boss whose name isn't Shackleton?
 
 
17.
"Second in command,” “Lieutenant,” “Shackleton’s right hand”
 
What did she see so clearly in me,
my drama teacher in elementary school
when she'd always assign me the role of Father Joseph,
of Gaspar the Magi offering Jesus frankincense,
or of John the Baptist always there to clear the path?
What did she see in my metallic pupils, baritone voice,
      infrequent speech
as if scissors, bandage, and iodine
inside a first aid kit?
 
Under Antarctica's naked sky, each of us followed his own star.
Even the carpenter, his own heraldic calling.
You didn’t need much to feed them;
 just a few crusts of insomnia and the tents' punctured holes.
 
My star was weak; you could hardly see it
hidden behind another larger, troubled star
like a calm valley that appears behind jagged peaks
more attractive when absent.
 
 
18.
What happened afterward can be told in a few words:
I worked in a mine; earth’s warm heart,
happened to be crueler than her frozen brain.
I laid railroad tracks South, always toward the Unknown.
It was like playing only two strings on a violin: joy and sorrow,
fatefully blending at the horizon.
 
I repaired houses. Another waste of time.
I never understood their weak points,
just as you can't make out eyes from genitals or mouth
in some underwater creatures.
 
And when I was left penniless,
I gave lectures about Antarctica,
water gurgling in my gullet every five words, for those few
who listened patiently to an adventure of survival.
 
Then Bea arrived. Or sweet Beatrice.
It was easy to grant her what I had left in my heart
—that set of heavy museum keys—
with no fear she might lose them.
 
Tired lungs and liver
could barely follow my split image
of bust and bottle of booze.
Like a prophet in the last circle of Dante’s Inferno,
I carried my own decapitated head in hand.
 
My ashes were lost at the base of a church. No one
      thought of them.
It was a time of war. Another world war. The second
one not knowing what to do with her own ashes either. 
 
19.
Some of us died in the war.  Others took to the sea again,
the gray, cracked waters of the South,
decks perspiring fuel and alcohol.
Our random itineraries. Full-time melancholics.
 
For months in Antarctica,
we waited for our shadow to return
and consumed that question you ask yourself only once in your
     lifetime,
the way one consumes chickenpox.
 
And the rest of the time,
we counted the scars left on our faces,
with a gesture you could call indifferent and epic,
or childlike.
 


^^EOP^^

I look for you early,
my rock and my refuge,
         offering you worship
     morning and night;
before your vastness
I come confused
          and afraid, for you see
     the thoughts of my heart.
 
What could the heart
and tongue compose,
         or spirit’s strength
     within me to suit you?
But song soothes you
and so I’ll give praise
          to your being as long
     as your breath-in-me moves.
 


^^EOP^^

all my desire is here before you,
     whether or not I speak of it:
I'd seek your favor, for an instant, then die—
     if only you would grant my wish.
I'd place my spirit in your hand,
     then sleep—and in that sleep find sweetness.
 
I wander from you—and die alive;
     the closer I cling—I live to die.
How to approach I still don't know,
     nor on what words I might rely.
Instruct me, Lord: advise and guide me.
     Free me from my prison of lies.
 
Teach me while I can bear the affliction—
     do not, Lord, despise my plea;
before I've become my own burden
     and the little I am weighs on me,
and against my will, I give in
     as worms eat bones that weary of me.
 
I'll come to the place my forefathers reached,
     and by their place of rest find rest.
Earth's back to me is foreign;
     my one true home is in its dust.
Till now my youth has done what it would:
     When will I provide for myself?
 
The world He placed in my heart has kept me
     from tending to my end and after.
How could I come to serve my Lord,
     when I am still desire's prisoner?
How could I ask for a place on high,
     when I know the worm will be my sister?
 
How at that end could my heart be glad,
     when I do not know what death will bring?
Day after day and night after night
     reduce the flesh upon me to nothing.
Into the winds they'll scatter my spirit.
     To dust they'll return the little remaining.
 
What can I say—with desire my enemy,
     from boyhood till now pursuing me:
What is Time to me but your Will?
     If you're not with me, what will I be?
I stand bereft of any virtue:
     only your justice and mercy shield me.
 
But why should I speak, or even aspire?
     Lord, before you is all my desire.


^^EOP^^

You can't fake it. You know when I fail
          to achieve the expected: palm the becoming-
                         comatose bullfrog, legs collapsing as they may,
and chuck it (we used to say) high as you can.
 
Let it fly stone-like to the skylight in the low
          dome of fog—another requirement of the game:
                    a foggy day and a bullfrog and you, Vincent.
The old code goes back and forth between us
 
as we take our turns, childhood pals, engaged
           by the game we once called Kamikaze—now,
                         a nameless ceremony. Nameless not because
a boy's play calcifies in a man's conviction;
 
not because, despite our promise, you've become
          a mid-rank fighter pilot, and I a minor poet;
                        and not because it's too unpleasant to name
what brings to hand that astonished muscle
 
only to leave it, later, sprawled on the current.
          The perfect toss sends the critter shattering
                         for an instant, beyond fog, into the invisible.
Disappearance is success. Once you said, "My insides
 
tickle whenever it happens," and so I know
          you've been tickled five times, and I three.
                    That's the score; the score matters little.
The name is gone because we're from here,
 
and, being native, cannot visit how it is
         that an urge to which we tend tends to us—
                       how we are cruel, inscrutable, indefensible,
yet holy. How we send up bodies of praise from
 
our right hand, only to gather eventual elegies—
          flesh stunned still as words—in our left.
                    Once again the center of the heavens
is earth. We've thrown as high as we can
 
for as long as we can remember, only to await
          some return: a revelation, plummet, explosive
                         splash. So it is that two grown men
may stand again in stillness, awaiting word,
 
friends who glimpse for seconds at a time
          earth as it is in heaven, ankle-deep
                          in Rowan Creek with eyes uplifted,
reflecting the fog to the fog itself.


^^EOP^^

1.
I was born on a Tuesday in April.
I didn't cry. Not because I was stunned. I wasn't even mad.
I was the lucky egg, trained for gratitude
inside the belly for nine months straight.
Two workers welded bunk beds at the end
of the delivery room. One on top of the other.
My universe might have been the white lime ceiling,
or the embodiment of Einstein's bent space
in the aluminum springs of the bed above
that curved toward the center. 
Neither cold, nor warm.
"It was a clear day," my mother told me. 
It's hard to believe
there were a few romantic evenings
when I was conceived, a buzz in the retina
and red-laced magma
decadently peeling off
a silver candlestick.
Infants' cries and milk fever
turned to salt from the stench of bleach—
abrasive, unequivocal.
With a piece of cloth wrapped on the end of a stick,
the janitor casually extends the negative space
of the black-and-white tiled floor
like a mouth of broken teeth, a baleen of darkness
sieving out new human destinies.
 
 
2.
1968. At the dock, ships arriving from the East
dumped punctured rice bags, mice
and the delirium of the Cultural Revolution.
A couple of men in uniform
cleared out the church
in the middle of the night.
The locals saw the priest in the yard
wearing only his underwear, shivering from the cold.
Their eyes, disillusioned, questioned one another:
"Wasn't he the one who pardoned our sins?"
 
Icons burned in front of their eyes,
icons and the holy scriptures.
Witnesses stepped farther back,
as if looking at love letters
nobody dared to claim.
 
Crosses were plucked from graves. And from each mouth
spilled irreversible promises:
mounds of dirt the rains would smooth down
sooner or later.
 
Children dragged church bells by the tongue.
(Why didn’t they think of this before?)
Overnight, the dome was demolished, instantly revealing
a myriad of nameless stars that chased the crowd
like flies on a dead horse.
 
And what could replace Sunday mass now?
Women brought cauldrons into the yard.
Men filled up their pipes; smoke rose
into the air, against gravity's pull.
Nails in worn out shoes exposed stigmata
that bled in the wrong places—
a new code of sanctification,
of man, by man.
 
 
3.
"Read!"—I was told. Who said that?
Angel Gabriel, or my first-grade teacher
who had dark roots underneath her bleached curls?
 
Language arrived fragmentary
split in syllables, spasmodic
like code in times of war.
 
"Continue where your classmate left off!"
A long sentence tied us to one another
without connotation as if inside an idiom.
Someone would get to read the noun, another the verb,
a third one a pronoun. . .
I always got the exclamation mark at the end—
a mere grimace, a small curse.
 
A tall cast-iron stove below the portrait of the dictator,
puffing smoke from its temples, enough heat for everyone.
On the blackboard,    
leftover diphthongs from yesterday or the day before
rubbed against one another like kittens.
 
After dusk, I looked for another language outside the window,
my eyes glued to a constellation
(they call these types "dreamers")
my discovery possibly a journey into the past,
toward a galaxy already dead, nonexistent,
the kind of news that needs millions of years
to reach me.
 
"Read!"—the angel shook me for a third time
her finger pointing to an arbitrary word
a million light years apart from its object. (It didn't matter who
       was first).
Negative space sketched my onomatopoeic profile
of body and shadow in an accidental encounter.
 
 
4.
Language is erosive.
It makes us recluses,
a wind through the canyons
carving our paleontological eras
for everyone to read.
 
Under the revised testament of my skin
bellows a gold-cast bull, an alluring object,
a need for attention.
Then comes the unleavened bread and a last supper,
which, remarkably, is repeated several times
between ice ages.
Lower yet, Sodom.
I recognize it from the stench of sulfur.
 
I hold my nose. Freud would have done the same.
And then Cain,
a crow taught him how to bury his own brother. . .
And at the bottom,
Adam’s gentlemanlike sin
under which scientists
discover earlier epochs of famine.
 
Between unidentified layers,
wanderings in the sand, the search for a new prophet. . .
 
I try to understand my people.
Their language is plain. Some words,
were actually never uttered, like pages stuck together
in a book fresh off the press
and long after it sits on a shelf.
 
This, too, lives inside me
within insidious bubbles of air, negative
spaces where I can find little historical rest,
but also where utter ruin may originate.
  
5.
Little left of the snow three days ago.
Its blanket ripped away, exposing
dog shit and the bruises of routine.
 
Negative space gives form to the woods
and to the mad woman—a silhouette
of the goddess Athena
wearing a pair of flip flops,
an owl on her shoulder.
 
It’s minus zero. The factory’s gate gnashes its teeth
behind the back of the last worker. Blowing noses, shivering,
     mucus. . .
A virus circulates through the workplace,
secretly, intimately touching one person after another,
a current of sensuality.
It softens the tone. 
But nothing unites them more than their frailty,
The one-sizes-fits-all shoes you must grow accustomed to
By filling the extra space with cotton,
Or curling your ill-fitting toes.
  
6.
In Halil’s yard,
rules were sacrilege.
His eight children entertained themselves
by carrying famine on their shoulders,
recalling St. Bartholomew’s flayed skin.
Starving, filthy, hazel-eyed—
three qualities that unexpectedly coalesce
in the bright light, strung together like sneezes.
 
One’s famine was another’s consolation.
“Look at them! It’s a sin for us to complain.
They’re even worse off than us!”
But even Halil found his own consolation
in the old woman Zyra, “barren and paralyzed,”
the root origin of despair.
 
This was our highlands landscape,
hierarchical, where each family
would make out a different expiration date
on the roof below their own.
  Schadenfreude was the only river
that could turn mills.
 
But if this hierarchy shifted,
and our roof gave signs of ruin,
my mother would plant tulips in the garden,
white tulips, our false image,
a scarecrow to keep predators away.
 
 
7.
Nearly nothing was mentioned in the letters he sent from prison,
just two lines, on top of the page:
“I am well. . .” and “If you can,
please send me a pair of woolen socks.”
 
From them, I learned to read between the lines:
negative spaces, the unsaid, gestures,
insomnia that like a hat’s shadow
fails to shade your chin and ears.
 
And in the photographs’ white background,
acrophobia adds to the color of their eyes: blue,
green, gray, and ultimately, chesnut brown,
as, earthward, we lower our gaze.
 
I learned to read the empty spaces the dead left
behind—a pair of folded glasses
after the reading’s done and discourse commences.
 
Or the musical chairs game called "love,"
where there are less empty seats than people.
If you don’t want to be the last one standing
you must predict when the music will stop.
(Who, though, has really succeeded?)
 
Perhaps a little practice can be useful in this case.
I don’t mean squatting, jumping, stretching,
but listening to the same music every day from the start,
the same miserable vinyl record
so that you’ll recognize its cracks
before it recognizes yours.
 
 
8.
Midnight. Snoring,
meaningless sounds that stain the side of the wall
that belongs to no one.
So where are we? What dimension?
Who foots the bill at a time like this
without lambs or sinners,
when even angels record nothing?
 
The street’s clearly visible
under the neon 24-hour-service sign
above the funeral home.
There was a music shop next to it
that closed down a few months ago;
the shop shared a wall with the funeral home,
shared the same water pipes and the same gate to heaven.
But the coffins won,
the wide-shouldered coffins that narrow down
in the shape of a mummy, not a human.
Wood of the highest quality, swears the owner,
and pure silk inside, pleated like a stomach
that can digest even a bulldozer.
 
When asleep we're simply five limbs. Starfish.
If you cut one limb, it will grow back.
Even a single limb could recreate us from the beginning,
     a single hope.
Negative space is always fertile.
 
 
9.
No one knows if it was simply a matter of mixed
or some other reason why I used to see
what I wasn't supposed to see—
the ending of things.
It wasn’t a mystical gift, but like a blood clot
in the darkness of a vein, I held on to reason,
as it circulated from the bottom up
and not the other way around as we were told.
I used to start from the edges
and with my left hand or a croupier’s stick
gather the balls and dice from the corners
and then watch the bettors
as neither a winner nor a loser.
There's nothing sillier
than watching a film in reverse
where after the climax, the protagonists
are replaced by circumstances,
and circumstances replaced by minor characters,
their tongues plastered behind a single, fatal smirk
Life and my short lunar calendar slipped away
like carbon paper sending off as much light as necessary,
skipping the details, the contrast and sharp colors.
Lunar time is short. Until the actual end,
there are years enough, the negative spaces.
What to do with them when the verb
has already been uttered, a conclusive sentence
with Latin syntax, or more than that:
didactic.


^^EOP^^

For all
the pain
 
passed down
the genes
 
or latent
in the very grain
 
of being;
for the lordless
 
mornings,
the smear
 
of spirit
words intuit
 
and inter;
for all
 
the nightfall
neverness
 
inking
into me 
even now,
my prayer
 
is that a mind
blurred
 
by anxiety
or despair
 
might find
here
 
a trace
of peace.
 


^^EOP^^

Send your spirit
     to revive our corpses,
and ripple the longed-for
     land again.
 
The crops come from you;
     you’re good to all—
and always return
     to restore what has been.


^^EOP^^

I grew up in a big house
where weakness and expressions of joy
deserved punishment.
And I was raised on the via politica
with the grease of yesterday’s glories,
a thick grease collected under arctic skies.
I was lit up. My notebooks, my hair, my heart reeked of
smoke.
 
That’s when we saw each other clearly.
Or rather, what remained of us.
Damaged like lottery numbers
scratched away with a blade.
 
How different we were!
 
Those with round faces were righteous;
those with narrow faces were cautious.
 
One listened secretly to Puccini,
another to silence, the music’s music.
The oldest one declaimed monologues
inside a ten-by-ten-foot cell
he had built for himself.
 
And the mysterious one
simply had diabetes.
 
But how similar we were in severe circumstances!
 
Alarmed like a flock of magpies
that the smallest stone sends into the sky
toward the mouth of the abyss.
 
Then it became obvious there wasn’t enough space for everyone.
We separated. Some went on living in via verbum,
telling of what they knew, what they witnessed,
and so, through their narrative,
creating their own grease.
 
The others crossed over the ocean.
 
And those in particular who went farthest away
never speak of their annoying history
of wretched survival, burying it
in the darkest crevices on their being.
Unfortunately, as with perfume, its scent
lingers there for much, much longer.
 


^^EOP^^

GUITH
              a greylag morning,
              the sea a conscious blue.  
CALF SOUND
              orca
              in a sea blue room,
              breathing pearls that rise to the surface.  
GROATHA
              the plenum of the shed:
              every part infilled with flutter,
              glass, sheep turd, gusts of damp.  
GREENTOFT
              gunshot punctures a field
              of geese, their clackety rise
              a flock of helicopters.  
THE SETTER STONE
               an old man steps out of the ground
               all lines and angles,
               sun snagged in his beard.   
MILLCROFT
              a tree softened house:
              red willow, alder, pine,
              eucalyptus rooting.  
WARNESS
              a stream hole
              a pure, dense fall; 
              one ocean falling into another.  
PLANTATION
             wren, silver lark, crow
             woody snipe, curlew, hen hawk
             day owl, starling.   
SOUTH END
              the Varagen, beaded with spotlights
              curves through the dark
              round great holes in the sea  
WARD HILL
               climbing with the moon,
               the wind blowing round my mouth—
               a low note, like an owl.   
 


^^EOP^^

It's a weary life, it is, she said:
Doubly blank in a woman's lot:
I wish and I wish I were a man:
Or, better then any being, were not: 
Were nothing at all in all the world,
Not a body and not a soul:
Not so much as a grain of dust
Or a drop of water from pole to pole. 
Still the world would wag on the same,
Still the seasons go and come:
Blossoms bloom as in days of old,
Cherries ripen and wild bees hum. 
None would miss me in all the world,
How much less would care or weep:
I should be nothing, while all the rest
Would wake and weary and fall asleep.


^^EOP^^




                          Outside
                                                outside myself  
                                                                                  there is a world,
                          he rumbled, subject to my incursions
                                          —William Carlos Williams, Paterson



i. 
impossible.  
sterile extrusion
the rigour of its beauty 
its crumpled geometry
worked to defeat. 
light, stopped. 
locked in its form
shuttered and windless 
in dry rifts,
split, furrowed, mottled, creased.  
ii. 
trundling
bulging from behind, 
its too heavy body
its natural carapace 
shelving green,
sinking the sea beneath it 
the difficulty piling up,
rising to the surface.   
iii. 
swirling backward
on blue flowering currents 
rolling up
sudden, in spray and mist 
—like the turning of a page
that leaves us blinded for a second— 
unlocked in a milky scum
half hid, long on its axis 
growing open wounds
of violet, emerald, silver. 
a point of astonishment.
lapses of silence. air.


^^EOP^^

One face looks out from all his canvases,
One selfsame figure sits or walks or leans:
We found her hidden just behind those screens,
That mirror gave back all her loveliness.
A queen in opal or in ruby dress,
A nameless girl in freshest summer-greens,
A saint, an angel — every canvas means
The same one meaning, neither more or less.
He feeds upon her face by day and night,
And she with true kind eyes looks back on him,
Fair as the moon and joyful as the light:
Not wan with waiting, not with sorrow dim;
Not as she is, but was when hope shone bright;
Not as she is, but as she fills his dream.


^^EOP^^

I never said I loved you, John:
        Why will you tease me, day by day,
And wax a weariness to think upon
        With always "do" and "pray"? 
You know I never loved you, John;
        No fault of mine made me your toast:
Why will you haunt me with a face as wan
        As shows an hour-old ghost? 
I dare say Meg or Moll would take
        Pity upon you, if you'd ask:
And pray don't remain single for my sake
        Who can't perform that task. 
I have no heart?—Perhaps I have not;
        But then you're mad to take offence
That I don't give you what I have not got:
        Use your common sense. 
Let bygones be bygones:
        Don't call me false, who owed not to be true:
I'd rather answer "No" to fifty Johns
        Than answer "Yes" to you. 
Let's mar our pleasant days no more,
        Song-birds of passage, days of youth:
Catch at to-day, forget the days before:
        I'll wink at your untruth. 
Let us strike hands as hearty friends;
        No more, no less: and friendship's good:
Only don't keep in view ulterior ends,
        And points not understood 
In open treaty. Rise above
        Quibbles and shuffling off and on:
Here's friendship for you if you like; but love,—
        No, thank you, John.


^^EOP^^




from Pia Arke's exhibition Arctic Hysteria at Greenland's 
National Museum & Archives, Nuuk, 2010



i.
I am in my body. I am here, in front of you. I am the temperature in this room. I am undressed in my nudity; I am the light and shade you feel. I am more like other people than like you. I have before and after. I am my self, entirely and only. My outside and inside are continuous. I am muscle, organ, fluid, bone. I am monumental. You are the only one who sees me. 


ii. 
I am not naked as I am; I am naked as you see me. I am transparent, almost visible. I have a time and a place. I am tribal and exotic. I must always carry objects. You are heroic. I am a complete museum, the story of my own making. I am a mirror to you; you are reflected in the looking at me. At best, I mimic you. You write me. When you leave, I will no longer exist. 


iii. 
I am a single conscious point. I am indifferent. I am unself, like a photogram. I am prehistoric, before definition. Your body falls over me. I have depth and luminescence. I am neither here nor there; I have infinite extension. I live inside the lived world, the light and dark inside my head like dream substance. I am camera obscura, the room itself. I both adore and resist. 
                

^^EOP^^

She stands as pale as Parian statues stand;
Like Cleopatra when she turned at bay,
And felt her strength above the Roman sway,
And felt the aspic writhing in her hand.
Her face is steadfast toward the shadowy land,
For dim beyond it looms the light of day;
Her feet are steadfast; all the arduous way
That foot-track hath not wavered on the sand.
She stands there like a beacon thro' the night,
A pale clear beacon where the storm-drift is;
She stands alone, a wonder deathly white;
She stands there patient, nerved with inner might,
Indomitable in her feebleness,
Her face and will athirst against the light.


^^EOP^^

Three sang of love together: one with lips
   Crimson, with cheeks and bosom in a glow,
Flushed to the yellow hair and finger tips;
   And one there sang who soft and smooth as snow
   Bloomed like a tinted hyacinth at a show;
And one was blue with famine after love,
   Who like a harpstring snapped rang harsh and low
The burden of what those were singing of.
One shamed herself in love; one temperately
   Grew gross in soulless love, a sluggish wife;
One famished died for love. Thus two of three
   Took death for love and won him after strife;
One droned in sweetness like a fattened bee:
   All on the threshold, yet all short of life.


^^EOP^^

I tell my secret? No indeed, not I;
Perhaps some day, who knows?
But not today; it froze, and blows and snows,
And you’re too curious: fie!
You want to hear it? well:
Only, my secret’s mine, and I won’t tell. 
Or, after all, perhaps there’s none:
Suppose there is no secret after all,
But only just my fun.
Today’s a nipping day, a biting day;
In which one wants a shawl,
A veil, a cloak, and other wraps:
I cannot ope to everyone who taps,
And let the draughts come whistling thro’ my hall;
Come bounding and surrounding me,
Come buffeting, astounding me,
Nipping and clipping thro’ my wraps and all.
I wear my mask for warmth: who ever shows
His nose to Russian snows
To be pecked at by every wind that blows?
You would not peck? I thank you for good will,
Believe, but leave the truth untested still. 
Spring’s an expansive time: yet I don’t trust
March with its peck of dust,
Nor April with its rainbow-crowned brief showers,
Nor even May, whose flowers
One frost may wither thro’ the sunless hours. 
Perhaps some languid summer day,
When drowsy birds sing less and less,
And golden fruit is ripening to excess,
If there’s not too much sun nor too much cloud,
And the warm wind is neither still nor loud,
Perhaps my secret I may say,
Or you may guess.


^^EOP^^

A blue anchor grains of grit in a tall sky sewing 
I inch and only sometimes as far as the twisted pole gone in spare colors 
Too late the last express passes through the dust of gardens


^^EOP^^

I’m your guide here. In the evening-dark
morning streets, I point and name.
Look, the sycamores, their mottled,
paint-by-number bark. Look, the leaves
rusting and crisping at the edges.
I walk through Schiller Park with you
on my chest. Stars smolder well
into daylight. Look, the pond, the ducks,
the dogs paddling after their prized sticks.
Fall is when the only things you know
because I’ve named them
begin to end. Soon I’ll have another
season to offer you: frost soft
on the window and a porthole
sighed there, ice sleeving the bare
gray branches. The first time you see
something die, you won’t know it might
come back. I’m desperate for you
to love the world because I brought you here.
 


^^EOP^^

She was my Sunday school teacher
when I was just seven and eight.
He was the newly hired pastor,
 
an albino, alarming sight
with his transparent eyelashes
and mouse-pink skin that looked like it
 
might hurt whenever she caressed
his arm. Since Eva was her name,
to my child’s mind it made great sense
 
that she should fall in love with him.
He was Adán. Before the Fall
and afterward, her invert twin.
 
And she, Eva, was blonde as well,
though more robust, like Liv Ullmann.
I loved her honey hair, her full
 
lips; her green eyes a nameless sin.
(Not that I worried all that much—
the church was Presbyterian.)
 
In Sunday school, her way to teach
us kids to pray was to comment
on all the beauty we could touch
 
or see in our environment.
My hand was always in the air
to volunteer my sentiment.
 
Since other kids considered prayer
a chore, the floor was usually mine.
My list of joys left out her hair
 
but blessed the red hibiscus seen
through the windows while others bowed
their heads. Her heart I schemed to win
 
with purple prose on meringue clouds.
—For who was Adán, anyway,
I thought, but nada spelled backward?
 
While hers, reversed, called out, Ave!  Ave! The lyric of a bird
born and airborne on the same day.
 
But it was night when I saw her
outside the church for the last time:
yellow light, mosquitoes, summer.
 
I shaped a barking dog, a fine
but disembodied pair of wings
with my hands. She spoke in hushed tones
 
to my parents. The next day I would find
myself up north, in a strange house,
without my tongue and almost blind,
 
there was so much to see. This caused
Cuba, my past, to be eclipsed
in time, but Eva stayed, a loss.
  Ave, I learned, meant also this: Farewell! I haven’t seen her since.
 


^^EOP^^




In art, politics, school, church, business, love
 or marriage—in a piece of work or in a career—
strongly spent is synonymous with kept. 
                                                              —Robert Frost



                    
                    She taught me the names of flowers: calendula, ranunculus, Iceland
poppy. And the medicinal uses of herbs: Fenugreek opens up a
stuffy head; goldenseal lubricates the cracked mucous membranes.
Over a circa 1820 American dropleaf table, she told me asparagus
was the broom of the kidneys. I hadn't understood at first and
thought she'd used a German word I pictured as brüm and not as the
little stalks standing on their heads, sweeping out the impurities. I
learned to make the perfect roux for soufflé and became her
efficient assistant in the kitchen—dicing and chopping, she once
told me, with unparalleled patience. Then one day she began to
accidentally break my Depression glassware, and I recalled how
she'd giggled when she told me that in two years of marriage she
had single-handedly decimated her husband's glass collection
dating from 1790 to 1810, including a rare wedding goblet. In the
doorway to the back porch she stated simply that my presence
made her feel strangled, it was nothing I was doing or could do. We
saw a therapist for six years, while my collection dwindled then
became memory. With unparalleled patience I jumped through
hoop after burning hoop, the therapist pointed out, but I heard that
as praise for my prowess and continued to balance Bauer plates on
my nose on command; hold growling tigers off with Windsor dining
room chairs; juggle career, job, hope, and nightly tempests with
unparalleled dexterity. I could reassemble anything: shattered pictures
of us crossing the street with canes in the future, my hand under her
elbow. My heart. But what I lacked, I can see now, was the ability
to dissemble. Finally, she brought home a Cuisinart food processor,
and I started hearing the minutes slicing away with ferocious velocity,
time doing its soft-shoe faster and faster like Fred Astaire on
amphetamines. Memories of flowers and herbs were sacrificed to
the angry god of its vortex. Your voice is like acid on my skin, she
said after twelve years, then grabbed her Cuisinart and left me
behind like so much history.
                

^^EOP^^




Regla lesbia: Flexible rule that may be adjusted to any
body to be measured. Compare regla fija: standard. 
                                                    —The Velázquez Dictionary



I.
In the garden, it’s there. Even when you’re inside you feel it,
as though it were you standing naked among the weeds,
 
the tips of the bougainvillea bursting into flame, your nipples
ruffled like the skin of a lake by a breeze.
 
You worship the invisible body like an old-fashioned lover, from afar,
loving the specificity of space between you.
 
Sometimes at night it stretches out on the empty side
of the bed, stares at you with the length of its invisible surface.
 
Every contour of your body not filled by you is molded
by the attentiveness of the invisible body, whose breath surrounds
     you.
 
It’s more than prayer it wants—more than language, with its
     conditions.
The invisible body demands you invent new senses to receive it,
 
new places on your body to marvel at its subtlety,
like the eyes of the deaf percussionist that perceive sound.
 
II.
The invisible body wants you to become a satellite dish,
tuned to what exists only because your body calls to it.
 
Like the woman who had her kitchen remodeled to make room
for the microwave she’d entered a contest for. Then won.
 
III.
When asked whether falling in love was about acquisitiveness,
about the ego, the seventy-five-year-old poet
 
responded that the ego had nothing to do with it;
it was the need for union with the beloved.
 
Rumi asks, Who is it we spend our entire lives loving? 
 
IV.
How, then, do you measure the invisible body,
which resists commitment but is faithful?
 
Is it clear who the beloved is, when no clear
body exists that can be measured against a standard?
 
V.
The invisible body sometimes acquires a body—it’s so convincing,
it takes you a while to figure out it’s really the invisible body.
 
Like someone who has been reading your journal,
it has decoded from your petty, daily complaints the open sesame
 
that slides the stone from the hidden cave’s opening
and cleans you out while you sleep, leaving a sarcastic note.
 
It wants you to know it was doing you a favor, besides,
how else did you think you’d discover the cave’s precise location?
 
When Aphrodite sharpens you, you sacrifice a little of yourself,
willingly, as a knife does, so that you may become better at it.
 
VI.
This is the point at which the invisible body speaks
in italics, the Ouija board of poetry.
  In my mind, says the invisible body, that time capsule shuttling through space, I hold, in all the languages of the world,
  your love, rushed like holographic platters to a table, steaming into the future long after you’ve ceased to shine,
  the silver faces of your beloved bobbing out of the darkness, the black velvet pillow of your life on which you offer them for view.
 
VII.
The invisible body is created out of your longing, your longing
compressing invisible molecules together into an absence you
     recognize.
 
That is the way one blind man sees the world—after the fact,
in photographs he took, once he had passed through it.


^^EOP^^

V.
                                                  A.
There are no doors between the rooms. The archways bore
through the house like a tunnel through a mountain. The room
one falls into after my parents’ is the largest and serves as two
bedrooms divided by an invisible wall. Half of it is my brother’s
and the other half my sister and I share, but not at first.
 
Earlier, I have a bed to myself on the side of the room nearest the
kitchen. My bed is low and on one side a wooden rail can be
dragged up noisily and clicked into place.
 
          It is here my little goat wakes me, grabbing the covers off
          me with her teeth. We play in the empty pig shelter at the
          far end of the patio while my mother washes clothes in a
          palangana and throws the soapy water across the concrete,
          where it steams.
 
          But my father is a butcher by profession, and my family
          has other plans for my goat: a Sunday picnic at the zoo in
          Havana. The day is huge and blue and breezy. My sister
          teases me for not eating and says my goat is delicious. I
          stray away to watch the monkeys.
 
          I give one of the monkeys near the fence my banana. As it
          finishes peeling it meticulously, another monkey appears
          behind it and shoves the banana into its own mouth. The
          first monkey turns around, slaps it in the face with the
          empty peel, but that monkey isn’t sorry and starts jumping
          and screeching and showing its yellow teeth.
 
          For many years, those monkeys are all I can remember
          about the picnic at the zoo.
 
 
                                                  B.
Later, when my sister and I share a bed on the other side of the room,
I can see the tall narrow cabinet right inside my parents’ room. My
father always puts his hat on top of it as he walks in. And at night,
through the mosquito netting, it is a tall thin man wearing a straw
hat, lurking just outside the door, watching me in a sinister way. The
dead weight of my sister’s habitual leg thrown across my body is no
talisman. I have to keep waking myself up, sweaty and tense, to
make sure he hasn’t moved any closer.
 


^^EOP^^

If the ashes of Mark Twain
lie in the Mississippi River
then I’m sure he does rise up some days
emerge from dark polluted depths
to walk over water to land
and scans the horizon for change
being a curious sort,
he sees the crisis rise again
another war on the horizon
and shakes his craggy head to say no not again
he hopes truth-sayers still exist
who don’t have to wait until their dead.
 
December 2002


^^EOP^^

Because a lie is not a lie if the teller
believes it, the way beautiful things
 
reassure us of the world’s wholeness,
of our wholeness, is not quite a lie.
 
Beautiful things believe their own
narrative, the narrative that makes them
 
beautiful. I almost believed it
until the new mother strapped
 
her infant to her chest, opened
the eighth-floor window,
 
and jumped. My daughter tells me,
after her preschool field trip
 
to the Firefighter Museum,
about the elephant mask, its hose
 
like a trunk, and the video of a man
on fire being smothered in blankets.
 
She asks me if she knows anyone
who got dead in a fire, anyone who
  got fired. When will I die? she asks.
When I was a child, I churched
 
my hands, I steepled my hands,
and all the people were inside,
 
each finger a man, a woman,
a child. When I die, will you
  still love me? she asks. The mother
cracked on the pavement—
 
how did the baby live? Look,
he smiles and totters around
 
the apartment eight stories up.
Beautiful things reassure us
 
of the world’s wholeness:
each child sliding down the pole
 
into the fire captain’s arms.
But what’s whole doesn’t sell
 
itself as such: buy this whole apple,
this whole car. Live this whole life.
 
A lie is not a lie if the teller
believes it? Next time the man
 
in the video will not ignite.
The baby will open like a parachute.
 


^^EOP^^

Recycled over and over
people born look like parents,
grandparents, sister or brother,
or perhaps a throwback
from an earlier ancestor,
the hawk nose, a hard ridged forehead,
the cleft in the chin or a blue birthmark
on the arm, the stomach,
the dainty fresh bum of a newborn
each unique like a snowflake never
can you guess what’s on their mind
sometimes I can feel what they’re feeling
detect it like hairs on the back of my arms,
together we live, talk, walk the same sidewalks,
to die buried in a foreign cemetery
for others to sit upon ponder their
own light, why am I free, what must I do,
does someone love me like I do,
new skin gives way to wrinkles,
hair fades to gray, bones grow strong
then decay, strength seeps every time
one pees, sleeps, ages, loves,
muscles grow then shrink the body
a temporary vessel destination unknown.
 
April 28, 2002


^^EOP^^

I carried my fear of the world
to my children, but they refused it.
 
I carried my fear of the world
on my chest, where I once carried
my children, where some nights it slept
as newborns sleep, where it purred
but mostly growled, where it licked
sweat from my clavicles.
 
I carried my fear of the world
and apprenticed myself to the fear.
 
I carried my fear of the world
and it became my teacher.
I carried it, and it repaid me
by teaching me how to carry it.
 
I carried my fear of the world
the way an animal carries a kill in its jaws
but in reverse: I was the kill, the gift.
Whose feet would I be left at?
 
I carried my fear of the world
as if it could protect me from the world.
 
I carried my fear of the world
and for my children modeled marveling
at its beauty but keeping my hands still—
keeping my eyes on its mouth, its teeth.
 
I carried my fear of the world.
I stroked it or I did not dare to stroke it.
 
I carried my fear of the world
and it became my teacher.
It taught me how to keep quiet and still
 
I carried my fear of the world
and my love for the world.
I carried my terrible awe.
 
I carried my fear of the world
without knowing how to set it down.
 
I carried my fear of the world
and let it nuzzle close to me,
and when it nipped, when it bit
down hard to taste me, part of me
shined: I had been right.
 
I carried my fear of the world
and it taught me I had been right.
I carried it and loved it
for making me right.
 
I carried my fear of the world
and it taught me how to carry it.
 
I carried my fear of the world
to my children and laid it down
at their feet, a kill, a gift.
Or I was laid at their feet.


^^EOP^^

my daughter says. Unless the car could float.
Unless by car you mean boat. Unless the ocean
turned to ice and promised not to crack.
Unless Greenland floated over here,
having lifted its anchor. Unless we could row
our country there. Our whole continent
would have to come along, wouldn't it? Unless
we cut ourselves free. What kind of saw
could we use for that? What kind of oars
could deliver one country to another?
She asks, Why is Greenland called Greenland
if it’s not green? Why is Iceland called
Iceland if it’s greener than Greenland?
Unless it’s a trick, a lie: the name Greenland
is an ad for Greenland. Who would go
promised nothing but ice? Who would cut
her home to pieces and row away for that?


^^EOP^^

   I've become the person who says Darling, who says Sugarpie,     Honeybunch, Snugglebear—and that’s just for my children.     What I call my husband is unprintable. You’re welcome. I am     his sweetheart, and finally, finally—I answer to his call and his     alone. Animals are named for people, places, or perhaps a little     Latin. Plants invite names for colors or plant-parts. When you     get a group of heartbeats together you get names that call out     into the evening’s first radiance of planets: a quiver of cobras,     a maelstrom of salamanders, an audience of squid, or an ostentation     of peacocks. But what is it called when creatures on this earth curl     and sleep, when shadows of moons we don’t yet know brush across     our faces? And what is the name for the movement we make when     we wake, swiping hand or claw or wing across our face, like trying     to remember a path or a river we’ve only visited in our dreams.    


^^EOP^^

   Breathe deep even if it means you wrinkle     your nose from the fake-lemon antiseptic
      of the mopped floors and wiped-down     doorknobs. The freshly soaped necks
      and armpits. Your teacher means well,     even if he butchers your name like
      he has a bloody sausage casing stuck     between his teeth, handprints
      on his white, sloppy apron. And when     everyone turns around to check out
      your face, no need to flush red and warm.     Just picture all the eyes as if your classroom
      is one big scallop with its dozens of icy blues     and you will remember that winter your family     
took you to the China Sea and you sank     your face in it to gaze at baby clams and sea stars     
the size of your outstretched hand. And when     all those necks start to crane, try not to forget     
someone once lathered their bodies, once patted them     dry with a fluffy towel after a bath, set out their clothes     
for the first day of school. Think of their pencil cases     from third grade, full of sharp pencils, a pink pearl eraser.     
Think of their handheld pencil sharpener and its tiny blade.     


^^EOP^^

amaryllis comes in many flavors
snow sometimes slants
when will politics make improvements? 
strawberry amaryllis walks right in
snarling at snowfall
saying flowers don’t abuse women 
female rabbi demands ancient answers
untranslatable tablets found
there’s more knowledge in flowers 
aren’t all rabbis ancient females
snow’s setting in
untranslatable strawberry soufflés, first course 
ancient untranslatable second course arrives
edible flowers abound
distant whale sounds sing loudly 
singing memories of the future
they thought so
singing, singing, never stopping singing 
echo above sea level roads
people ponder protest
extreme weather patterns manifest warnings 
swim swam have swum under
and in soufflés
until willows swill scotch seltzers 
no tree left behind pleas
a branch fell
right into the money jar 
no money have I none
neither do you
so together we’ll be bereft 
piles of words mound high
counting moon phases
feathers flew across our minds 
consult the feather field guide
mostly about toucans
and birthdays and cookie monsters 
we live in the country
they wonder why
the thin place is nearby 
it’s a wordy country here
full of vegetables
each word is a pea 
lots of potatoes with eyes
carrots without tops
one frozen leek left behind 
carrots have eyes too, y’know
you can sit
on a mushroom, never ginger 
some folks sit on rocks
large, smooth, flat
and shakers made fine furniture 
some rocks start to shake
like a quaker
I’ve never dated a dentist 
dating a dentist really bites
tooth-growing oysters
what a very weird universe  s is a yellow letter
in my synesthesia
I mean my synesthesia scheme 
can you hear sunrays?
see trumpet calls?
taste the shape of words? 
if you spell synesthesia with
an a (synaesthesia) everything
changes because a is red 
synesthetes come in many colors
snow sometimes slants
when will untranslatable make improvements? 
if you stick with me
what everything does
will be the backwards opposite 
improvements make untranslatable demand flowers
hear, see, taste
everything will make sense again 
you’ve got another thing coming
I see people
nothing will ever make sense 
nonsense to making sense again
the mysterious mind
memories within time plus space 
do you know the future
will be there?
time might go backwards, sir 
if only pleasure were limitless
beyond the mind
a tiny speck of sand 
if only you knew how
limitless pleasures can
be like little engine dresses 
yes the small pleasures roar
like mighty engines
here sometimes they are jets 
you mean nuclear jet engines
like the speedway’s
oh save us and the trees 
more trees will save us
air moves through
we hear maple sap drop 
trees taught us to breathe
sap rises up
we see windy voices say 
nothing is really real tonight
the wind laughs
oysters jump on our plates


^^EOP^^

Like nights we knelt on the dirt floor
of a dugout, leaned our heads back,
eyes twitching gone, and popped nitrous 
canisters into the communion shapes
of our mouths, slipped inside where
everything seemed to be falling snow, 
ice, the time split between chasing flies
through a darkened park and sprawling
in sycamore bark—how clean that abyss 
we drifted in, like dew, more like pollen,
on our skins; and, beneath, a want
for touch, a kiss, a return. Like nothing 
back then, to break an arm latching on
to the bumper of an Impala, or settling back 
as the car took us as far as the salted bridge, 
before letting the ride go with a mitten
caught behind the chrome waving
from the other side of the river. Like this,  
you said, sliding a needle, watching
dope plunge, the body's rush and tow
until you felt something like an angel 
hovering above, but it was only pigeon
feathers deviling the air. Those friends
are gone: some dead, dying, locked up 
or jailed in themselves; and when I see
some kids running in the heat of a taillight
swirling behind them, I remember we 
wanted only to quiet our bodies, their 
unnatural hum, a vague pull inward,
some thin furrows gliding over the snow. 


^^EOP^^

if you didn’t mind the bible
you’d surely mind the belt


^^EOP^^


 


 


 


 


 


 


 



“A Billion Things in One” is an erasure of the article “YesJulz, Snapchat Royalty” by Max Berlinger, which appeared in the New York Times on June 30, 2016.


^^EOP^^

Blue light ringing through
the green grass. 
The bent heads of petals 
are not praying
to anything or to anyone. 
Only we are
standing in a field of them, 
my son and me and me
holding him. 
In my arms he stretches
out to the very far ends of the earth 
like a radio signal 
made of skin and organs,
of everything. 
I was singing a song to him
I made up 
about me dying.
Since yesterday he has not been 
crying as much as screaming
like it is terrifying 
to wake up. 
It is terrifying to wake up
and terrifying to sleep 
and his feet going blue in the cold
spring air 
in which he is growing.
His mother is growing him 
with the milk she makes all day,
spilling out in blue. 
The song I am singing to him
puts him to sleep, 
will put me to sleep. 
Will one day burst the drum
in my ear 
like a bell, very much like a voice
screaming from far off, 
though you don’t know
if it’s hurting or hungry or nothing at all.


^^EOP^^

Olive seashells
in the air 
you can eat.
The very inner of the inner ear 
in the breeze.
Last night my son dreamt 
about falling
out of trees. 
I had almost forgotten
that we were 
simians. 
The fiddlehead turns
on itself but only ever in love. 
Green cinnamon roll,
a snake too small to hunt 
anyone.
Curled in like my son’s
fingers, his fists. 
More beautiful than
a spider fern, 
spun-in island,
moldy tongue of a hippopotamus, 
the eye of the forest. 
When my son wakes up
screaming 
I don’t pick him up
right away. 
I tell him where he is and who
I am. 
At night all the fiddlehead
wants to do is sleep. 
When I sleep
I dream about death adders curling 
around his soft
body, 
all of us making the same kinds of sounds.


^^EOP^^

I saw another ladybug
Chicago could win
if  I eat the leftover fish & chips
in every line so I don’t forget
We went to the river called fish & chips
We stayed at the fish & chips tower
They donated a million dollars to the fish & chips foundation
so we could go to school for free
It’s called fish & chips college for women


^^EOP^^

the pope has his cardinals
batman has his robins
shakespeare has a lark
in just one of his sonnets


^^EOP^^

Darlings, if your owners say you are / not usually like this / then I must take them / at their word / I am like you / not crazy about that which towers before me / particularly the buildings here / and the people inside / who look at my name / and make noises / that seem like growling / my small and eager darlings / what it must be like / to have the sound for love / and the sound for fear / be a matter of pitch / I am afraid to touch / anyone who might stay / long enough to make leaving / an echo / there is a difference / between burying a thing you love / for the sake of returning / and leaving a fresh absence / in a city’s dirt / looking for a mercy / left by someone / who came before you / I am saying that I / too / am at a loss for language / can’t beg myself / a doorway / out of anyone / I am not usually like this either / I must apologize again for how adulthood has rendered me / us, really  / I know you all forget the touch / of someone who loves you / in two minutes / and I arrive to you / a constellation of shadows / once hands / listen darlings / there is a sky / to be pulled down / into our bowls / there is a sweetness for us / to push our faces into / I promise / I will not beg for you to stay this time / I will leave you to your wild galloping / I am sorry / to hold you again / for so long / I am in the mood / to be forgotten.

 
                

^^EOP^^

chapter viii   
Tired    I walk toward everything except fear 
over seaweed-covered rocks 
I think that someday some new women 
will be allowed to see each other happy 
happy more than usual 
I looked in all the other open rooms of my heart 
A vague fear obscured the whole scene into a diorama of ruin 
As sharp as a sword-cut    the light struck    a half-reclining cloud 
Time and distance trembled in my body 
 
•   To become in love with everything apropos of nothing  To see without seeming to stare  To change in the reflection  To appear peculiar 
 
•   We never refer to sadness  as something that looks  like secrecy  but it does 
 
•  
I drifted on the fresh breeze 
I did not like it 
Joy     joy     joy although not joy    a bad thing 
I can feel it wet against my bosom 
My journey is mapped and ready 
I am only taking one dress 
 
•  
I don’t want to talk     of infinitesimal distinctions 
between man and man     see no difference     between men and maidens 
I am the modern Morpheus
I made the minutes disappear
I am thin
an errant swarm of bees
a naked lunatic
faithful
selfish
old
a tiger
immensely strong
a wild beast
a paroxysm of rage
mercy
murder
coming
coming
coming 
 
chapter xiv   
After a bad night I lock myself in my room and read 
I had only imagination 
I remember how on our wedding day    he said 
I shall never let trouble or nervousness concern you    you can trust me 
I must not forgive    I cannot     
I know the real truth now 
My imagination tinges everything with ill adventure 
I suppose a cry clears the air    as other rain does 
 
•  
I have a good memory for details 
it is not always so with young ladies    or so it had been said to me 
I cannot comprehend this husband 
Women all their lives are interrupted    considered hysterical 
summoned to make children for the strong and manly 
and for his sake must smile and not speak 
Now this man I began to think a weak fool 
I had trusted him    my husband 
even half believed his words when he said 
I would have an ordinary life    without dread 
 
•  
Let me tell you from experience of men 
his brain and heart are terrible things 
This man    impotent in the dark 
He succeeded in getting me to doubt 
everything took a hue of unreality 
I did not trust even my own senses 
You don’t know what it is to doubt everything    even yourself 
I am a wife he fashioned by his own hand 
to be sweet and earnest and so kind 
 
•  
An idea struck me 
Following great loss     people see things that others cannot 
Men want to explain explain explain 
see themselves new    pretend to be young 
Ladies’ bodies are deemed unholy 
by the very men who burn them 
Generations of men believe that women 
walk amongst them without knowledge 
My thesis is this 
I want to believe    to believe     
to believe in 
a universe    willing 
to understand 
 
chapter xxi   
A detail in a pool of blood 
the body gathered in an awkward kink 
I dress myself  in easy anything 
 
•  
I softened into a swollen confusion 
only slightly solid    I was shining 
He beckoned 
His hands    a dark mass like a thousand rats 
A cloud closed over my eyes 
I moistened myself with brandy 
I held tight to life 
I became like water 
 
•  
Kneeling on the edge of the bed    his face was turned 
his left hand    held both arms    his right gripped 
my neck    blood    a thin stream of it    his nostrils quivered 
 
•  
I lay in disarray 
my eyes    and from them came    an endless moment 
Cold moonshine dazed me    I began to pull on clothes 
I drew back    unclean 
Shame folded me like steel    tried to twist me in obedience 
I could not feel the rise of reddening dawn 
Silence    the sound of  what happened 
 
•  
I want you to know all this 
understand    how much I need to show you 
It was he who caused me to disappear 
My husband    my husband and other men 
hunt me and command    my flesh my blood my brain 
This is my pollution story 
 
•  
The eastern sky became clear
             as the awful narrative deepened
                          in the morning light
                                       when the first red streak shot up my flesh


^^EOP^^


 


 


 


 


^^EOP^^

  
 


 


^^EOP^^

What you need will come to you at the right time says the tarot card I overturned at my friend Nathalie’s house one evening. I was wondering if she said something worth hearing, What? I’m looking at her face, trying to read it, not a clue what she said but I’ll just say yeah and hope. Me, Tabitha, and her aunt are waffling in Waffle House by the Mississippi River. Tabitha’s aunt is all mumble. She either said Do you want a pancake? or You look melancholic. The less I hear the bigger the swamp, so I smile and nod while my head becomes a faint foghorn, a lost river. Why wasn’t I asking her to microphone? When you tell someone you read lips you become a mysterious captain. You watch their brains navigate channels with BSL interpreters in the  corner of night TV. Sometimes it’s hard to get back the smooth sailing and you go down with the whole conversation. I’m a haze of broken jars, a purple bucket and only I know there’s a hole in it. On Twitter @justnoxy tweets I can’t watch TV / movies / without subtitles. It’s just too hard to follow. I’m just sitting there pretending and it’s just not worth it. I tweet back you not being able to follow is not your failure. It’s weird, giving the advice you need to someone else, weird as thinking my American friend said I move through London like a Hotep when she actually said I’m used to London life with no sales tax. Deanna (my friend who owns crystals and mentions the existence of multiple moons) says I should write about my mishearings, she thinks it’ll make a good book for her bathroom. I am still afraid I have grown up missing too much information. I think about that episode of The Twilight Zone where an old man walks around the city bar selling bric-a-brac from his suitcase, knowing what people need — scissors, a leaky pen, a bus ticket, combs. In the scene, music is playing loud, meaning if I were in that bar I would miss the mysticism while the old man’s miracles make the barman say WOAH, this guy is from another planet!


^^EOP^^

                    
                    
                    The Sangre de Cristo Mountains mottled as if with oil stains. Configurations of cloud-shadows.

Easy gait of hours: a way through — or into — the dry winds.

Our church is the mountains, says the guide to the tour group, all of whom have been instructed to keep their cameras inside their bags.  A group crowding the aisles of San Geronimo Chapel.

On the dirt path between adobe structures, bareheaded. Stretching, palms out, as steam from the boiling pot does.

To move along the earth without keeping a ledger.

The horsefly not so incongruous with the sagebrush. Still, reflexive swatting.

We’re good citizens, we serve in the Army, though we’re regarded as second  class by the US government.

Framed badges and news stories in the house of the retired sheriff. Men in his family who have been policemen, firemen, soldiers. His wife pinching the ears of bear sculptures formed from mica clay.

Thick paste of red soil and the piñon that pierces through it.

To carry on from day to day without exercising the sloppy hand of  manipulation.

Four dollars for a plate of fry bread in cinnamon butter. The boy at the counter restless, wanting to get back to the electronic dance  music on pause on his iPhone.

Reading a history backward, the deep strata.

Settling on this life as a parasite on its host.

That man next door who you bought from? He sells jewelry made by an Anglo woman. His wife.

The stray dog asleep on her side, dreams ripped from her open jaw.

Money touched from hand to hand.

Whole lifetimes spent trying to make sense of an appetite.

A town called Tres Orejas. Three ears. Plenty.
                

^^EOP^^

One look at the lilac, one smell
and my childhood is —  
dogs scratching at the sliding
glass door, bits 
of bottles coming up 
like grass in the grass, a dirty towel
down by the feet 
of the tree, Lysol cans, small
packets of Land O’Frost 
turkey meat — 
there in front of me in spring, 
in the wonderfully fat rain, 
flowering purple and whatever
the pinkish purple is called 
and the white 
ones too. They smell like
my siblings, like the backs of my infant 
son’s ears, like my son
whom I would kill someone for. 
Before he was born I wouldn’t kill
anyone. But now I would. 
And after I’d get a coffee
from Starbucks, a coffee and a piece 
of that amazing lemon-frosted
lemon cake 
and think nothing of it, 
and read the paper and hold him
against my chest 
and listen to his body living,
alive outside 
his mother’s body, and the lilac
outside on the street, outside 
everyone, and heavy in the rain.


^^EOP^^

My mother and I are on the front porch lighting each other's cigarettes
as if we were on a ten-minute break from our jobs
at being a mother and son, just ten minutes
to steal a moment of freedom before clocking back in, before
putting the aprons back on, the paper hats,
washing our hands twice and then standing
behind the counter again,
hoping for tips, hoping the customers
will be nice, will say some kind word, the cool
front yard before us and the dogs 
in the backyard shitting on everything.
We are hunched over, two extras on the set of The Night of the Hunter.
I am pulling a second cigarette out of the pack, a swimmer
rising from a pool of other swimmers. Soon we will go back
inside and sit in the yellow kitchen and drink
the rest of the coffee 
and what is coming to kill us will pour milk
into mine and sugar into hers.


^^EOP^^

turns out
there are no
dead bodies
after all
unless you
put them there 
 


^^EOP^^

I play the egg
and I play the triangle
I play the reed
and I play each angle
I play the lyre
and I play the lute
I play the snare
and I play the flute
I play the licorice stick
and I play the juke
I play the kettle
and I play the uke
who ever thought of the triangle
who ever thought of the clarinet
the castanets the cornet the
discotheque the harmonium
the euphonium marimbas and
maracas harmonicas
tom-toms and tatas
I play the fiddle
and I play the jug
I play the washboard
and the washtub
I play kalimba
and I play the koto
I play the organ
and I play the banjo
I play the fool I play it cool
I play hot and I play pranks
I played your mixtape
forgot to say thanks


^^EOP^^




The Ware Collection of Blaschka Glass Models of Plants,  Harvard Museum of Natural History



The ovaries, when splayed, resemble sliced tomatoes. Or rose windows, 
each geometry precise enough to praise. I want to press my tongue 
against the bloodroot petal, to run its stamen along my slick shelf of 
teeth like a man might with a wheat stalk. Four times so far other tourists 
have taken me for a gallery attendant. In the glass, a slow- 
sidling crimson spreads over my own skewed reflection: a hesitant 
teen in a Harvard hoodie, the fifth, leans in to ask, Excuse me, sir?  Are they really glass? — a testament to how my binder encases 
my breasts, my faith in the plum yew’s fruit- shorn frenzy. Dense clusters teeming 
with their separate blossoms, any unknowing eye might think they were 
living. But I know the lilac’s tell: two blemishes, bulbous where some 
hot glass mis-dripped, then caught forever in the filament. Sometimes, I think 
I’ll wake to find they’ve finally trickled off me in the night, pooled 
molten down the bed and gathered back again. I might thrash off both breasts 
in a sleepless fit, or could unfurl my clit like a pollen basket passed 
from a honeybee’s hind legs to the hive. It makes its secret 
seen. I can only answer yes. Yes, They’re real. I mean, they’re really glass. 
You could snap a stem between fingers with such a slight force, one stark blink —  
the flies flitting the gallery would fear the weight of their own landing, 
thick wings rapt still. When the public, in their distressed astonishment, 
demanded to know how the Blaschkas transported the models without 
a fracture in even one pistil, Leopold Blaschka revealed his own 
elaborate process: pack each flower tightly in its cardboard 
cradle, then strap them down with strong wire to restrict movement, and set each, at last, 
in a wooden box wrapped with burlap. They drove them straight from Manhattan 
in two hearses. The drivers, of course, wore black suits. Onlookers parted 
to allow their small procession past. I like it here, with everyone 
focused on the flowers. Hunched, kneeling, as if suspicious, still doubting, 
the teen eyes two tiny zinnias, then moves on to another case. 
I’ve seen many leave unsatisfied. They can’t bear to be partitioned —  
how can I blame them? Someone made these with their body. They let their breath 
unspool to form each impossible bud, crafted every flower’s fold, 
then waited on the heat to break to hold just one, wearing special gloves. 
Wouldn’t anyone wish for just one lie among a garden this precise? 
One daisy swapped out in secret, switched with a common courtyard flower, 
now waiting for someone to notice its wilt while its counterparts keep 
all their glisten. It does seem to me true punishment: never to change. 
Unflinching forever. Sometimes, near closing, when the hall becomes quiet, 
I really do believe they’re real.


^^EOP^^




^^EOP^^

spread millet in this neighborhood
all you get is bluejays 
bluejay may be cooked three
ways


^^EOP^^

don’t talk to stranglers
when yr wasted do
talk to swingers don’t
talk to swindlers if
you can tell them apart
from the strangers who
are just strangers no
stranger than you alone
and afraid to be alone
cuz they might want
to touch your throat


^^EOP^^

let’s say you want flowers
you should have flowers 
let’s say you want forever
you should have flowers 
let’s say he should have
you in and out by tuesday 
and if you want flowers
you should have flowers 
and the flowers will stay
fresh until tuesday you say 
yes that’s the way it’s done
should you want flowers


^^EOP^^

kiss
upon 
kiss
they 
grow
into 
this
they 
wish
your 
shad
roes 
hand
sock 
hard
rock 
cold
toes 
will
blow 
warm
will 
blow
cold 
they
just 
raid
your 
hash
then 
like
meat 
bees
with 
your
cash 
they
give 
they
take 
form
like 
your
fist 
over
love


^^EOP^^

All of us were boys only some were taller or already in high school, and almost
      nothing else
mattered but to learn some new trick,
to pull off something we saw in a skate video, wind cutting 
around our bodies when we flew
off the lip of a ramp, grabbed the board and twisted
into a 180, kicking 
a leg out and landing it, the only way to run
through the neighborhood 
was to run through it
together, flipping off cops and skinheads, I almost
don't even remember girls but a vague sense of the taste of bubble gum
and how they smelled so different
from us, sitting in some kid's basement drinking
his parents' vodka, we grew out our bangs, moved in a pack,
jumped in when some one of us 
got jumped, 
so when a man we had never seen before
came up and started beating on Simon, one of us dropped his skateboard, walked
over to the man
like someone walking into a bank
and stabbed him.
The man, startled, sat down, right there on the asphalt,
right in the middle of his new consciousness,
kind of looking around. 


^^EOP^^

In the desert, the moon shivers. Tonight, to stay awake, I’ll cut my feet
with glass. Outside Oaxaca, in a clinic, my mother said,
“I hate your Indian face.” In the dream I’m running. My limbs skeletal
and scabbed. After my mother’s death, I found, in a box,
her wedding dress. As I lifted the lid, a stench corkscrewed
into my nostrils: the dress had curdled like milk. During the day
I gather tinder. Paper. Shed snakeskin. When the last light
above the mountains knots into stars, I crouch under mesquite, make a fire. Sometimes the moon stops shivering. Sometimes
I tally what I owe. In the dream I’m running through a hallway.
The floor uneven. The walls green. Last month, as my son blew out
the candles on his cake, I noticed, for the first time,
the hideous shape of his nose. Tonight I’ll pinch my thighs to stay
awake. My mother, in the clinic, said, “The rain has a fever, it
needs plenty of rest, it needs to drink plenty of water.” The doctor
scribbled in a file then asked for more money. If my mother
could see me now! My feet bloody. My face darker than ever.
Tonight, to stay awake, I’ll sit close to the fire. In the dream I stumble,
but I never let go of my right breast: an urn heavy with my own
ashes, an urn I’m lugging God-knows-where.


^^EOP^^




After Rita Dove



Apá, dying is boring. To pass las horas, I carve our last name all over my body.
I try to recall the taste of  Pablo’s sweat. Whiskey, no. Wet dirt, sí. I stuff  English into my mouth, spit out chingaderas. Have it your way. Home of the Whopper. Run
for the border. ¡Aguas! The mirror betrayed us. It erased your face from my face. Gave me mother’s smile, narrow nariz. Once, I wore her necklace. The gold slick,
obscene. God, I was beautiful. Cada noche, I sleep with dead men. The coyote was the third to die. Your money is still in his wallet. Quien engaña
no gana. Apá, there’s a foto, in my bolsillo, of a skeleton shrouded in black flames: Nuestra Señora de la Santa Muerte. Patron saint of smugglers, pick- pockets, & jotos.
La Flaca. Señora Negra. La Huesuda. ¡Aguas! An animal is prowling this station. It shimmies with hunger. It shimmers with thirst. To keep it away,
I hurl my memories at it. Your laughter is now snagged on its fangs. Your pain now breathes inside its lungs. Taste the feeling. Siempre Coca-Cola. America’s
real choice — I gathered & smashed bottles. Apá, follow the glass snaking from the barrel to a mesquite to find my body. Lips blue, skin thick with scabs.
Apá, kneel in the shade, peel the scabs. Touch our last name. Solís.


^^EOP^^

the bare-backed barback
in the bear bar’s back bar
barebacked with a bare bear
who was also a barback back there


^^EOP^^

How could I predict
That my life wd become whatever,
So many people
Passing thru—address books
 
Filled with names & numbers
I no longer recognize,
Pages torn loose,
Addresses crossed out,
 
Lives badly smudged,
Decades of earnest grief,
Missed opportunities,
Phones disconnected.
 
What am I now?
Just another old man
Among old men.
Turn the calendar upside down
 
& let the days fall out.
 


^^EOP^^

You take the cats out with you, shut
the door: I have the whole wide bed, all
the covers to fall back asleep in, while you
cut up and sugar the strawberries, grind
the coffee, leave the radio off
so I won't be disturbed. The room is still
dark, rain forecast for the entire day,
other people's family picnics cancelled,
barbecues moved into basements, parades
rerouted to avoid flooded viaducts, the iris
losing petals beside newly cleaned graves,
their mason jars spilt into the saturated ground.
But here is my holiday, this drift back beneath thought
while I lie in the warm impression of your body.


^^EOP^^

I'm out with the wheelbarrow mixing mulch.
A mockingbird trills in the pine.
Then, from higher, a buzz, and through patches of blue
as the fog burns off, a small plane pulls a banner,
red letters I can't read—
but I do see, over the fence,
a man in a sky-blue shirt walking his dog to the beach.
He says he missed it, will keep an eye out.
Four barrows of mulch around the blueberry bushes,
I'm pulling off gloves, and he's back, beaming.
"It says, I LOVE YOU, MARTHA.
Are you Martha?"


^^EOP^^

Though the doctors said no salt,
salt was all my father craved.
His body bloated, skin water-logged
and gray, still he wanted potato chips,
honey-baked ham, greasy slabs
of Polish sausage from Piekutowski's.
He begged for pepperoni pizza,
garlic butter, ribs slathered in sauce.
But when I did the shopping,
I searched only for labels that said low sodium and no preservatives, instead
bringing home heads of broccoli,
turkey burgers, shredded wheat.
And when he died anyway,
guilt gnawed me like an ulcer—
how could I have denied him
his few final pleasures?—
until I found Big Mac wrappers
stuffed under the car seat,
jars of pickles in the hall closet,
and hidden among wads of tissues
near the night stand, his stash—
a half-used canister of salt.
I sat down on his sagging mattress
now stripped of stained sheets
and studied that blue label
with the girl in the yellow dress
holding her umbrella against a rain
of salt still falling from the sky.
 


^^EOP^^

Someone has opened a giant map
and with the tips of our fingers,
each of us suddenly blind,
we track the black cold of this monument
for names we know
like finding a route home.
 
Lost here
this damp spring morning,
the cherries exploding like the fourth of July,
we wonder how many maps of Viet Nam
sold those years,
so many strange sounding places.
 
One of us holds a magnifying glass
to McCarroll, McMorris, McNabb,
small print in the polished stone,
the way a neighbor, say, in Neoga, Illinois
might have done, late at night
searching that faraway land on his kitchen table,
 
hearing again the morning paper
thump against the front door,
that boy on his bike in the dark
grown and gone—what was his name, that kid from down the block?—
Khe Sanh, Da Nang, Hanoi.
 
--for PFC William "Willie" Searle
 


^^EOP^^

I took the dog and went to walk
in the auditorium of the woods,
but not to get away from things.
It was our habit, that was all,
a thing we did on summer days,
and much there was to listen to.
A slight wind came and went
in three birches by the pond.
A crow uphill was going on
about the black life it led,
and a brown creeper went creeping up
a brown trunk methodically
with no record of ever having
been understood by anyone.
A woodpecker was working out
a deep hole from the sound of it
in a stand of dead trees up there.
And then a jay, much put upon,
complained about some treachery
it may or may not have endured,
though most are liars anyway.
The farther in, the quieter,
till only the snapping of a stick
broke the silence we were in.
The dog stood still and looked at me,
the woods by then already dark.
Much later, on the porch at night,
I heard the owl, an eldritch thing.
The dog, still with me, heard it too,
a call that came from where we'd been,
and where we would not be again.


^^EOP^^

There goes the
aluminum, the antimony, the arsenic
the barium, the cadmium, 
the cesium, the gadolinium
the lead
the mercury
the nickel, the thalium, and 
the tin.  
There goes that job spraying lawns
with chemicals, driving the Merc
three-quarter ton 
with a tank on the back
and no brakes
through West Vancouver, bouncing
the wheels against the curb
to stop
and on the steep
majesterial streets
that afford such views 
that they could hire
two talentless dickbrains
to weed and feed
front and back
and back again 
in two weeks.  
That was a heavy metal job
that probably killed
a lot of salmon too.  
There goes the shotgun
pellets from the pheasants
we shot out in Abbotsford and Langley
plucked and hung
in the concrete basement
in New Westminster
fresh
with the stink of pheasant guts. 
Oily, delicious pheasants
roasted always
with a little buckshot
after a day off.  
There goes those summers painting
houses with my brother
wire-brushing off
the old paint, breathing
it in on the wooden ladders
white guys working
on a tan
and saving up for the Peugot
ten speed. There goes 
the seventies
out from my body.
Led Zep Humble Pie Burning Spear, and
Marley too, adidas, big E Levis 
from Lee's Men's Wear on Sixth Street
there goes that brown house
paint, broken down 
and pissed out.  
There goes those years
beachcombing along the Fraser
from New West to Lulu Island
pulling out cedar blocks
that had floated free
from the shake factory booms.  
Pulling the blocks out
of that industrial muck 
grey green and foamy 
down near Scott Paper, the mill
that Larry worked in until
it moved
production south.  
Then stacking and drying the blocks
to split them into shakes
with a birchwood
hammer and an adze. There goes 
that industrial mix
from the Fraser 
from the riverbank
from the bars by the river. 
There goes sucking on
a hose to get some gas into that
golden sixty-six Valiant convertible
with the leaky roof and
the 273 and putting it
right into the carb to sputter
the piece of shit to life
Again. Still, pretty great  
to have a convertible with a radio
(turn the radio on 
roadrunner roadrunner!)
and a five-gallon gas can
and a piece of garden hose
and a mouthful of
Regular, a mouthful of
Regular Leaded
from the Chevron
in the strip mall across Tenth Ave. 
There goes working
on a printing press
under the sidewalk
of the storefront at Cambie and Hastings
that was later the Caribbean place
and is now
going to be gentrified.
There goes that time.  
There goes all the shitty renos
on Broadway, on Hastings, on Commercial Drive,
there goes the dust
from that wall Mike took
down with a chain saw
when Talonbooks was above the foundry
and there goes the foundry dust
and the sweep of chemicals
that would take your head off
like six beers later at the Waldorf.  
There goes the mystery
unmarked jars of cleaners and solvents and grease
that Larry nicked from the mill
and we used on the cars and bikes
and on our hands.  
There goes that job at the self-serve
Shell with a car wash across from the college
when it was in temporary trailers
just to show that education
for the masses
was taken seriously. 
And there goes, hopefully, the dust
and everything from that week 
in September
when what was stored in the three
buildings of the World
Trade Centre was pulverized
and burnt Into the air
and Nancy and I stayed in the apartment
with t-shirts tied 
over our mouth and nose 
and didn't go out until
we went to Milano's
where the Fireman drank for free
with the IRA guys
leaning at the bar. There goes
that time.  
There goes the
Aluminum, the antimony, the arsenic
the barium, the cadmium, 
the cesium, the gadolinium
the lead
the mercury
the nickel, the thalium, and 
the tin. Broken down
pissed out.  
There goes those jobs, those times
there goes those relations
of inside and outside, of work
and nerves and fat and soft tissue
and synapses. 
There goes that set of relations inside and outside. There goes that body
that use and surplus

^^EOP^^

It was hard to sit there with my father,
watching one of my sister's girls playing
a set of tennis against my son or daughter
because he'd forget himself and with a groan
of disappointment or a grunt
of sympathetic exertion make it clear
that he was rooting for my sister's child
and against mine. There was no use
calling him on it, because he'd deny it
and get angry. So I would get angry
but try not to show it, until I couldn't
stand it any longer and would get up
and walk away. That was how it worked
between us, the unspoken building up
like thunderheads above the tennis court,
where the kids played on, not caring who won
and hardly noticing the sky had darkened.
 


^^EOP^^

I can’t get rid of useful things
and nobody wants to pick them up,
I keep forgetting where I lay my umbrella.
 
I don’t leave footprints in the snow anymore,
we haven’t had a war on domestic soil in so long
I wonder if I still got it. Because once I had it.
 
I heard about a boy who once tied a string to his brother,
he tied his brother to the ocean and the ocean to the blackbird—
 
from the ground all the birds look like blackbirds
from the ground a Stealth Bomber looks like a spaceship.
 
The aliens are coming,
they walk through birthday parties
and basically go unnoticed.
 
And this is kind of how I go through life,
once I heated up a spoon in the microwave
the fish have so much mercury in them they spark.
 
I was handed a bayonet from the Civil War
and a copper penny corroded with rust.
When they take the Statue of Liberty apart to clean her
her neck explodes with a million little spiders.
 
Meanwhile in a forest somewhere
someone cut open my grandmother’s belly
and filled it with bricks
 
something is coming soon
I keep a bucket of lambs blood
by the front door.


^^EOP^^

Ecstatic experiences with nature
This is an automatic furnace
Do not drop or roll
Do not handle with squeeze lift truck
Handle with care
This is a piece of quality assured
Home heating and cooling equipment
The Ohio Valley Container Corporation
Made its container to stand
A resistance bursting test
Of over 200 pounds per square inch
Not an inch a metaphor, 
These words are on my window
There is no pane, the first frost comes
The second baby, we'll have to
Turn up the heat, eat nothing
And breathe through a rose
Emulating the butterfly's patterns
And the repetitive indifference of leaves
Turning pink, color of the rose, so flushed
Orange color, color of trees
Ecstatic mists train us, no feeling
No feeling, only moving beginning
The pane crashed, baby falls
Between loose pelvis onto the sheet
Watches leaves blow wind onto window
Ecstatic poets bend over, watch the thin doctor
He's in the light, this is a chore or task
Leaves blow the rose upside down up and down the street
Interior blowing toward muscles and thighs
Bending up and down, pictures of people
The butterfly replaces the hat
Every inch of the sheet is ironed
Practice matches a new sculpture of thought in ephemeral
                stretching
The space is no bigger than needed
Air and water all around, pennies in water
I foresee a taste for display in blowing up and down
The crown describes only fantastic gems in air
No loose signs of what the teas will do for you
Fear a moment of taking longer than the warmth lasts
The visitors and the coaches then speak of their intention
For time to deny any atrophy or waste, even the giggles
Later longer than warmth not in inches
But in wrappings of leaves for warmth and evenness
The warm colors, the cold blue curtains between the sun and the moon
After pretension to be singly devoted to one's task is swayed to love
Then the simple movement from inside to outside
Become astonishment, red yellow orange and eyes bright
Sophia Crystal foretells as I foresee absence of memory who
              sings eternally
Only to sing more and more


^^EOP^^




(May 22, 1965)



When we look at ourselves
We see ourselves through eyes
Which have been schooled
To see comely only the opaque, 
Comely to us skin that is fair,
Comely to us eyes that are light,
Comely to us hair that is straight,
Comely to us lips that are thin,
Our gods and goddesses
Glow in opalescent whiteness
And daily we worship at this shrine. 
Ugly to us our satin black skin,
Ugly to us our fulsome lips,
Ugly to us our midnight eyes,
Ugly to us our crisping hair
Thus we have rejected our image. 
But this is not as it should be
We black people must be born again.
Know that the black people like other races
Have their own distinct beauty,
Know that the Stygian night too is beautiful. 


^^EOP^^




(For all children who wondered about the tragic event of April 4, 1968 at Memphis.)



My children, my children, remember the day
When the Drum Major of Freedom's parade went away.
Stop crying now little children and listen
And you will know for the future what really did happen.  
You will know why your father was solemn and grim
And why mother's eyes were wet at the rim.
You will know why the flags flew at half mast
And why all the buildings were shut tight and fast.  
The Drum Major was down in Memphis that day
Helping the workers to win a raise in pay
When an evil assassin's bullet
Snuffed his bright young life away. 
That's why we were all so saddened that day
When the life of the Drum Major was taken away.
Who will come forward to stand in his stead?
Who'll be the Drum Major in the Freedom parade? 
My children, our Major was such a good man
Whose life was based on the divine plan.
He loved this country, its people black and white
And believed that all should be imbued with the right.  
That's why we were all so saddened that day
When the life of the Drum Major was taken away.
We are looking for someone to stand in his stead
We now seek a new leader for the Freedom parade. 
Do you know my children that he bore the brunt,
He marched unafraid right up in the front
He marched for Justice for children like you
And a bountier life for your parents too. 
That's why we honor Martin Luther King
He tried with love to make Liberty ring.
He wished everyone in our tortured country
To live together in peace and harmony. 
That's why we were all so saddened that day
When the Drum Major's life was taken away.
Do you know someone who can stand in his stead?
Do you know someone to lead the parade? 
I hear you my children. I hear what you said.
That you children yourselves would lead his parade
That you'll carry the banner of the Drum Major dear
And march on to full Freedom without any fear. 
Our spirits are lifted, our sorrows subside.
You children shall lead us with Dr. King at your side. 
You children of Freedom will stand in his stead.
You children of Freedom will lead the parade.  
March on my children to his distant drumbeat. 
March on my children, keep alive his heartbeat.
When this Peace and Freedom is finally won
Then will Martin Luther King's work be done. 


^^EOP^^

Venerable black women
You of yesterday, you of today.
Black mothers of tomorrow yet to be
These lines are homage to you, for you.  
Magnificent black women
The poets and singers have been remiss
Have sung too few poems and songs of you
And the image makers have not recorded your beauty. 
Sheba, Nefertiti, Zaiditu, Cleopatra. 
Black women, Mothers of humanity, Mother original
Your black children here salute you.
You, bartered, sold, insulted, raped and defiled,
Debased and debauched for four centuries.  
Strong women, Gannet, Tubman and Truth.  
Weary black women
Your breasts gaunt from nurturing theirs first
And later sustaining yours, caring for theirs
At the same instance providing for yours also. 
Women forgotten, Mandy, Melindy, Cindy, and Lisa. 
Gentle black women
While being hated, yet teaching love
Being scorned, yet teaching respect
Being humiliated and teaching Compassion. 
Humble women, Bessie, Mattie, Lucey, Ann and Willie Mae.  
Resourceful black women, with tact
Managing to make do, alter clothing,
Stretch meals, Making room, Prodding, Bolstering
Nudging us on, Protecting, teaching survival.  
Laney, Bethune, Keckley, Terrel and Brown.  
Militant black women, defending yours with fury
Standing firm, picketing and demonstrating
Kneeling in, sitting in and wading in
Standing, walking, marching and boycotting.  
Parks, Wells, Pleasant and Louvestre.  
Discerning black women, women of genius
Setting your children a proper example
Teaching that each generation must do its part
To improve life for those coming after.  
Nannie, Gaines, Burroughs, Maggie Walker.  
Courageous black women, brave and fearless
Seeking to make a home among the unfriendly
Sending your children off to school
To pass unscathed through walls of hate. 
Lucy, Bates, Richardson, and Hamer. 
Angry black women and understanding
Aware of efforts to stunt your men
Yet urging them manhood again. 
Diana, Gloria, Thelma, Ethel, Eva and Marion. 
Heroic black women, women of glory
Not turning back, never giving up
Equalling, surpassing the stature
Of any race of women, anywhere, any time. 
Billie, Ella, Dinah, Sis-Sirretta, Mahalia. 
Black women of genius, brilliant women
Walking through the hateful valleys
In dignity, strength and such serene composure
That even your enemies tremble insecure.  
Hansberry, Talbert, Bonds and Baker.  
Magnificent black women, hopeful women
Believing that trouble doesn't last always
Knowing this truth, that those who are slaves today
May well be the masters tomorrow, even sooner.  
Sisters with all women, black women
Your sufferings echo those of all the oppressed.
Join together all of you in a universal cry
For Peace and the good life for all. The world listens. 


^^EOP^^

Let it be known to all, the story
Of the glorious struggle of my people.
Let it be known that black men and women
Helped to build this our country.
Let it be known that black men and women of the past
In an effort to make this country
What it ought to be, gave up their very last
To make America, a real democracy
A true homeland of the free.
Let our leaders of today go back into the past
And come fighting forth envigored with the spirit
Of Turner, and Vesey, Douglass, Tubman and Truth. 
Let our stalwart black youth, lift their heads in pride
As they tell of their fathers' fight for freedom
To the white youth by their side.
Yes, let it be known. Let all of the old folks tell it
Sing it to the babes yet in arms.
Let us read the glorious story
Right along with our Bible. Let it be known to all,
The story of the glorious struggles of my people.
Too long…Too long has it been kept from us. 


^^EOP^^

The fat girl next door would give us a nickel
to walk to the old man's store
and get her an ice-cream cone,
vanilla, of course, the only flavor then.
On Powotan Avenue, Aunt Harriet and I would take
turns licking it all the way back.
It was hot that summer and we longed
to go to Virginia Beach and put our toes in the tide.
It rained every day and the James River swelled
up to our doorsteps.
Aunt Harriet and I wore tight rubber bathing caps
and long saggy bathing suits. How skinny we were.
She was nine and I was six. The lightning flashed
and we hid in the closet; the thunder crashed.
We had straight, bobbed hair and bangs.
Once a dirigible moved above the tops of the trees,
with little ladders dangling down, and we waved.


^^EOP^^




1963



What shall I tell my children who are black
Of what it means to be a captive in this dark skin
What shall I tell my dear one, fruit of my womb, 
Of how beautiful they are when everywhere they turn
They are faced with abhorrence of everything that is black. 
Villains are black with black hearts. 
A black cow gives no milk. A black hen lays no eggs.
Bad news comes bordered in black, black is evil
And evil is black and devils' food is black… 
What shall I tell my dear ones raised in a white world
A place where white has been made to represent
All that is good and pure and fine and decent.
Where clouds are white, and dolls, and heaven
Surely is a white, white place with angels
Robed in white, and cotton candy and ice cream
and milk and ruffled Sunday dresses
And dream houses and long sleek cadillacs
And angel's food is white…all, all…white. 
What can I say therefore, when my child
Comes home in tears because a playmate
Has called him black, big lipped, flatnosed
and nappy headed? What will he think
When I dry his tears and whisper, "Yes, that's true.
But no less beautiful and dear."
How shall I lift up his head, get him to square
His shoulders, look his adversaries in the eye,
Confident of the knowledge of his worth,
Serene under his sable skin and proud of his own beauty? 
What can I do to give him strength
That he may come through life's adversities 
As a whole human being unwarped and human in a world
Of biased laws and inhuman practices, that he might 
Survive. And survive he must! For who knows?
Perhaps this black child here bears the genius
To discover the cure for…Cancer
Or to chart the course for exploration of the universe. 
So, he must survive for the good of all humanity.
He must and will survive.
I have drunk deeply of late from the foundation
Of my black culture, sat at the knee and learned
From Mother Africa, discovered the truth of my heritage,
The truth, so often obscured and omitted. 
And I find I have much to say to my black children.  
I will lift up their heads in proud blackness
With the story of their fathers and their fathers 
Fathers. And I shall take them into a way back time
of Kings and Queens who ruled the Nile,
And measured the stars and discovered the 
Laws of mathematics. Upon whose backs have been built
The wealth of continents. I will tell him
This and more. And his heritage shall be his weapon
And his armor; will make him strong enough to win
Any battle he may face. And since this story is 
Often obscured, I must sacrifice to find it 
For my children, even as I sacrificed to feed, 
Clothe and shelter them. So this I will do for them
If I love them. None will do it for me.
I must find the truth of heritage for myself
And pass it on to them. In years to come I believe
Because I have armed them with the truth, my children
And my children's children will venerate me. 
For it is the truth that will make us free!
 


^^EOP^^




A lot of water has passed under the bridge since 1963. Then, my concern was particularly for my own people and this version was written especially for them. I am happy that it has done and is doing its job. However, I want it to be known, that I am not a proponent of the concept of cultural nationalism. I dearly love and am proud of my good, serious, sincere black people, yet at the same time, my concern is with all people of goodwill no matter the color. I make no mystique of blackness. I am a humanist. Indeed, I am a universalist. This truth, I know. The liberation of black people in the United States is tightly linked with the liberation of black people in the far flung diaspora. Further, and more important, the liberation of black and oppressed people all over the world, is linked with the struggles of the workers of the world of every nationality and color against the common oppressors, overlords, and exploiters of their labor. 
                    Thus it was only natural that I should write "What Shall We Tell Our Children?" in 1973. I have tried to tell them the facts of life and the truth as I see it:
                    I hope I have succeeded. 
 



What shall we tell our children who are black?
What shall we tell our children who are white?
What shall we tell children of every race and hue?
For all children are the children of all of us
And all of us bear responsibility for all children
What shall we tell them?
How can we show them the conditions of their lives
So they will see how they can change them?
Those who are poverty stricken in the midst of plenty
Who must live in rat-infested slums
While decent homes stand empty
Who go to bed hungry
While grocery shelves are heavy
Who huddle in tattered rags
While racks in stores are sagging
Who yearn for a good education
But languish in programmed illiteracy
Whose intellectual growth is stunted
And whose ignorance is compounded
While the Academies produce more drones for the labor colony
What shall we tell them?
How can we show them the conditions of their lives
So they will see how they can change them?
What shall we tell our children
The men and women of the future?
We shall tell them the truth
It is our bounden duty to tell them the truth
It may be painful. We must tell them the truth
We may be criticized. We must tell them the truth 
We may be castigated. We must tell them the truth 
The truth it shall be, shall show them the conditions of their lives
Of a glorified way of life, the greatest in the world 
Which is not concerned with people, but with profits
Not with the well-being of many, but with the interests of a few
Not with the welfare and future of the people
But only with the profit-making present
We shall tell them the truth about a way of life
The greatest in the world
Where freedom and equality is granted to every man, woman, and child
Where everyone, providing he is willing to do what is necessary
Can become rich and wealthy by doing others before they do you
Where everyone, including you
Can acquire life's most important goodies
Like split-level houses, with wall-to-wall carpeting completely furnished 
And two cars and two color T.V.'s
And the latest style clothes and minks
And schminks and everything!
We shall tell them the truth
About a way of life
The greatest in the world
Which rejects the wisdom of its seers and sages
And whose culture is dictated and delineated by
Violent, vicious, destructive 
Murderous, unfeeling, crude
And quick on the draw supermen
Who deem the men and women of the future
As expendable and shunt them off to
Purposeless death in the name of patria and patriotism
Who slaughter the innocents who protest or speak for Peace
We shall tell them the truth
​We shall tell them the truth
About a way of life, the greatest in the world
Whose primal motivation is material acquisition
Wherein the majority of the people derive happiness
From having things which others do not have
Whose all high, omnipotent
All powerful Jehovah, Jesus, Lord
God, Allah and all Supreme
Is the adulated, sought after, live for,
Steal for, murder for, Almighty D-O-L-L-A-R dollar!
​We shall tell them the truth
About a way of life, the greatest in the world
Which manipulates and expends young lives
So that parasites may live and survive
Whose aim is but to acquire and kill
And kill and acquire again and again
At home and abroad and everywhere
​We shall tell them the truth
We shall urge them to examine their way of life,
The greatest in the world
Which deliberately depresses the conditions of life
Which offers no bright future
But instead keeps people in fear
Insecurity and in constant turmoil
Which decimates their ranks
With endless predatory wars
​We shall tell them the truth
About what life could be made to be
And how they themselves can help to make it
Bright, happy and secure. 
We shall show them that life
Is ever in motion, constantly going through
Processes of change, shall strengthen them in the belief
That it is possible for men and women,
For they themselves, for all of us
To live in harmony with our environment
And the Universe
Shall teach them that our knowledge increases
The more we gain control over our envirnment
And exploit it not for private gain but for our own happiness
We shall tell them the truth
We shall encourage them to expand their knowledge 
Of the known and the unknown
To destroy the cobwebs of superstition 
To find that there are no mysteries
Either in life or in nature
And that above all there is nothing to fear but fear itself. 
​We shall tell them the truth
Shall suggest this way of life
Can truly be made to be among the 
Greatest in the world
That through their own efforts
They can forge a new way
A superior way, a good way of life
Which is in harmony with the true purpose of life
Wherein the people themselves control the conditions of their labor
Wherein the people have the total benefits of their labor
And where men, women, and children
Live lives free from exploitation. 
We shall tell them that a way of life is possible
Wherein the people may own the means and tools of production
And use them solely for the abundance of the whole people
And not for the aggrandizement of a few
As in the old way.
​We shall tell them the truth
We shall arm them with the knowledge of how to survive
In an atmosphere fraught with danger and hostility
We shall urge them to heed
​The wisdom bequeathed to us by the elders
And to have faith. To have faith.
In people, in themselves and their fellow human beings
And to have respect and love for all of humankind.
​We shall tell them
​To keep the belief that the purpose of life
Is to continue to grow and create
And to contribute to growth and create
And to contribute to growth and
Creativity toward a better life
For people now and for generations to come
What shall we tell our children?
​We shall tell them the truth
We shall imbue them with the vision of the new tomorrow
Seemingly far, but yet so near
We shall tell them that they hold the power in their own hands
To make this new way
A reality in our own life time.


^^EOP^^

rings diminish, duck reflects flight then threads off
Long branch of land, rusted oaks smoldering
       fawn shore, grasses bare scripts of green
       black fingerbones of the willows, splayed
       rubric fringe of the reeds at the edge of water
The reflection is its own blurred dream
The blended edges, furred thing
tawny path of stalks brushed into gray slope behind
Bright yellow mostly gone now, the dominance
       of dulled bronze, ochrous, ferrous grooves of
       the several oaks
The wrought planes and hinges of things
Strange, held-off symmetry, axis of waterline
       rubbed, smeared, edge-shifted
What is real then made more so through
       an intervention of element
The chipmunk’s tail jerks in synch with its mouth-pops
Stares hard at me from a dead willow stump
Who are you and what have you done?
Things moving in the leaves behind me.
Dog barks from far across fields
Single bird oars across lake
The sky deep in: dark oxygens
crimp of leaf edging in dried weed stalk
miniature seedpods held forward
calligraphic against gray water, white stones
chipmunk-rustle, upturn duff, chirp storm whirl off, hold still
       hold still
Gravity picks and fidgets 
How each blade and bract is angled just so
       arches, etched kerns
       scroll of deft beech leaf
       Baroque script of dried vines
       their wall of texture coming down
Crows burr into woods
fish plinks through and slacks under
ducks quilt across sky, through sky-water
mottled beads hovering, unchaining
Reflection is a real thing set
       in perpetual motion, as if electron
       spinning and jittering made visible
       the static progressions
The waving laminations of white stone
the wandering rift through
the pulse-veins
Breathing thing, made to breathe, graven so 
Now the delicate hammers
pure cuts of bird
steel rings reassembling
Quit path under oak
Something moves off a dark road
Deep-embroidered quiet
the tickets slip
thicket in
meter-tick of duck taking off
       keep close, brush close to surface
       furl between bird and mirror-bird
I am vested in sensation
a suspension of yellow maple amid stalks of oak
       distillate of leaves
       saffron particulate
Deep sea of trees, fanned tops of oak corals, collective bend
fast tappers high up
flapping across water
back up the damp trough
trees closing in
two deer pick across, turn back
       clatter through woods
       encircling


^^EOP^^

Adam ate an apple
it got stuck in his throat
and they called him Eve
the progenitor
the creator of all things
the mother of strength
and fortitude
and sadness
Adam ate an apple
choked on it so hard
a rib popped out of his chest
and they called it Eve
the progenitor
the creator of all things
the mother of strength and fortitude
and sadness
it takes the hacking of a body
to make a woman
Adam hacking up a piece of his body
it was just a piece of fruit
they called me fruit once too
they called me fruity
before they called me flaming
before they called me faggot
before they called me woman
i thought i would have
to hack this body into pieces
woman, a name stuck in my throat
right under the apple Adam tried to eat
choked on it for years
waited for my ribs to pop out
my chest to explode
for my Eve to be created
from the fruit i couldn’t swallow
they called me fruit once
until they called me woman
and then they just called me fruitless
as if it took a womb to be
progenitor
creator
mother of all things
strength and fortitude and sadness
they reckon God looked
at the image of herself
and called it Adam
they still don’t call me woman
they still don’t birth me Eve
even though they cast me out
my throat shrunken close
with the fruit still stuck in it
like Adam
before they called him Eve
and suddenly i am a stranger
to Eden
i am a stranger to this body
as if it hadn’t always been mine
i reckon God looked
at the image of herself
and called it me
but i don’t know if that
was before or after the apple
before or after Adam choked
which came first
the progenitor or the mother
the apple or the rib
the strength or the sadness
this body was God’s original creation
but they called it sin
they called it Adam
I reckon God looked
at the image of  herself
and called Adam Eve
after she choked on his name
some fruit that bloomed
in everyone else’s throat
but she could never quite swallow
the fall of man was an apple
hacked up from a fruitless body
a woman learning what evil was
like a man forcing his name upon you
the fall of man was a rib
being torn from a chest
and men calling that violence holy
naming a woman based only
on the body parts she’s made of
the fall of man
was the beginning of Eve
Eve casting out Adam’s name
Eve discovering who she was
the progenitor
the creator of all things
the mother of strength
and fortitude
and sadness
the fall of man
was Eve becoming a woman
with or without Eden’s approval
and now
every time someone
tries to call her Adam
tries to force the apple
of his name down her throat
she laughs
she swallows
she looks at God herself
and she smiles


^^EOP^^

If you open up any atlas
and take a look at a map of the world,
almost every single one of them
slices the Pacific Ocean in half.
To the human eye,
every map centers all the land masses on Earth
creating the illusion
that water can handle the butchering
and be pushed to the edges
of the world.
As if the Pacific Ocean isn’t the largest body
living today, beating the loudest heart,
the reason why land has a pulse in the first place. 
The audacity one must have to create a visual so
violent as to assume that no one comes
from water so no one will care
what you do with it
and yet,
people came from land,
are still coming from land,
and look what was done to them. 
When people ask me where I’m from,
they don’t believe me when I say water.
So instead, I tell them that home is a machete
and that I belong to places
that don’t belong to themselves anymore,
broken and butchered places that have made me
a hyphen of a woman:
a Samoan-American that carries the weight of both
colonizer and colonized,
both blade and blood. 
California                          stolen.
Samoa                                        sliced in half                                          stolen.
California, nestled on the western coast of the most powerful
country on this planet.
Samoa, an island so microscopic on a map, it’s no wonder
people doubt its existence.
California, a state of emergency away from having the drought
rid it of all its water.
Samoa, a state of emergency away from becoming a saltwater cemetery
if the sea level doesn’t stop rising.
When people ask me where I’m from,
what they want is to hear me speak of land,
what they want is to know where I go once I leave here,
the privilege that comes with assuming that home
is just a destination, and not the panic.
Not the constant migration that the panic gives birth to.
What is it like? To know that home is something
that’s waiting for you to return to it?
What does it mean to belong to something that isn’t sinking?
What does it mean to belong to what is causing the flood? 
So many of us come from water
but when you come from water
no one believes you.
Colonization keeps laughing.
Global warming is grinning
at all your grief.
How you mourn the loss of a home
that isn’t even gone yet.
That no one believes you’re from. 
How everyone is beginning
to hear more about your island
but only in the context of
vacations and honeymoons,
football and military life,
exotic women exotic fruit exotic beaches
but never asks about the rest of its body.
The water.
The islands breathing in it.
The reason why they’re sinking.
No one visualizes islands in the Pacific
as actually being there.
You explain and explain and clarify
and correct their incorrect pronunciation
and explain 
until they remember just how vast your ocean is,
how microscopic your islands look in it,
how easy it is to miss when looking
on a map of the world. 
Excuses people make
for why they didn’t see it
before.


^^EOP^^

Dear Frustrated in Flatbush,
Gurl, just go on ahead then.
You waiting for your Daddy
to give you the thumbs up?
Do what you like.
Do what makes your ass happy.
They gon’ call you all makes
and sizes of hoe anyway.
That’s how this thing been set up.
But just cuz they name a thing a thing,
don’t mean it ain’t still named God
in some other language. 
Your fortune cookie say you poppin’.
You a full spread of good shit.
Your rotten wisdom tooth.
Your pockmarked shoulders.
Those eyelashes ain’t come here
to talk about the weather.
You the hottest day in July
and every fire hydrant in this city
is written out to your name. 
Whatchu dead fish for?
Whatchu call that stroke?
Drowning? Baptism?
Gurl, you betta lick that
collection plate clean
and stop pretending you just
got off the first canoe from Heaven.
You ain’t nothin but
a big bowl of sweat rice.
You wring your left thigh,
they call you Vintage JuJu.
They like, “This some kind of nightmare?” 
And it’s just you, smoking a blunt in the dark,
cackling like rain. Like your grandmama
at her ain’t-shit husband’s funeral.
Bitch, you been a woman.
This ain’t new skin.
Slap some Lycra on it
and call yourself a predicament.
You ain’t just somebody’s meal plan.
Pull back your hair and eat. 
And look at this muhfukka,
sittin across the table,
lookin like he wanna bite you.
Tonight is tonight and tomorrow
might be somewhere else,
serenading some lesser bitch.
Throw his ass a bone and
stop worrying about your credit score. 
You stay banging your tambourine
to the wrong hymnal.
I’m sure they had names
and inescapable mouths but
what your ex gotta do with this?
Why you still got his body in your linen closet?
That’s nasty. Bitch, keep your house clean.
You crying over spilled dick. Gurl buh-bye.
Getchu a free refill. 
You too black for indie film housewife.
You too naked for conversation like this.
Too much soft brutality,
too much bathtub depression.
Why you always got your neck swung open?
Free throat don’t pay for your boy’s sneakers.
You already know I don’t even sigh for free.
Shit, I stroke a shallow strobe light,
inchworm down 4 feet of greasy pole,
and I still don’t feel like any less than a miracle.


^^EOP^^

Watch —
Vasenka citizens do not know they are evidence of happiness 
in a time of war,
each is a ripped-out document of laughter. 
God,
deaf  have something to tell
that not even they can hear — 
you will find me, God,
like a dumb pigeon’s beak I am
pecking
every way at astonishment. 
If you
climb a roof in the Central Square of a bombarded city, you will see my people and me —
one neighbor thieves a cigarette
another gives a dog
a pint of sunlit beer.


^^EOP^^

As the dead, so I come
to the city I am of.
Am without. 
To watch play out around me
as theater —  
audience as the dead are audience 
to the life that is not mine.
Is as not
as never. 
Turning down Shiraz’s streets
it turns out to be such 
a faraway thing. 
A without which
I have learned to be. 
From bed, I hear a man in the alley
selling something, no longer by mule and holler
but by bullhorn and jalopy. 
How to say what he is selling —  
it is no thing
this language thought worth naming.
No thing I have used before. 
It is his
life I don’t see daily.
Not theater. Not play. 
Though I remain only audience. 
It is a thing he must sell daily
and every day he peddles 
this thing: a without which 
I cannot name. 
Without which is my life.


^^EOP^^

chuuch /church

[pronounced without the r. the r is the hump on our backs. too much to weigh /wait. imagine replacing the r with u. the cupping is softer. all the things it holds. it often sounds like ahh. round and complete. it all comes together. like home.]
 


from the renowned amen! meaning let it be. or so it is. or so may have it. and take into agreement. this the stamp. the let it be said and sold. the solidarity screaming from the stem of our spouts.  this is the yes.
used in positions of incognegro. the screech beyond the never-lands of our blocks. posted and protecting. remember the code.  often known as i peep game. or the never ending i’m on it, bro.   closing the deal. the celebration of i see you. welcome to my memory for another day. let the house of our bodies be grateful. for our sacrifices have not killed us. yet.
said like a vaccine. the awkwardness dancing on your lip before  your words fall and ruin the show. this can also be the broken promise. the text you know you won’t reply to. the person you   drag your heart for with no supplies left to clean. this is sometimes the last stake. the call of i don’t understand, but imma figure this shit out. the choir is singing and you can’t understand anything   sang. you sing. for the house is still bouncing. ace boom cooling.
this is not to be confused with sending off. it’s the most honest  thing we are unsure of. for every house is not covered. so we  cover our prayer with a this is it. this is real and our lives. we do  not agree to this condition of our well-being. blast and break our  cinder blocks like tambourines. we weave the stories together. thank and talk through our teeth. for we know. we understand. we  light the sky. shake up with god and find the move. keep the key.  keep it pushing.



^^EOP^^

I call to ask my mother the name of the street where we bought the suitcases when we left
Brooklyn. A better question would have been how did it feel to be sliced from the rib of Pine and
Loring and sent, like a kite, up North. Or tell me what your mother said to you in her grand rear
room the night we left, seated on the edge of her bed in her nightgown, muted in the low light.
So many bellies in the house. Cacophony of kreyol and Brooklyn buk and sweet sweat across the
walls. Did she tell you to follow your husband. Did she tell you anything about us. How, above
all, you should keep us anchored to here, where the distance between comfort and safety is
measurable by the length of the hallway, the distance from one room to the next. The rooms, like
capsules, each with its own medicine for Black kids. Or, tell me what you wore on the plane
ride. I only remember what I wore: stockings and Mary Janes and the pink knit pleated skirt. I did
not remember this was your first time flying, a grown woman over thirty, and you had never seen
how small the world looked beneath your feet.


^^EOP^^

On limbs of slanted light
painted with my mind’s skin color,
I step upon black braids,
oil-drenched, worming
from last month’s orphaned mouth. 
Winged with burning — 
I ferry them                 from my filmed eyes, wheezing. 
Scalp blood in my footprints — 
my buckskin pouch filling                 with photographed sand. 
No language but its rind                 crackling in the past tense.   •  
Tearing apart cloud names — 
pierced fog commands:
douse the inferno’s ribs
with opaque forgetting;
clip dawn from the book’s dusk,
unfasten the song’s empty auditorium                 over a garden of mute foals. 
Tearing apart fog names — 
pierced cloud sings:
let them shriek from their hinges,
let them slice their gills open
with flint knives
and circle their ghosts
as frog-skinned antelope,
let them drag their legs over a trail
anchored to a ladder
that has soaked up blood
since land began crawling out of anthills.   •  
Slipping into free fall,
we drip-pattern: the somewhere parts,
our shoulders dissolving                                                 in somewhere mud. 
The arcing sun whistles
across the mask’s abalone brow,
its blurring pouts into a forest
chirping from a lake’s bite marks
stamped vertically on this map’s windowsill. 
Kneeling our thoughts on ellipses
evaporating from ollas of fragrant wet clay — 
we saddle the drowning’s slippery rim.


^^EOP^^

What represses unhomes in the sound
Who has made me what is made me
Is a voice just muscles and shape and
Breath to phrase a song boats assemble
At the mouth of the harbor mouth in
Earth you who wrote an ode to silence
Never wrote of what is silenced I did
Seek all resounding caves let the voice
Be lit all the lanterns in the new world we
Need the language of stone from string
To string quiver in the opening the garden
So beautiful Lucifer dark sun of morning
No Eden but innocence no expulsion
But after  • 
No more will I listen to other than
A single note moaned not known
I do not here think again what place
Presents itself own moan well eye
Here body as a battery of the one
Moment when it is time to open
Your mouth to plug in I will allow what
I invented to find its color make
A shape which neither water nor
Sky do how do you now in this
Contained shape go through
Your life not like a constellation
Not guessed at intuited or divined
No name so how do you discern a shape for
What is often called g-d  • 
Vantablack was made for missiles
Or planes for defense purposes so dark
No eye could see it some voices are
Like that no one could hear them it
Is not good to be lost to be lost is
More than metaphor for spiritual
Condition I sit at the terrace overlooking
The green sea perhaps it is failure
That ought to be sought the voice
That fails falls silent Sheila’s or
The body’s the blue failed me the sun
Fails every evening I we you have all
Failed too everyone who strove all these
Long years for peace failed  • 
August 7 Predawn blue and blue the sound
Of the sea further away and less violent lights
On the water fishing boats closer than I
Imagined no one is awake some animals
Maybe what I do without knowing in a
Harrowing world what I do without knowing
As I listen to the gurgle of water against
The promontory I feel like I am listening
To a body how slow and opening a piece
Of tune where one does not know how
It will unfold no chord or cadence to tell
You in sound what the path will be how
It will happen until it happens I do not want
To be alone what does it mean anyway when
Someone says “Muslim”  • 
Can she still feel music in her body can she
Vocalize even without technology of the
Mouth tongue palate glottis vocal chords
What is a voice Anish Kapoor granted
Exclusive right to work with blackest
Black she now communicates through notes
And gesture Vantablack made for
Military purposes like sound also used
For torture all sounds to wake you vibrate
Your brain what emerges as an echo from
Music as torture children on the beach
Playing god is sound or art or science
Shit and sex the body’s echo what mess
Is left in the big or the little death  • 
Sheila’s voice always in the background
Always disappearing into the music
Of what surrounds it the way one loses
Oneself in sex or death or the moment
Of shitting I got lost in Salman’s
Music he said it was a surrender of
Ego when he left me behind but really
It was a surrender of my will words too
Have god inside but for the prize of
The body they do not compete can
Not hold the storm of time cannot
Hold the line do I touch the ocean
Inside will my family come to
My funeral  • 
That night we swam the full moon
Civilized us federated us gave us
Our nationality we who were lost
I have now lost what little heritage
I did have returned to the rude
Rough world long vowels of
Morning evening birds scream
No soft blanket falling to cover
But a throttling a suffocation
Of dusk no silence when the self
Stills the absence of noise is itself
Torture I cannot sleep tongued loose
Drones move through a riff by
A singer without papers  • 
August 9 Eleanna takes me out on
The water Miller exploding the form
Of the novel itself I see now how Nin
Wanted to move away from his vociferous
Singing of the world as material to try
To construct a music of the way
The mind works still fed by light on the
Water a mute noise of engines under
Water as the boat passes the light
House and heads out for open sea
Remembering in Palestine crawling
Down the hill trying to catch a wifi
Signal from the settlement untapped
Improvisation of space  • 
At the stone terrace the gardener lingers
Clipping hedges while I work breeze
Between us soon I will return I read
The article about a poet who was killed
In the street his poems untranslated
All the artists and writers killed the open
Space of the sea yesterday Eleanna and I
Went too far out went almost all the way
To Marseille we saw the pink-gray sky
Of wildfire I accepted the waves I found
In the chapters of the Quran to sing my
Way through turbulence draw a way
Through the waves savage wildfire all
The villages evacuated  • 
We woke to the smell of burning air
A little cool smell of charred refuse
Colors muted last night the moon
Came clear nearly blue eyes too
Painfully large rough on the eyes and
Impatient but I wanted to look so
Badly for the meteors the sea
Crashing against the rocks smoke
From the fire obscured the sky
In the morning we rowed across
The harbor and realized fear of heights
And fear of depth is the same just one
You see and one you don’t


^^EOP^^

We knew something was wrong when next to the TV, a large tomatillo plant was growing out the carpet. Everything there spoke, Table, Lamps    ...    

In the living room, Coffee Table’s eyes glued to the TV: flags, drums, hands on the chest on the screen, but it couldn’t have been Independence. It was the fifth of the fifth month, something about a battle won, a battle lost.

Our host, Dining Table, handed each of us a green sphere. Eat, s’il vous plaît. Don’t think about it, she told us; then sent Chair and Coffee Table to sleep.

Watch the bedbugs. You can’t unlock the windows, Fan in the hallway said.

For two weeks Table left tomatillos outside our door. The green marbles punched through our stomachs, so deep, our ears grew roots. It was as if no heat. Bed wished she was bigger. Closet dreaded his clothes. Wall didn’t let us sleep; kept saying,

¡Look! Look over there, cabrones. You’ll never make it there. If you’re gonna ask for the best route, the best price. ¿Where are your suspenders? ¿Dress shoes? You’re not really serious about getting to San Francisco. ¿Are you? Pinche dirty pigeons.


^^EOP^^

1 
Picture a woman
riding thunder on
the legs of slavery    ...       2 
Picture her kissing
our spines saying no to
the eyes of slavery    ...       3 
Picture her rotating
the earth into a shape
of lives becoming    ...       4 
Picture her leaning
into the eyes of our
birth clouds    ...       5 
Picture this woman
saying no to the constant yes of slavery    ...       6 
Picture a woman
jumping rivers her
legs inhaling moons    ...       7 
Picture her ripe
with seasons of
legs    ...   running    ...       8 
Picture her tasting
the secret corners
of woods    ...      9 
Picture her saying: You have within you the strength,
the patience, and the passion
to reach for the stars,
to change the world

^^EOP^^

Granma cautioned in a kitchen off Century and Hoover:
Never throw your hair away. Burn it. Till yellow
cornbread bakes and greens release pot liquor,
her garnet-polished fingers unraveled each cornrow. 
Never throw your hair away, burn it till yellow
flames flick up and turn orange, blue. Overhead,
her garnet-polished fingers unraveled each cornrow,
wrestling. I reminisce, standing over her deathbed. 
Rain picks up and turns ocher, blue. Unsaid
were simple things. Oxtail stew and yam
recipes I recollect, standing over her deathbed.
She smoked Mores leaning in the kitchen doorjamb, 
when simple things — oxtail stew and yam
recipes — were not measured nor written. Cooking while
she smoked Mores leaning in the kitchen doorjamb,
her left hand in the profound curve of her hip. She’d say, Chile, 
ma recipes are not measured nor written. Cooking while
I sat alongside the stove waiting for the hot comb, meantime
her left hand in the profound curve of her hip, she’d say, Chile,
I may be dead and gone, but you mark my words. Sometimes 
I sat alongside the stove waiting for the hot comb, meantime
I loved watching her smoking, cooking, talking with More fingers,
I may be dead and gone, but you’ll mark my words. This time,
she is quiet. I hold maroon-polished hands as her soul lifts, waits, lingers. 
I loved watching her smoking, cooking, talking with More fingers.
Halcyon rain picks up, soaks me blue. Nothing unsaid.
She is quiet. I hold maroon-polished hands as her soul lifts, waits, lingers,
restful. I’m remembering — standing over her deathbed.


^^EOP^^

A boy I did not marry                  taught me to dance salsa on 2      placed
the fingers of his left hand            on my untutored spine;               you know what
it’s like to become someone’s clave  
to love for the span           of the trombone’s long breath                  he      whispered negra so I spun                my heart landing            on     the     rum-covered     linoleum
of a nightclub  
on what used to be New York Ave              in what used to be Chocolate City
I let him turn & spin                                 my name             bella negra
             his hands were less tender but still I let them roam  
              when I                  1, 2, 3             5, 6, 7     in front of my mirror
I was always la negra defended in the lyric                       and     you     can     forgive
searching hands when a mouth swells the biggest ache of your body 
                                                                                                 into song


^^EOP^^

Even if I still had the clothes I wore,
those first twelve years, even if I had
the clothes I would take off before my mother
climbed the stairs toward me: the glassy
Orlon sweater; the cotton dress,
under its smocking my breasts-to-be
accordion-folded under the skin of my chest;
even if I had all the sashes,
even if I had all the cotton
underwear, like a secret friend,
I think I could not get back to how
it felt. I study the stability
of the spirit — was it almost I who came back
out of each punishment,
back to a self which had been waiting, for me,
in the cooled-off pile of my clothes? As for the
condition of being beaten, what
was it like: going into a barn, the animals
not in stalls, but biting, and shitting, and
parts of them on fire? And when my body came out
the other side, and I checked myself,
10 fingers, 10 toes,
and I checked whatever I had where we were
supposed to have a soul, I hardly dared
to know what I knew,
that though I had been taken down,
again, hammer and tongs, valley
and range, down to the ground of my being
and under that ground, it was possible
that in my essence, at the center of my essence, in some
tiny chamber my mother could not
enter — or did not enter — I had not been changed.


^^EOP^^

When my wife was breaking apart, my son was falling in love. 
She lay on the couch with a heated sack of rice on her belly,
sometimes dozing, sometimes staring out the window at the olive tree 
as it broke into tiny white blossoms, as it swelled into bitter black fruit. 
At first, I wanted to spare him.
I wished he was still farming up north, tucking bulbs of green onions
into their beds and watering the lettuce,
his hands gritty, his head haloed in a straw hat. 
But as the months deepened, I grew selfish. 
I wanted him here with his new love.
When I passed the open bathroom door, I wanted
to see them brushing their teeth, 
one perched on the toilet lid, one on the side of the tub,
laughing and talking through their foamy mouths,
toothbrushes rattling against their teeth. 
Like sage gives its scent when you crush it. Like stone
is hard. They were happy and I could touch it.


^^EOP^^

And although I am a poet, I am not the bullet;
I will not heat-search the soft points. 
I am not the coroner who will graze her hand
over naked knees. Who will swish her fingers 
in the mouth. Who will flip the body over, her eye a hook
fishing for government-issued lead. 
I am not the sidewalk, which is unsurprised
as another cheek scrapes harsh against it. 
             Although I too enjoy soft palms on me;
enjoy when he rests on my body with a hard breath;
                                                                                 I have clasped
this man inside me and released him again and again,
listening to him die thousands of little deaths. 
What is a good metaphor for a woman who loves in a time like this? 
I am no scalpel or high thread count sheet. Not a gavel, or hand-painted teacup.
I am neither           nor romanced by the streetlamp nor candlelight;
my hands are not an iron, but look, they’re hot, look
how I place them           in love           on his skin
and am still able to unwrinkle his spine.


^^EOP^^

When you finally, after deep illness, lay
the length of your body on mine, isn’t it
like the strata of the earth, the pressure
of time on sand, mud, bits of shell, all
the years, uncountable wakings, sleepings,
sleepless nights, fights, ordinary mornings
talking about nothing, and the brief
fiery plummets, and the unselfconscious
silences of animals grazing, the moving
water, wind, ice that carries the minutes, leaves
behind minerals that bind the sediment into rock.
How to bear the weight, with every
flake of bone pressed in. Then, how to bear when
the weight is gone, the way a woman
whose neck has been coiled with brass
can no longer hold it up alone. Oh love,
it is balm, but also a seal. It binds us tight
as the fur of a rabbit to the rabbit.
When you strip it, grasping the edge
of the sliced skin, pulling the glossy membranes
apart, the body is warm and limp. If you could,
you’d climb inside that wet, slick skin
and carry it on your back. This is not
neat and white and lacy like a wedding,
not the bright effervescence of champagne
spilling over the throat of the bottle. This visceral
bloody union that is love, but
beyond love. Beyond charm and delight
the way you to yourself are past charm and delight.
This is the shucked meat of love, the alleys and broken
glass of love, the petals torn off the branches of love,
the dizzy hoarse cry, the stubborn hunger.


^^EOP^^

To wave from the porch
To let go of the grudge
To disrobe
To recall Ethel Rosenberg’s green polka-dotted dress
To call your father and say I’d forgotten how nice everyone in these red states can be
To hear him say Yes, long as you don’t move in next door
To recall every drawn curtain in the apartments you have lived
To find yourself at 33 at a vast expanse with nary a papyrus of  guidance, with nary a voice, a muse, a model
To finally admit out loud then I want to go home
To have a dinner party of intellectuals with a bell, long-armed, lightly-tongued, at each setting
To sport your dun gown
To revel in face serums
To be a well-calibrated burn victim to fight the signs of aging
To assure financial health
To be lavender sachets and cedar lining and all the ways the rich might hide their rot
To eye the master’s bone china
To pour diuretic in his coffee and think this erosive to the state
To disrobe when the agent asks you to
To find a spot on any wall to stare into
To develop the ability to leave an entire nation thusly, just by staring at a spot on the wall, as the lead-vested agent names article by article what to remove
To do this in order to do the other thing, the wild thing
To say this is my filmdom, The Master’s House, and I gaze upon it and it is good
To discuss desalinization plants and de terroir
To date briefly a banker, a lapsed Marxist, and hear him on the phone speaking in billions of dollars, its residue over the clear bulbs of his eyes, as he turns to look upon your nudity
To fantasize publishing a poem in the New Yorker eviscerating his little need
To set a bell at each intellectual’s table setting ringing idea after idea, and be the simple-footed help, rushing to say Yes?
To disrobe when the agent asks you to
To find a spot on any wall to stare into
To develop the ability to leave an entire nation thusly, just by staring at a spot on the wall
To say this is my filmdom, The Master’s House
To recall the Settler who from behind his mobile phone said I’m filming you for God
To recall this sad God, God of the mobile phone camera, God of the small black globe and pixelated eye above the blackjack table at Harrah’s and the metal, toothed pit of Qalandia checkpoint the same
To recall the Texan that held the shotgun to your father’s chest, sending him falling backward, pleading, and the words came to him in Farsi
To be jealous of this, his most desperate language
To lament the fact of your lamentations in English, English being your first defeat
To finally admit out loud then I want to go home
To stand outside your grandmother’s house
To know, for example, that in Farsi the present perfect is called the  relational past, and is used at times to describe a historic event whose effect is still relevant today, transcending the past
To say, for example, Shah dictator bude-ast translates to The Shah was a dictator, but more literally to The Shah is was a dictator
To have a tense of is-was, the residue of it over the clear bulb of your eyes
To walk cemetery after cemetery in these States and nary a gravestone reading Solmaz
To know no nation will be home until one does
To do this in order to do the other thing, the wild thing, though you’ve forgotten what it was


^^EOP^^




The team behind Moana has taken great care to respect the cultures of the Pacific Islands that inspired the film, and we regret that the Maui costume has offended some.
— Disney, Inc.



someone will
touch the Earth
once, I wanted
my own soil.
tried to drown my ankles
in myself.
again. Daughter of Oceania
wanting me home.
my skin is sacred ground.
always want
to take
a white girl's skin
I cried so hard,
until I became a boat
I never want to be lost
at high tide. Daughter of
Ancestor's language tatted
on my skin
my skin
what's mine
more than
an ocean
floating above myself
at sea
open-mouthed Sun
on my body.
my story will breathe.
 


^^EOP^^

Why not a crocus from this bulb? Why not the purple
of bees’ lust so that, in honey, she might taste something
good? Under skin, purple is a private taste, closer
to the blood of her tongue, closer to the blood
she chokes on when she’s gasping, to the clot
behind her blackened eye. The heated force
that slammed her shin, that pushed bone
from the bone, that arched her but did not
approach caress, is another kind of lust. Spring:
a madness of grappling. Isn’t that what she sees outside
every window? And inside? Nothing unique going on.


^^EOP^^




A reading  from the book of  Willie Maxwell 679:1738



...    then Rap Gawd formed a man
from the dust of the auto-tune
&breathed into his nostrils
the breath of Rémy Martin
the man became Fetty Wap. 
Rap Gawd saw fit to
make Fetty a counterpart.
so he caused the man to fall into a deep sleep;
while he was sleeping
he took one of the man’s eyes
then closed up the place with flesh.
then the Rap Gawd made a woman
from the eye he had taken out of the man. 
the creation story of Fetty
the first trap rapper to make a song
I might play at my wedding. 
there’s a choir of church mothers
smiling down on the brown boy
that sings of a woman’s worth
in a culture destined to nullify it. 
do you know how long
sisters been waiting
for a brother
to willingly let us hit the bando?
(after patiently explaining what the fuck that means.)  l’union fait la force
your music emblematic of the motto of Haiti
unity makes strength 
as we scream SQUAAADDDD!
the weight of that bass
hits hard
like Gawd’s tears
landing on glow in the dark floors
’cause Gawd does not just “cry”
He makes it rain
on a crowd of women
in heels higher than most GPAs
dancing their way through
nursing school
&out of some deadbeat’s
roach-filled 1 bedroom. 
the fellas
big brother
arm-wrapped shoulders
singing off-key
about Ki’s &pies
and other shit
they have no real idea about. 
the only song in the club
that allows a hetero male
to gaze into the eyes
of another
[suspected] hetero male
and/or stranger
singing his fucking heart out. 
make him more mathematician
than murderer
spewing lyrics repping
the urban district’s finest cognac
this
is a black man’s
“Sweet Caroline”
oh, oh, oh! 
Fetty, you got me —
I, too, see heaven
peering through
the pearly-gated smile
of that gap-toothed princess
in your video. 
I, too, have a glock in my rari —
in the form of a master’s degree
but don’t get it twisted
this summa cum laude bloaw
anytime a motherfucker think
they know me!
&my trap look a lot
like a dimly-lit cafe
with semicold
red stripes
a microphone
a couple judges
but I’ll be damned
if anyone tell me
I ain’t a queen of this shit. 
&then I blink
&the bass subsides
&the song fades
into another brother
caring more
about his golden grill
than making the best
of a family business. 
&she picks up her ass
her purse
slides off the pole
disappears
into a mixture
of low-budget smoke machines
&catcalling men 
wedding bands tangled
in the drawstring of their sweats
 
&another Saturday twerks itself into the crisp breeze of Sunday morning &the church mothers glance over the room covered in government-issued confetti &Gawd smiles as they bellow in unison
  “I want you to be mine again!”


^^EOP^^




After Alfred Stieglitz



Not so much the missing of things
but the nostalgia of colors, their music, 
the ordinary revelation of a family’s life
caught in the flop and dance, a jig, 
if you will, of their layers, outer and inner skins,
the secret things so close to the body, 
the taste, the salt and sweet of blood, and shit,
and piss, and then, rinsed and scrubbed, leaving 
beneath the astringent scent of soap
a musky marker of self for strays 
to smell or imagine as they walk
past the parade of the living 
on taut lines, propped by poles
with nails for a hook, above 
the startling green of grass and hedge,
the barefaced concrete steps, 
the sky, inscrutable as a wall;
this is what one carries as a kind 
of sweetness — the labor of brown hands,
elbow-deep in suds, the rituals 
of cleansing, the humility of a darning
or a frayed crotch, the dignity 
of cleanliness, the democracy of truth,
the way we lived our lives in the open.


^^EOP^^




For Etan Patz



The parents whose boy went off to school
that morning — the police may have found someone
who saw their son, alive, after
they saw him for the last time. Step away!
Someone who saw that elfin face
change, at the word “soda.” Step back!
And change again, and change. And down
the basement steps, down into the earth,
the stairs down into the underworld. Don’t go there. Close your eyes. Someone
may know the unbearable — someone
in custody. O, “custody.”
A wall of dirt, a wall of stone,
a bare bulb, like the uterus upside
down. No Kaddish, no washing of the dead,
no linen shroud, no company
through the long night.
Whatever honor can be kept for him — 
his pure and whole honor is kept
by his parents, for the rest of the hard
labor of their lives. All this time,
they could not die, so they’d be here, in case
he came back. Unspeakable. And now,
the one taken in for questioning cries out,
“I don’t know why, I don’t know why.”
He will not tell. Is he holding that hour
to himself. Did he hold that child in his hands,
39 years ago.
Vanished. The spirit mattered away.
And the dear matter — don’t. The bag,
the truck. The landfill or the barge, the burial
at sea — the dispersal, the containment within
the bounds of the oceans, crested on top and
cragged at the floor where the innards of the planet pour
up, molten, through fissures — contained
in the air bound by the atmosphere, the
clouds of mourning pressing against
the inner surface of the casing. Shut
your mouth. Put down your pen. Drop
your weapon! Stop! In the name of the law
and the prophets.

^^EOP^^

What is a man?
A quiet between two bombardments.


^^EOP^^

Of course I chose the terry cloth surrogate. Milkless
artifice. False idol. Everyone, I’m told, has a mother, 
but Master bred me in a laboratory, his colony
of orphans. Rhesus macaque. Macaca mulatta. Old
World monkeys, my matriarchs ruled the grasslands 
and forests long before white men like him weaned
their whiteness and maleness from our chromosomes, 
slashed and burned our home, what they once called
The Orient. French Indochina. Việt Nam. Master,
like a good despot, besotted and dumbstruck, dying 
to discern the genesis of allegiance, the science of love
and loss, nature versus nurture, segregated me at birth 
from my maker, pelt sopping with placental blood.
In a chamber where he kept track of me, his pupils
recorded my every movement, my every utterance, 
hoping I might evince to them a part of themselves.
But I wasn’t stupid. I knew famine and emaciation, 
and nevertheless I picked that lifeless piece of shit
because it was soft to hold. Who wouldn’t want that?
Though it couldn’t hold me, I clung to the yellow-face 
devil as though it was my true mother and I grasped
the function of motherhood: witness to my suffering, 
companion in hell. Unlike infants with wire mothers
I didn’t hurl myself on the floor in terror or tantrum,
rocking back and forth, colder than a corpse. I had 
what Master believed to be a psychological base
of operations. Emotional attachment. Autonomy. 
Everything he denied and did to me, his ceaseless
cruelty concealed as inquisition, unthinkable until
it was thought, I endured by keeping for myself 
the wisdom he yearned to discover and take credit
for. Love, like me, is a beast no master can maim, 
no dungeon can discipline. Love is at once master
and dungeon. So don’t underestimate me. Simple-
minded and subservient as I might appear to be, 
I gathered more about Master than he did
about me, which, I guess, is a kind of fidelity 
conceived not from fondness but fear magnified
by fascination. Master made me his terry cloth
surrogate, his red-clawed god, nursing his id 
on my tits, and for that, I pitied him. All this time
he was the animal. All this time he belonged to me.


^^EOP^^

I cover the eyes of Gena, 7, and Anushka, 2,
as their father drops his trousers to be searched, and his flesh shakes, 
and around him:
silence’s gross belly flaps. The crowd watches. 
The children watch us watch:
soldiers drag the naked man up the staircase. I teach his children’s hands to make of anguish 
a language —
see how deafness nails us into our bodies. Anushka 
speaks to homeless dogs as if they are men,
speaks to men 
as if they are men
and not just souls on crutches of bone. 
Townspeople
watch children but feel under the bare feet of their thoughts 
the cold stone of the city.


^^EOP^^

Your hands have no more worth than tree stumps at harvest.
Don’t sit on my porch while I make myself useful.
Braid secrets in scalps on summer days for my sisters.
Secure every strand of gossip with tight rubber bands of value.
What possessed you to ever grow your nails so long?
How can you have history without braids? 
A black girl is happiest when rooted to the scalp are braids.
She dances with them whipping down her back like corn in winds of harvest.
Braiding forces our reunions to be like the shifts your mothers work, long.
I find that being surrounded by only your own is more useful.
Gives our mixed blood more value.
Solidifies your place with your race, with your sisters. 
Your block is a layered cake of your sisters.
Force your lips quiet and sweet and they’ll speak when they need to practice braids.
Your hair length is the only part of you that holds value.
The tallest crop is worshipped at harvest.
So many little hands in your head. You are finally useful.
Your hair is yours, your hair is theirs, your hair is, for a black girl, long. 
Tender-headed ass won’t last ’round here long.
Cut your nails and use your fists to protect yourself against your sisters.
Somehow mold those hands useful.
You hair won’t get pulled in fights if they are in braids.
Beat out the weak parts of the crops during harvest.
When they are limp and without soul they have value. 
If you won’t braid or defend yourself what is your value?
Sitting on the porch until dark sweeps in needing to be invited, you’ll be needing long.
When the crop is already used what is its worth after harvest?
You’ll learn that you can’t ever trust those quick to call themselves your sisters.
They yearn for the gold that is your braids.
You hold on your shoulders a coveted item that is useful. 
Your presence will someday become useful.
One day the rest of your body will stagger under the weight of its value.
Until then, sit in silence in the front with your scalp on fire from the braids.
I promise you won’t need anyone too long.
One day you will love yourself on your own, without the validation of sisters.
No longer a stump wailing for affection at harvest.


^^EOP^^

sister was the wolf
& could cross easily through 
the mountain dark to den
keen & quivered with 
the muscular siege of slit    purse
purple with hours 
purse purple with birthwork
her sight both inward- 
& outward-lit
on what small sparkle of pyrite 
in the silt or the thick smell of her own
wilderness opening shit & hair & blood 
each little birth
an astonishment of form 
inside its own tiny veil
licked toward the air of this Other Side  
     [Live!]  
then that sound
from the hospital’s infant table 
after what seemed like years
of silence     a mew 
which held inside it
all the voices of 
this dream & other animals
trying to begin


^^EOP^^

coming from a place where we meandered mornings and met quail, scrub jay, mockingbird, i knew coyote, like everyone else, i knew  cactus, knew tumbleweed, lichen on the rocks and pill bugs beneath, rattlers sometimes, the soft smell of sage and the ferment of cactus pear. coming from this place, from a place where grass might grow greener on the hillside in winter than in any yard, where, the whole rest of the year, everything i loved, chaparral pea, bottle brush tree, jacaranda, mariposa, pinyon and desert oak, the kumquat in the back garden and wisteria vining the porch, the dry grass whispering long after the last rains, raccoons in and out of the hills, trash hurled by the hottest wind, the dry grass tall now and golden, lawn chairs,  eucalyptus, everything, in a place we knew, every thing, we knew, little and large and mine and ours, except horror, all of it, everything could flame up that quickly, could flare and be gone.


^^EOP^^




South Carolina, c.1950



You got that clean waistcoat,
the bright white of a well-tailored
shirt, you got those loose-as-sacks
slacks and some spit-polished shoes,
and you know, whether you are looking
like money, or about to take a stroll,
to tilt that hat like you own
the world; yeah, smoke your pipe,
roll your tobacco, and hold loose
as authority, your muscles, lithe
and hard; and every so often, when
you feel the urge, you reach into the waist
pocket and pull out that watch on its
chain, then look in the sky and say Gonna be a cold one when it come,
like God gave you that fancy clock
to tell the future. These are the easy
boys of the goodly South; waiting for
what is out of frame to happen:
the sheriff with his questions, the
paddy wagon, the chain gang, the weight
of the world. Waiting, with such delicate
dignity, fickle as the seasonal sky.


^^EOP^^




There are many kinds of open.
— Audre Lorde



We are all ventricle, spine, lung, larynx, and gut.
Clavicle and nape, what lies forked in an open palm; 
we are follicle and temple. We are ankle, arch,
sole. Pore and rib, pelvis and root 
and tongue. We are wishbone and gland and molar
and lobe. We are hippocampus and exposed nerve 
and cornea. Areola, pigment, melanin, and nails.
Varicose. Cellulite. Divining rod. Sinew and tissue, 
saliva and silt. We are blood and salt, clay and aquifer.
We are breath and flame and stratosphere. Palimpsest 
and bibelot and cloisonné fine lines. Marigold, hydrangea,
and dimple. Nightlight, satellite, and stubble. We are 
pinnacle, plummet, dark circles, and dark matter.
A constellation of freckles and specters and miracles 
and lashes. Both bent and erect, we are all give
and give back. We are volta and girder. Make an incision 
in our nectary and Painted Ladies sail forth, riding the back
of a warm wind, plumed with love and things like love. 
Crack us down to the marrow, and you may find us full
of cicada husks and sand dollars and salted maple taffy 
weary of welding together our daydreams. All sweet tea,
razor blades, carbon, and patchwork quilts of Good God! 
and Lord have mercy! Our hands remember how to turn
the earth before we do. Our intestinal fortitude? Cumulonimbus 
streaked with saffron light. Our foundation? Not in our limbs
or hips; this comes first as an amen, a hallelujah, a suckling, 
swaddled psalm sung at the cosmos’s breast. You want to
know what women are made of? Open wide and find out.


^^EOP^^

at a certain time the kitten stopped moving I wanted to see if it would burn    ​  rain like cane fields when they’re scorched after harvesting 
through the phone Abuelita remembers the black kitten I threw in the fire      still trying to crawl out that ash isn’t snow Abuelo said shirtless 
I picked up a mound in my hand if I look back at my front door    ​  barefoot kids in the street try catching the flakes on their tongues 
come visit us they say nextyearnextyear I’ll try again    ​  dust covers the roof my toys my hair my expired work permit burns 
black the sky it is march again & again there’s no wind    ​  Abuelita asks us to send a bag of autumn leaves she wants to keep 
in a book the color so pretty interesting what if there’s no wind    ​  I ask while acid at Joshua Tree camping the slight movements 
of the twigs of the ocotillo sound like mice deep in their burrows    ​  with the silence of only this pen writing the only words I can hear  hella yellow now I’m in a similar dirt to Abuelita’s yellow but here there’s healing    ​  the cold the sky the same I’m staring at clouds the same 
thought of then now again I could this could be the very cloud    ​  the very dirt but this time I’m happy yes I can be I’m smiling


^^EOP^^

it’s the being alone, i think, the emails but not voices. dominicans be funny, the way we love to touch — every greeting a cheek kiss, a shoulder clap, a loud.

it gots to be my period, the bloating, the insurance commercial where the husband comes home after being deployed, the last of the gouda gone, the rejection letter, the acceptance letter, the empty inbox.

a dream, these days. to work at home is a privilege, i remind myself.

spend the whole fucking day flirting with screens. window, tv, computer, phone: eyes & eyes & eyes. the keys clicking, the ding of the  microwave, the broadway soundtrack i share wine with in the evenings.

these are the answers, you feel me? & the impetus. the why. of when the manicurist holds my hand, making my nails a lilliputian abstract,

i close my fingers around hers, disrupting the polish, too tight i know then, too tight to hold a stranger, but she squeezes back & doesn’t let go & so finally i can.


^^EOP^^

                    
                    
                    After the first course, your corsage         flatlines into beautiful convulsions          It sprouts wings, thorns, claws
its way up your arm to swallow you goosebump          by goosebump          There is a moment when resurrection
devours the most devout heart          Deep blue           the ink pen veins blow up behind my eyes        Patron saint of stifling
anger on the rocks        Patron saint of politely            melting into this tomato        soup a spoonful at a time
& we speak        in fortune cookie all night               The next dish, a ventilator       An IV        dripping into something 
already dead       I order two specials            Make the pain remind you of the one who signed your tiny 
gashes today    A struggling creek, your tongue
wriggles out from the baby's         breath to ask        Were we ever anything
more than    echolocation    Patron saint of the meteor that falls from the sky:                          forgiven, eventually, easily
                

^^EOP^^

We sit on the spillway,
the red and white bobbers
lilted by the wind, while
some force beneath the water
 
brings everything to attention,
the tight line, the echoed rings
conjuring tension inside us.
And when I touch the rod,
 
a living strangeness, a quivering
unseen tugs at my imagination,
not receiving but sending
some impulse down the line,
 
into the muddy water,
and when the sunfish erupts
I've made the spangles of water
the verdant scales, the shudder
 
of tail fin and light. We build fish
all afternoon, threading hooks,
looping line into a tight noose,
running gills down the stringer
 
into an opalescent chain
of glimmering emerald bodies.
Soon our mothers will call
with their icy vodka voices
 
and we will carry them home
like the weight of guilt,
but for now night closes around us.


^^EOP^^

We say the trees are a canopy in mid July,
as if that's a special description of home.
 
Walking down the hill to see a friend,
I have good news and bad news for him.
 
We say canopy made out of stars as our
special way to describe the universe to ourselves.
 
So which one will my friend choose today?
 
Canopy of trees gives way to the sky;
I'm walking now thinking all the way which
one will he choose good or bad which one?
 
I guess I can just say instead I love the way
you fixed up the place and these colors.
 
At a certain age a man can begin to say
things like that to his friends.
 


^^EOP^^

The fence was down. Out among humid smells
and shrill cicadas we walked, the lichened trunks
moon-blue, our faces blue and our hands.
 
Led by their bellwether bellies, the sheep
had toddled astray. The neighbor farmer's woods
or coyotes might have got them, or the far road.
 
I remember the night, the moon-colored grass
we waded through to look for them, the oaks
tangled and dark, like starting a story midway.
 
We gazed over seed heads to the barn
toppled in the homestead orchard. Then we saw
the weather of white wool, a cloud in the blue
 
moving without sound as if charmed
by the moon beholding them out of bounds.
Time has not tightened the wire or righted the barn.
 
The unpruned orchard rots in its meadow
and the story unravels, the sunlight creeping back
like a song with nobody left to hear it.
 


^^EOP^^

This morning in Dingle, the clouds
bellied down over the mountains
and broke into grey, white, and blue.
 
Winds flagged through the palm trees
that the man from the "Big House"
brought back to the bay long ago.
 
Up Greene Street, the school kids
in their dark uniforms gather
on the sidewalk by the Spar store.
 
Long ago, this was a Spanish town,
east of the Blasket Islands and west of
Connor Pass. The harbor is full of sails.
 
The piper sits in his little shop
on the rounding road, selling penny
whistles, telling anyone who will listen
 
how many ways there are
to vary the sound, how much
there is to think of all at once.
 


^^EOP^^

A small stand of trees, unremarkable.
I don't know their names.
They're like a knot of folks waiting
for a train, or for a store to open
—a gathering, that's all. They don't
seem to know each other. They didn't
plan to be together there in a field of weeds.
 
Yet, on second look, they are remarkable,
having stood the invisible winds of winter,
stood the bitter season that comes
to each alone, that separateness of sickness
—mind and soul—there in the bent of trees.
The trees seem to know all about winter.
Seem to have winter in their bones.
 
Perhaps someone else would see them
differently, a different reflection,
a family gathering, not just a knot.
Some might see them that way.
Some might see them differently.
And I too, perhaps, on a different day.
 
The others around me, others
by the window, silently looking out
—I can see us reflected in the window
when the light is just right. Another
stand of trees, a knot, not planning
to be together here in a field of weeds.


^^EOP^^

In a seaside desert port
that wasn’t yet a city
our grandfather built a wide house
and called it gulistan 
 
There were no roses there
just the new government
four children that would be seven and a porch
where he stitched shoes and mixed paste
for paper maché book bindings
 
He counted buds
and tended love birds
built their cage and bedecked it
in blue and green and red
foil this and gota that
a cage the cat got into
in front of the open water tankard
the children got into
during this or that fatal game
Loose with life
 
while their father cycled home
in starched and ironed whites
polished porch stitched black leather shoes
a narrow mustache
we now associate with genocide
 
What is reverence anyway
who writes the reverence rules
After our grandmother died
he developed a taste for Western sweets
Flintstones pushpops and cokes and nerds
 
Of all the things he typed
and the typing was profuse
none changed the course of history
 
Like the verses of the Qur’an
rendered in @ signs
which he used as a coiled pixel
taxing the Smith-Corona
Coronamatic with his gridded plan
 
Let’s hate the names of things
like this
 
Before they changed the world with typewriters
the Smith brothers manufactured firearms
Cartridge and ribbon
bullet and thermal transfer
Syracuse and gulistan
 
Verses laid out in rows of @
seven @s in a vertical row
to make an alif 
@s like a fallen E
to make a tashdeed
He did the whole Qur’an this way
 
At some point in paleography
they discovered this sign filling in
for the A of Amen or Ameen
in a Bulgarian version   
of a fourteenth century Greek chronicle
 
Why and for whom or does
The Book short circuit this question
 
A smaller selection I have
is a better plot for dirt ministrations
just sura 8 ayah 46 inna Allaha maaAa al sabireen 
Allah is with the patient ones
 
laid out in vertical reflection
its geometry a formal garden
hemmed by squares of @
looking in four directions
paths and hedges of invocation
borders of apostrophe
trees of hail and leaves of call
 
I wonder did he think
his helical pixels looked like roses
I wonder did he count
the buds in every verse


^^EOP^^

Working the water-line the apple haunts the edge of—
 
A shard of selenite is said to clear negativity. 
Like a stained glass window.
 
Against the rules, we coupled on your grandmother’s floor.
 
Write it the way a Painted Lady explosion
erases it.  Five minutes ago.
 
Thus, you grow faint like bioluminescence.
 
Pouring what I know into small vials.  Back and forth.
Blur the field to include not-seeing. 
 
When we were a potted plant or something.
Halved pomegranate knocked against a bowl.
 
Thus, is every tree wild?
 
Caretaker,
so what if they do not look back at you—
 


^^EOP^^

                                       Where the Story Leaves Off
 
We had set out, the four of us, like pilgrims.
It’s a quick jaunt to Guanajuato from San Miguel,
over long stretches of restless earth,
not desert, not valley,
patchy green on tawny ground,
head to head in the passing lane
with a pick-up sprouting children
and a blunderbuss fifties’ Chevy
with no hood over its engine, with its insides exposed.
A quick jaunt to the underworld, the gauzy mummies.
But we lingered in the marketplace:
the two women—my cousin’s wife, my lover—
poring over shawls and serapes;
my cousin clicking away with his Nikon and zoom
at the gargoyles’ leering and capricious faces,
 
while I lost myself among the hawkers’ masks—
swinging like lanterns on the standards—
blessed and damned with edgy, angular,
yet impassive facades.
And made of no special wood.
I wanted one anyway and forked out eight pesos.
It’s hard crawling through the crypt.
You have to get down on your hands and knees
and the openings were meant
for smaller people, unless the getting down
was part of a solemn ritual.
It was a relief to be in the cool of the underworld,
away from the tension of the light.
The dead were well preserved.
They stood upright. They stayed together.
I couldn’t have known it then, but soon
my cousin, his wife, my lover—soon
we would all be lost to each other forever—
not taken by death,
 
just gone into another kind of dust.


^^EOP^^

                                                            1
 
The woman stands on tiptoe to kiss the man and for a moment,
with their twin-teal backpacks, parkas, and other gear—
they look like one new creature. A mutation.
 
 
                                                            2
 
Seated in La Rosita their gear guards the table
where they sip cafe con leche and lean forward,
sitting tall, pelvises tilted forward,
to talk—whisper?—their physical closeness
almost embarrassing (but to whom?) at this early hour—
light rivering in her chestnut hair,
their foreheads almost touching as they sit
further forward straddling their chairs
toes pressed down, heels up, wrists crossed;
 
a posture almost too intimate for a public space
at breakfast but somehow right in the Spanish café.
 
She says that while it is absurd to sell forsythia
it is a small miracle to buy cactus
on 107th Street and Broadway.
 
(If they’re strangers in Manhattan
they seem more at home than I’ve ever been.)
 
They listen to the brisk chatter and clatter of plates
and music from the Spanish station
which now plays “Yellow Submarine”—
universal language?—“our friends are all aboard.”
They study the menu and note
the beautiful sounds
words like huevos and arroz
make for eggs and rice. The generous
syllabic count and vowel length
seem like an echo for their love. And their desire
to linger. (Other eyes
are on them, not only mine.)
 
They have drawn
the morning from a sea
of newsprint—in at least three
languages—toward their window seat.
 
 
                                                            3
 
The light changes along with the brisk pace of the walkers.
Someone in a tan Mackintosh reaches out to hail
a yellow cab, while the sun gilds
the fire escapes and people rise
energetically from their beds.
 
 
                                                            4
 
Don’t their eyes tire of each other?
Or is it not the eyes that tire?
They’re not looking, they’re drinking,
communicating through their skin
several inches apart.
 
Love can’t be trusted.
But that doesn’t mean it isn’t real.
 
They linger over coffee; he strokes
the back of her neck; she doesn’t feel
impelled to look up or stop but, later,
she kisses him behind the ear.
 
 
                                                            5
 
And in the mountains there is
snow melting to get down from the heights
to pour through the clefts in the twisted
rocks: natural arches, obstacles—horseshoe shapes.
 
And in the plains there is
a dropping of the shoulder-armor,
a tingling in the hip sockets, so that even a chance touch
at the hipbone startles the center and starts
a slow convulsion—
 
release of two creatures
(peculiarly, perilously at odds),
used to training their gaze
on the peripheries, like this
bicycle tethered to a parking meter,
orange handlebars, silver trunk like a treasure chest
perched—not locked—on a wrought iron ledge
fixed over the chrome wheel-casings—
blue shadow-dappled twig-littered canopies,
or the small tantalizing cursive c
in the blue neon soft as silk, announcing
 
                         café Equense
 
where the couple might return in the voluptuous dark.
 
The dark, quietly vibrating like a Mouth Harp,
or her—noiseless—breathing…or,
when they are lost in Olmsted’s
misty, labyrinthine rambles
and, framed by traffic, they pause
beside the lake in the dank air
where the water is still,
 
                         another
world from the blood-running pavement,
the meat-packing plants
 
gray and dour below the rotting piers—
warped—(and will they be replaced
with fresh wood or fazed out with poured
concrete that knows no give or take—no—swelling—…?)
 
What can love repair?
By what force of love
can they imagine themselves beyond
the squalor that surrounds them
onto another plane
blessed and blessing!
 
 
                                                            6
 
Who invented ecstasy?
What man or woman
first walked around
with its burden?
 
Cold shelter from the street,
among the bronze
mailboxes, inside the bright red—
freshly painted—door jambs.
 
He picks her up under the buttocks,
she arches her thighs around his hips,
plants her feet on the tiles:
tongues firm, yet tentative,
learning their own momentum;
(the rubbery wall of her mouth
takes him further in and in.)
 
Tongue and tongue, freckle and freckle,
tears, shuddering, swelling
in the places where they used to ache,
“ain’t no cure,”
knowing this touch,
 
this grave flicking
of tongues could never
be repeated, or knowing
it could—
 
knowing it in another consciousness.
 
 
                                                            7
 
He strokes her neck at the junction
where the occipital bone and cervical spine
cross, engage, spark;
coccyx tingles, cock rises toward
her, not into her, through her, to her;
rises as he plies
the inside of her ass and thighs,
or rubs the crevice where her right
forefinger and thumb divide,
stroking her cheek, or the hollow below her earlobe,
ankle bone, clavicle,
 
tonguing every millimeter,
 
until sea dissolves into sky
 
(their raft turns over
in warm water and they are that water,
and bob, afloat, buoyant;
at rest in secret knowledge of each other’s darknesses…
          and now he could weep.)
 
But there is no ice in the water where they would roil and tumble,
and where avenues welcome those who walk hand in hand,
gait easy, backpacks half-full,
half empty—
the sun coming out now, as if synchronized to their desires—
and as the runners circle the reservoir
they lower their eyes to adjust to the light
bouncing off the water to ignite
the cinders; the green through the dead-
ice capped leaves;
a small curve, an indent on the track
gleams like a bracelet,
before an azure haze takes over.
 
 
                                                            8
 
It gets warm. She has to peel her Anorak.
She cups her hand over her eyes
in the light and wind off the reservoir,
to see the easy arcs the gulls make as they spiral upward
over the all-angle roller coaster of the rooftops,
 
in the comforting thud of other feet,
as if lulled by the sound of a lover’s heartbeat;
                                                     danger, in
distraction; she must kick the chain-link fence in order to set
off again, get back into the stream, put her mind back into her body;
             her body: slender; deceptive.
There is a power in it she has always known. And feared.
Or feared others would fear.
But it’s difficult, with others, always—just how to say it?
 
Necessary to hold some one thing back.
Whom could she trust to let it out?
It might scare her. (Scare him.)
 
 
                                                            9
 
Dawn, a smudge of charcoal, lifted by noon
and his body, as if heliotropic,
was drawn toward the flares of lilacs,
and now he knew to move cautiously,
keeping his eyes on the ground to not,
as he has done several times, catch his foot on
a stone or root cluster and fly off, gashed.
 
 
                                                            10
 
He’s relieved when night comes on.
He doesn’t need his eyes to know
swallows congregate on the stark, bare limbs.
The darkness grows through the darkness
of that winter tree.
Soon they will be one
and no one will see them.


^^EOP^^

                                                               2
 
There is no end to the torment that comes from watching dead actors
in old, and no so old, movies, and you always fall into the hole
of uncertainty; you know you don’t know if they’re alive or dead,
some of them look so radiant on films made not so long ago.
Richard Harris, the hero of The Heroes of Telemark,
is undergoing a second birth in old man roles,
while in the rockface rappelling, snow on castles
icecapade, Where Eagles Dare, two out of three leads,
Richard Burton and Mary Ure, are both quite dead,
as is her second husband, Robert Shaw.
 
A lot happens in Eagles, but what sticks
in my mind is the escape, where Mary Ure,
coifed, oblique glimmer of a smile,
cradling a machine gun
like a weightless toy on the caboose’s deck,
bullets in mesmerizingly endless supply,
decorously mows down row on row of Nazi pursuers,
who drop into the white Alpine ridges
like knocked over counters in a game,
as if she were answering the blasts
 
from Jimmy Porter’s trumpet as they merge
with a shrieking train whistle and screech of brakes.
 
 
                                                            3
 
To St Paul’s Church, Covent Garden, for Robert Shaw’s memorial service. A beautiful, still day. There was a gathering of figures from the profession, plus friends and family. Harold Pinter gave a short address, stressing Bob the writer... It was a fairly joyful occasion, serious but not sad. I had my usual bewilderment about our lack of ritual. We all huddled together in the sunshine outside the church—Paul Scofield, Kenneth Haigh, Harold, and many, many others. We all wanted to be together in Bob's memory. But what could we, un-Christian as most of us are, do? Off to the Riverside Studios to see The Changeling, beautifully staged by Peter Gill, precise and clear. But I had the impression of a not very talented cast dutifully following the conception of a quite brilliant director.
                                 —1978, Saturday 7 October, Peter Hall’s Diaries
 
 
I abhor assumptions but from the tension Robert Shaw
emitted on screen and in his other incarnations,
the athletic boozer’s fatal heart attack in middle-age
seemed at first less surprising than Mary’s Ure’s ambiguous end.
 
Shaw looks so painfully alive in Jaws as the shark-
crazed minor Ahab it’s hard to digest
how quickly he raced toward a death
from natural causes, so shortly afterwards.
 
There’s much that could be said about Robert Shaw,
a ubiquitous, menacing, explosive presence
during the previous decade in British films
before the American public began to pin a name
 


^^EOP^^

                                                      14                                               In the Wake
 
Riding north on the bus after hours in cars
or in the air or airports or bus stations,
 
I felt almost happy for a moment
as the tires hissed over the wet highway,
 
I was both in the rain and protected
from it, distracted from grief
 
by the sensual pressure of the instant,
water beading on the glass, the darkening hills.
 
But how glad I was to be riding north!
Sunoco on one side, Mobil on the other.
 
His best friend was from Mobile.
I always wanted to go there.
 
He died too soon, or I left home,
I can’t remember.
 
Two days ago my stepfather’s body
was laid to rest.
 
Comatose, sucking air
through a respirator, I can’t say
 
he was resting; I saw him
underground when I closed
 
my eyes at night and went
to bury the clock under mounds
 
of towels and pillows—I had not
heard it ticking so ferociously
 
while he lived—and it would not
quiet down. And the rain
 
tonight, it’s not like any other,
and I wish the bus would go faster.
 
I saw the rain in the heavy hanging clouds.
That’s a lie. Immense factories
 
blackening under a charcoal sky—
and rivers whose names I’ll never remember.
 
I saw a sign reflected in my window: Milwaukee Light.
 
                                                              *
 
Whenever the Chicago White Sox 
beat the Braves it made his day.
 
The Braves were in Milwaukee then,
with lefty Warren Spahn and slugger Hank Aaron.
 
The bus company is Peter Pan, 
and the Peter Pan coffee shop
 
 was our first stop in Chicago when we drove in;
and that’s where I was when,
 
though I didn’t know it then,
he married my mother in Bermuda—
 
watching Peter Pan in New York
with my “real” father…
 
And oh those prophetic lines, not to grow up, never to go to school. 
Never then to die! Only the living
are immortal. Like these rain clouds.
 
                                                               *
 
The fact of death—a silence attends it;
an absence with which we’re all
  
 
He was the lightest sleeper I’d ever known;
he’d open one eye if I merely peeked into his room. 
intimate. He’s there when I close
my eyes but not when I reach out in the dark.
 
At his bedside I peeled back his eyelids,
rubbed his blue feet, his bloated hands,
 
almost screamed in his ear,
wake up, man, I’ll be lonely without you,
 
I’ll be ANGRY if you don’t wake up;
and in the silence of our nearness to death—
 
the grinding hum of the generators
working at their limit for too long
 
to pump cool air in the killing heat;
the glug of him swallowing through the respirator.
 
                                                                *
 
    AT THE BUS STATION IN SPRINGFIELD, MASSACHUSETTS
 
The lateness of the bus angers
a tough young woman from Montana
 
travelling with her toddler son.
And yet she knows the way: I can see it
 
in her green peaked cap,
her direct taut anger—bus late,
  I kill the driver—boy knock over suitcase—I kill him too.
 
                                                                 *
 
                                              BUS BOARDED
 
The water bubbles on the windows
break; there is less and less outside to see…
 
And he was not even my real father.
That should put a cap on it.
 
It’s like knowing the name of the lake
you pass never seeing it again and yet
 
finding it tough to forget,
that jagged square of black water
 
just off the highway— that lake, and not another.
 
                                                                *
 
Baudelaire boasted that he laughed
at funerals and wept at feasts.
 
Now in the bus it’s only early evening;
I turn around and everyone’s sleeping—
 
mother and son, matron and magician.
Half-awake, I stare at the tree line,
 
and the blessing of rain,
and I would like to lie down on the roadside
 
and drink and drink and roll
in the mud.
 
                                                                *
 
Mortifying, one’s presence in the face
of nature’s sanguine gaze,
 
green whitewashing
the past. Whatever grooms
 
the body for the afterlife
pitches in this life like a tent
 
in a night encampment before
the dawn storming of the fortress.
 
The yellow day lilies wag
their heads at the first
 
touch of wind and I see what
others have always seen
 
in flowers, a sign marked
TRANSIENTS
 
that keeps them awake; see
now, as, standing catatonic
 
at the kitchen sink, the overhead
fluorescent light strip sinks into the pitch
 
dark bottom of a coffee mug.
Seeing is native to us and yet
 
we stupefy our native sight.
Not the eye’s sight.
 
                                                                *
 
Some mourners hurl dirt stiffly on the coffin
because it seems the right thing to do.
 
Some hold back. The flag-draped casket honors
the first Army chaplain in the Pacific Theater,
 
for praying good prayers above the bodies
of the dead and of the living.
 
 
                                   Prelude to an Afterword
 
Why should I feel compelled to write
          a thousand postscripts when I don’t
work from life, but to hear
          the testimonials of people
 
who knew the rider, the “little Rabbi,”
          moves me to tears while I am here
to attend my mother who lies
          in bed with her stomach reaching
 
toward the sky—(where Sam talks
          calmly to his “grandpa in heaven,”
matter-of-fact celestial discourse)—
          and I listen to this Baptist preacher
 
and hospice worker as he crouches beside my chair
          in her hospital room talk about his work
with mourning; how difficult
          it is to get people to understand
 
the element of surprise-over-time…;
          how he kissed the little Rabbi
the first time he met him
          and the last time he saw him
 
before “death took him so swiftly”
          there were no “last words”
and he was enveloped in silence,
          in absence—“the way death often
 
comes...” I see him more clearly
          through this stranger’s eyes.
I wouldn’t have thought that he could help
          confirm my sense of what is real,
 
but this man who knew him less than two years
          feels so indebted that I allow myself
to think of the rider’s life in terms of the people
          he affected, the bizarre love he could
 
elicit—not standard preacherly fare
          by any means but some connection
by being entirely present for others—
          promiscuously present—
 
meanwhile, as the nurses haul my mother
          from wheelchair to bed
why do I feel impelled to turn
          away… (we think we have the answers) …
 
and flash to an image of my friend caring
          for her father—bathing him?—but she
didn’t come out of his penis, did she?
          or is that another wrong turning in my thought?
 
The hospice preacher offers a prayer.
          He holds my mother’s swollen, psoriatic hand,
the arthritic clumps poling from her fingers,
          and as the dry, flaky patches blaze
 
in the unforgiving light, I find
          not a word to object to—except two—
“religion” and “churches.” I tell him that I left home
          as soon as I could because I couldn’t stand
 
being around the two of them; he admits he always
          felt sick “for hours afterward”
when he’d been with them together;
          it wasn’t just quarreling, I have to add,
 
seeking absolution for my absence,
          but hatred (can’t let my mother milk
the bereaved widow role). He nods—
          matter-of-factly. And sets me free.
 


^^EOP^^




Rome



Domitius gives her iron – a ring
Agrippina fingers it under her robes
while her hair is woven with flowers
 
gold placed on her neck and wrists
She thinks of the man    older
than her father ever was
 
At the ceremony a pregnant sow is brought forward
dark and wreathed in leaves   wine and crumbs
from holy cake are dusted on its brow
 
For the goddess Ceres    for Terra Mater
for this marriage   A man raises his ax
blunt-side down   strikes the sow
 
slices the stunned animal’s throat   opens
her belly    The priest pushes fetal piglets aside
handles the entrails close to his eyes
 
looking for flaws    Once signaled another man
places the insides on an altar for burning
Domitius watches Agrippina while the men
 
butcher the pig    char the guts    She does not look away
The priest steps into the blood   face covered   prays
in whispers   a flute drowning out any ominous sounds


^^EOP^^

back 90 suns to a run through the ferns
I remain the eclipse of each sound
as I push through the soil
to the icons that run no more. my stutters
explode through the shade of the twilight
as crows destroy the machine → robots
drone in the infinite zero, where
we dwell in the pull of the Sea. the moon
shaves our brain onto the plate and layers
the first person far before the book
to form the semblance we share in the animals
who dwell in the exterior layer of our souls
beyond the skin. that is where suffering
plants and holds its fractal flower
as hope delivers its other linked body
made of the sand and the wind. the flora
and fauna and others of the earth, of each person
extend their net of the mind
to reduce the numerical coldness
of the sound. but where do the multiple
hearts plant themselves in the exterior organs
and the bodies of the stones? and of time cut down
to the green and the stop of the harvest
where the singular falls, how does it start? and
where does it go?
 


^^EOP^^

I thought he was over-medicating himself and planning his suicide. I took the pills away from him. He looked defeated. He said as much. I felt sorry for both of us. His expressions held this enormity and a seared-exhausted center. Spatial discomfort started to affect him but didn't take hold till the next day, when he started to lose consciousness and rattled the house yelling about thieves, robbers, drunks, and pill-snatchers.  We didn’t know what was going on: the tumor was rapidly metastasizing its mass through his cerebellum. His body became harder to manage and he sprung through the house with fear tugging violently at his bile duct tube. Aja and I camped in the front rooms.
 
The last night of intimacy, of lucidity—unbeknownst to me—we sat together huddled and I caressed him, cradling his arms, his legs, and his penis. I was sure we had time left for more, but this was the last time he spoke and searched my face and looked at me with a recognition I understood.
 
It’s how we moved out of consciousness. I am haunted by those last days before we succumbed to hospice. I remember how stunning he was resting in bed—that week before, in our library with a cornflower blue-sheeted bed made by Ashby and Spider. In that bed, he had a look of wonder when we put movies on—he excited over Wilson, the ball in Castaway and stared unblinkingly at Tom Hanks. We giggled over this, and appreciated how Andrew put the Eno station on next, and Aja lit and framed this sheeted bed with a twinkling lamp, an illuminant: bulbs he found soothing. We all watched him compose in the air to Philip Glass. I wished that we could have unleashed him to his afterlife then. That's what he would have wanted: a release to his own universe sonant and material, an ethereal ball. An awkward Tom Hanks, a Wilson, and a castaway in a glittering hand-printed sea. This death sequence was the one I wanted for him.


^^EOP^^

                    
                    
                    For as long as I've known her, my mother's two things are going to Mass at Our Lady of Peace and playing bingo in North Hollywood. Guilty from leaving me at home all night, she'd bring a pink paper bag with Sanrio characters printed all over it. Every week would be different inside. The size of the bag would depend on if she got lucky that night or if she broke even, which she believed was the same as winning. Inside, there were stickers, pencils, a pencil case, paper, lollipops, a diary. It was the period when Pochacco just came out and I was skeptical of transitioning out of my love for Hello Kitty and onto smaller more obscure colorful characters. My mother knew this because she could read my mind, so she only bought Hello Kitty things.
 
I would stay up until midnight and wait for when she'd pull up in her white Cadillac onto the concrete driveway. Smelling like Marlboro Reds which I associated with evil, she'd wake me up from being somewhere between half asleep & dreaming of a crush. But Hello Kitty lived in heaven, and my mother and I were not in heaven. We were in the San Fernando Valley, the porn capital. And on the way to Mass every Sunday, we would drive by houses with swimming pools where money shots were being made.
                

^^EOP^^

The innocents all dress the same
Their mouths open
Their mouths close
They flush and bleed and wonder where they are
 
Happy to be leaving
Hesitant and
unprepared for the departure
w­­­­­hen it comes to them
like penicillin
 
Are you pinching yourself?
What I want 
and how I want it
That is what they told me
They were right
Skin is just like fabric
All violence
is in defense of something
 
I lay on my back and wish
I do that now
 
I wish for good things, all the good, good things
Why not
 
Fabric rolls out like a cloud of paint
A moan into a square of gauze
 
I don’t know
and so I write about it
 
I care about life
and the ones who never say a thing
 
We are in the hands of providence
who is unqualified
 
There are those who would protect us
from the possibility of good
 


^^EOP^^

Dear Kit,
 
I’m sad we never did that
Yacht Rock Karaoke Contest,
or was it just Michael McDonald?
 
But some things need not have happened
to have floated
as bright boats of genius
upon the dark waters of this world.
 
 
No things but in ideas.
 
In fact, no things at all.
 
Just ideas
 
without the mess of facts,
 
actions, actuality... actually
 
 
Why don’t we...
 
[wait for it]
 
“... steal away”
you sing in your captain’s hat 
on the deck of the S.S. Pangea —
that perfect falsetto thought yacht
on which we’ll sail
this sea
of mental illness
in between us
till we drown.
 


^^EOP^^

because a box is a box: humans are cultivated
into said box without choice or clarification, specimens
only existing—as in: (you—i—us). flesh & frame—
restricted bone matter comprising a box reluctant
not to be a box. but nurtured inside the box, let’s say
form which is shaped by & indigenous, to, the box &
the creator of the holy box—only leading to another
question about, of course, the infamous box—form
turns deceitful inside the box like any [thing] caged,
leaning to a non-empathetic approach steeped in revolt
—is judas in waiting. note: the box is not universal
nor the universal. whatever hopes of otherworldliness
lies in the box itself. the box will not elongate, dissolve
or vanish without reaction to an action & here within
lies problem of perspective as in—there is none—zero.
along time’s continuum, color, too, is encouraged
for the sake of the construction of the box, which
is precious as flickering light, but cannot be verified since
darkness is the original concept of all things human.


^^EOP^^

Under the roof is the empty room
papered in requiem blue.
 
Partiers crowd the burned kitchen,
gold fixtures hook to cheap lath.
 
What is it they can tell you about absence
how it abates, takes names
 
Becomes a wall with windows
faced on a formal garden, content
 
To accept the thin rain. The syllable
forgives the words that need it, a sentence
 
Badly written, epigraphs scrawled
thoughtlessly in books. Book where the hero
 
confronts a dark riddle, book where
the suitors stand at the gate and are stumped.
 
What force brought them forward
stooping at the lintel, up the chipped steps
 
To the blue door in the unbuilt tower,
half-built, the new stone.


^^EOP^^

4  But you had the sense that he was always competing with your father for your affection.
 
Not only my father. He didn’t understand my need to develop ties in these new worlds. He tried to legislate over my feelings. He was subject to extraordinarily inappropriate fits of jealousy.
  How are you the judge of that?
 
Many small incidents.
  Such as…
 
                                                             *
 
The boy’s name was Warren. He was an orphan.
As we pulled into the weed lot of the camp
in the uncertain March air and patented silence,
I could see him peeking down at us
from a second story dormer window,
like someone who had been dreaming of escape
from the run-down resort: torn up turf; dirt
basketball court, net hanging for its life by one
thin strand of rope; horseshoes, shuffle board;
musty, mildewed cabins with wet bedding;
the stars pressing too hard against our faces
in the catastrophic silence of the nights…
I’d never been left so happily alone,
alone, that is, in Warren’s wonderful company.
His talk mimicked the cadence of the stones he kicked.
Warren showed me the mica glow in the arrowheads
and quartz-tipped spears he'd unearthed.
Warren's cigar box overflowed with other people's
souvenirs, miniature monuments, key chains, lighters,
and initialed items like cuff links and bracelets.
He scoured the corners of the rooms of the departed
while his “mother,” slip of the tongue there, vacuumed.
“People always leave something behind,” he said.
I knew what he meant: taking their clothes
on and off so many times something
had to go. I wanted an initial bracelet
even with someone else’s initials.
The kids at summer camp in the Poconos all had
initialed bracelets, except for me,
but who among them had been west
of the Mississippi?
Warren wanted a home. I didn’t know what I wanted.
I asked to bring Warren home and give him a home.
“That’s ridiculous, he has a home here.
Besides, you only just met.”
My mother lamented his stick-thin, soot-blackened frame,
the smell he gave off and his yellow teeth,
his urchin eating with his hands,
his short and choppy hair,
his blousy shirt and baggy fatigues
that gave him a bulk, a volume,
he didn’t otherwise possess.
What about his fits of giddy delight?
As the days passed I forgot myself.
I became more and more like Warren.
I would brook no insults about my brother.
It would no longer be me, but me and Warren.
I’d share my meals with Warren, and my desk at school.
Warren could stay and I would just—slip away.
Next to Warren, I felt like I was on a clipper ship
lifted out of the water by the powerful wind-breath
of my two distant coastal families; my warring
mother and “blood” father, her lovely
companionable family in Los Angeles and Manhattan;
his friendly, compliant relations in Manhattan and Bensonhurst…
I dreamt both families were jammed on the deck
of the ship, waving, gesticulating, shouting,
and that I clung to a raft’s rope as a great
wave flung me back and back, but the truth
was I wasn’t sure I wanted to be near.
I wanted to fly apart—in the nowhere—.
When our two-door Chrysler Windsor
edged off the gravel onto the highway
I thrust my head right where the plush fabric
of the front seat parted like the Red Sea,
and said to my new dad. “You know what.
I love Warren more than I love you.”
“You don’t know what you’re saying,” he snapped.
“He’s just a little putz, and I can get
rid of him with a snap
of my fingers. Presto. See. Now—where is he?”
The seat beside me was empty. I was empty.
And my heart pounded in wild longing for its fullness lost.
I should have kept my mouth shut
but I thought my heart would burst
with that secret locked in it: why doesn’t he
understand? It wasn’t that I loved him less than I had
but that I loved Warren more. He had the same reaction
several years later, in Chicago, when I announced
my love for Carol, a round-faced, soft spoken blond girl
I’d brought home to play with my electric trains and drink
hot chocolate one brutal winter afternoon. I loved her and
I kissed her in the elevator on the way up.
I wanted him to say: I’m so happy for you, let’s put on some 45’s and dance.
He said, “You don't know what love is.”
And for the first time slapped me in the face.
I wrote my “blood” father of my love and he wrote back
he was glad I was “making friends out there.”
Why didn’t these men understand, I know what words mean,
by love I meant love, however transitory.
One word, two fathers, two red stone faces,
unblinking, dismayed.


^^EOP^^

Dropouts
 
Mace had the kind of courage you could easily mistake
for brawn. I don’t know why I call it courage.
 
Sure, he stood up to greasers. And didn’t visibly fret
on the days when his report card made hard fact
 
of what was already apparent from his absences.
Yet Mace was gifted with an uninflected quickness, a fine
 
intelligence of his own despair, a knowledge—
as he gunned the engine of his once white ’58 Chevy,
 
with a four-on-the-floor he’d installed himself,
to climb higher into the hills above the city—
 
of where nowhere was…
Light shadow cutting brusquely across the canyons—
 
                                                             * 
Like everyone else in our class, Mace was a year
older than me. He had stubble on his chin.
 
I dragged a razor up and down my cheeks
to inspire fast, early growth.
 
“Don’t shave your jowls,” friends warned,
knowing I overdid everything,
 
“or you’ll grow hair there later.” Later was a word I disdained, its insistence
 
on the future tense, postponement—
life on the back burner.
 
                                                              *
 
Mace seemed incapable of worry.
His coolness and insouciance made girls stare.
 
He was always brushing back the shock of raven-
black hair that fell over his right eyebrow.
 
The same teacher who sent me lickety split
to the principal’s office
 
would lean over Mace’s desk and whisper
warmly, compassionately in his ear.
 
They would nod together. I could fill in every blank.
“What’s the matter Richard?”
 
“Nothing.” “If you’re having trouble,”
this is where the whispering grew most intense,
 
“I want you to feel you can talk to me as a friend.
Your work in class is so good, you have so much ability,
       Richard…”
 
Mace would never protest, never defend himself.
Indignation was a country where he’d never been.
 
“You may hate me,” I thought, praying she would not
double the insult of the absence of her concern
 
for me with a glance in my direction,
“but deep down Mace and I are the same.”
 
                                                             *
 
Mace and I were running into the same problem
at the same time. Mathematical
 
wizards that we were we couldn’t solve
advanced algebraic equations in our head;
 
we were vexed by an added integer.
We had gotten this far without lifting a pencil.
 
History was being sold to us as a dead language
of fixed events and we wouldn’t buy.
 
What is a fact, I wondered, and I could see
the same question wrinkling Mace’s brow.
 
                                                              *
 
Mace’s problems weren’t academic. His disgust thrummed
like telephone wires in the wind, even his saturnine
 
presence was deceptive, like his beat-up Chevy
with its secret store of power concealed under the hood.
 
Mace too began the year in the front row,
placed there on the strength of pure ability.
 
He sank slowly, buoyed as I was, by the one
assigned book we read, Great Expectations.
 
Mace attended to his tasks in the classroom.
I dreamt of escape via the window’s easy access.
 
There were unknown roads to be driven, gulleys
to be plumbed; girls: a world of lovely distractions.
 
                                                             * 
For all the years I lived in Salt Lake City
I can’t remember seeing a single bird.
 
I felt watched in Salt Lake City ever since
that first day when the old geezer stepped
 
out of the shadows, on a street vast and empty
and without verticals, to reprimand my Double-
  mint gum wrapper for lighting in the gutter.
But only around the time of Hitchcock’s The Birds
 
did I start to withdraw from sight.
I was keen to see The Birds the Wednesday
 
afternoon it opened and I wanted the other—“good”—“Mark R.,”
the irreproachable blond Mormon angel everyone loved, to join us.
 
Our growling engine brought his mother to the porch.
The sun glared on her helmet of curlers.
 
Mark had “homework and chores,” she said, he “can’t come down.”
But he had already descended. And stood framed in the doorway.
 
I couldn’t get accustomed to the light
in the trampled meadows around his house,
 
the glow of dandelions, thistles, weeds.
Mark’s red cheeks reeked of aspiration and I could read
 
his thoughts: why couldn’t I wait until night? Why was I dragging myself down?
  Why skip history and rifle assembly? The movie would wait.
 
But I would not. I was keen,
and, seeking a purging terror to cleanse
 
me of my dread, I sat alone with Mace
in the vast empty theater alive to each
 
click and flicker in the projection room,
and the radiant impalpable dust
 
caught in the unstinting beam;
released from the limits of our world
 
until the screeching stopped
and, looked at askance by strangers,
 
we stepped into an iron dark
which held no trace of the light we’d left. 
 
                                                              * 
I forked over whatever change I had
to fuel each day’s free-wheeling splendor.
 
One morning, knowing Mace was down to smoking butts,
I brought a pack of my mother’s Kents
 
as an offering. Mace scorned them.
He only smoked Marlboros.
 
Yet later, desperate and broke in the maze
of roads through the hills overlooking the city,
 
he broke off the filters and smoked in silence.
I was used to doing the talking
 
for the two of us but this was different.
He pulled up besides a long driveway.
 
A vaulted roof jutted above columns of tall firs.
This was where he lived. He’d be
 
“a sec”—he had “some smokes” stashed in a drawer.
I followed him past the plaster jockey and the massy trees
 
toward an opulent, utterly contemporary house,
fronted by oak door and gold bell-knocker,
 
angular, white, high-ceilinged, skylit…
Our apartment could have fit into the living room…
 
Now I understood: Mace lived in the clouds.
Though I couldn’t see beyond the back yard
 
through the landscaping I knew what the view
must be like: that was the reason to live there;
 
for the nights, when the city, innocent as it was,
still blazed through its grid of interlocking lights. 
                                                               *
 
On May Day, Mace and I, long ago tossed
out of R.O.T.C. for “insubordination,”
 
but required to attend the final show-of-arms
sat together in the bleachers,
 
in splendid isolation, and watched
as the rule-followers—led
 
by the many-striped, other Mark R.—
in their woolen khaki uniforms,
 
shouldering their M 1 rifles,
dropped like flies in the insuperable heat.
 


^^EOP^^

a perfect symmetry
of both parts animal, feline and quizzical, and man,
              made
(undone) sworn in stormed again 
electric, transmitted from the foreground into
               appropriate weather
the skin being elastic cause for several considerations
contrite ((argued over) 
aren't we of beautiful tangents
beautiful ox blood, black sand
morning from small wire filigree, a gesture


^^EOP^^

korea might be gay but I do not think you are.
korea is a peninsula. you and I are people meaning that
we have hair we comb and things to look at. our lips
pout and take on the fullness of an adopted meaning.  
the fact of the matter is that relentlessness is a hand-
shake, a limp fish or glass of lukewarm tea. the fact of 
the matter is that standing on a stage everything is
comic, meaning small and memorable, of the insubstan-
tial "universe," a minor disaster or floating chord.  
the darkness is outside when I see you, not in.  
I laugh when the funny thing gets said, and mostly I
laugh inside. on the inside is without curves and artifi-
cial spaces, many of them not gay or korea. but when I 
see you they all run and speech is maybe stammer,
sometimes slur.  
margaret cho, your tongue might wreak more havoc
than in speaks, outside being from the vantage point of
escalating stairs, from dark glasses and escapades. the
vantage being from a great height, a lighter space on
the inside that was formerly before the dark and laugh.
we really wait for the funny things before they are said
and let go for ever after.  
margaret, there are many funny sisters and there are
many porn stores. I too think woo lae ok is really petri-
fied of its own fish. that there are babies and there are 
dykes, that this little piggy has something, that a pubic
mound transforms into a public space, not being gay or
with outstanding curves, prayerful and abashed, facing
the tide, grown over, rediscovered in the woods by
strangers and haunted for years and years.


^^EOP^^

we aren't differentiable with bangs and hooded lids.
I know the likeness doesn't stop right there.
what's so great about being horny? the joke is insatiable.
it rips and roars between and through.  
we both have found our mother's jewels.
buried in closets, rolled in silk thread and bunting. 
done in scarlet, fortunately found, never for the men
            in sharing.
these are our secrets. our punch lines and couplets. 
I went to bed thinking "pixies." the bliss and after-
             math of a spiritual kiss.
how you resonate without rooms, maintaining perfect
             valences. 
where is the disaster at the end of this dread?
in my dream state you were queen, a reigning
            bodhisattva without a sprig.
I climbed inside your belly. punched inside you
            laughed and laughed,
converting persimmons into a freedom jelly.
Slathered all over, I found us exuberant,
happy to swing or go both ways. 
 


^^EOP^^

And yesterday something shattering happened.
Not yesterday, but several (that’s becoming
a favorite word) weeks ago I came across
Kitaj’s The Jewish Rider and wept:
there he was in the very image of my stepfather;
the pate where a few strands of hair still frolic,
the same skinny legs, the same misguided
attempt to dress in a sporty way (who’s
watching?), the same abstractedness,
the same shlumpy—boneless—posture, gazing not
at the landscape flashing past
with wires lashed to the treetops as if with one
tug the countryside would vanish,
or listening to the tick of the rails,
but fixed—distractedly—on his lower extremities,
white loafers and the crease in his pants and nylon
socks to see whether or not he should roll them up … ;
no: looking both beyond and through physical space
into an inner dark. Why else draw the eyes as shadows?
It’s his glimpse into another world.
 
                                                                *
 
My mother’s father hunted and rode.
        My father rode and fished.
My stepfather never budged
        from his Barca Lounger
once the amber liquid began to pour. He had a spiritual life
and a social life and no
        physical life. But he liked it
that I was always outside:
        maybe that’s why he never
got on my back about grades;
        he might have thought
that this boy has to be outside
        at this time in his life. 
Maybe it’s more important
        that he roam the canyons and the hills 
that he know the streets 
        that he come home 
covered with leaves and bark and mud,
        than that he sit there 
like a good young scholar 
        like I was, a Rabbi 
at twenty giving money home
        to my parents in their cabbagy tenement 
in the Bronx. This is a boy
        who needs space. One time—
I think I had my learner's permit—
        he rented a Mustang
convertible in L.A. and for several
        days I drove around
past the long rows of used car lots
        and the bruised facades of restaurants
digging up relatives, my hoarse-voiced
        arthritic aunt in the shadows of
her goldenrod colored ranch house,
        limping like Ruffian
after her last run
        in the wet dirt at Belmont Stakes.
       
                                                                 *
 
But I’ve said nothing about what made me weep.
 
It's in the contrast between Kitaj's alter cocker
seeking comfort on a train,
and Rembrandt’s taut youth
setting off into the rampant amber on horseback;
it’s in the image of active life juxtaposed
with the image of sedentary contemplation—
though no one travels on horseback now
and heroism has become
attending AIDS patients
or sheltering the homeless.
The raw youth’s feet are planted
lightly yet firmly in his stirrups.
His coat glows with many colors.
 
Not so The Jewish Rider.
And yet—there's something more.
 
                                                             *
 
Michael Hoffman writes that New York
is not what it was when I was too young
to have marked the existence of The Blue Note,
but I can pick up this trail
by walking across the park to the Frick.
And Barbara Hershey wouldn’t have been at the Frick in 1959
(they don’t allow children under sixteen)
in black skin tight pants, black sweater,
(the female uniform of our generation
whose male version substitutes
black jeans, baseball hat, and bomber jacket—
though who knows what decorous garments
she’d checked in the cloakroom),
and white boots with plenty
of Elizabethan ruff at the edges,
pausing to look at The Polish Rider
while I scribbled notes. Her white
boots stood out against the dominant dark
like the Jewish Rider’s white loafers.
 
And that was good because the light in the painting is brief
whatever the time of day, sunrise or sunset,
and the rider’s gaze, looking out over
unknown space, is inward.
I followed his eyes through the archway toward canvases
where clouds roll over harbors
against the whiteness of sails
or toward gilded robes and velvet-hung rooms,
then back to meet wisdom’s bared breast
in Veronese’s Wisdom and Strength…
(Why didn’t Veronese have the nerve
to call his painting Woman
With Bare Breasts, like Tintoretto?
Why an allegorical title when the bare
flesh and bones and sinew would have done?)
He spends his life looking not
at far off hills or citadels or
the lights in the village below:
he has no choice but to fix
on her one bared breast, her swelling nipple.
I can’t figure out what landscape
he might be facing in the painted world.
The clatter of rocks and hooves
echoes over the stony plain. 
 
                                                                 *
 
I was no rider, but a pretend
horse and rider always rode
beside my train window—at a canter
no matter how fast the rails clicked by—
and though he wore a bandana
and leaned slightly forward in the saddle
to pull himself aboard,
his gaze, wide-ranging yet intent,
was like the Polish Rider’s.
 
Even as an only child I was never lonely.
 
My mother's father rode until he was old
and on a narrow pass his horse
jammed him up against rockface.
In his narrative of his life
this collision marked
the ruin of his hip
the rise of his cataracts.
 
My father rode “every morning before work.”
 
I never witnessed that,
but at a ranch in upper New York State
while I bloodied my hands
tugging the reins of a frothing giant
who would not budge from a weedpatch,
I watched him disappear
in his black polo shirt and khaki jodhpurs
as he galloped over a far off hill:
more at ease in the saddle—in the air—
than I’d ever seen him in civilian life.
 
My woman friend in El Paso lives to ride.
 
Only the Jewish Rider and I do not ride!
 
                                                                  *
 
That’s the stuff of events. What about
the signature inscribed by the sun,
the dark clouds sinister in just being there;
thresholds, exchanges going on in the village below,
candles lit in the deep interiors,
bread, wine, the plate making its way
around the table; what about—
 
leaping centuries ahead—
the energy from generators blazing
like auras through the clouds
the scattered lights,
the rotating tops of ambulances;
the tuna casseroles and macaroni and cheese
 
making the rounds, apple sauce
passing from high chair to bib, the Wonder Bread
on a calcified plate,
children eating, heads down, in silence,
communicating through eye movements,
the mother wiping her lips, the father
grinning stupidly and drooling;
 
the television quacking in the background,
the perfect suburban night unfolding
in bedroom and drive-in and den,
the sprinkler system ticking.
The snipers in the tower—.
This is what the riders,
guests everywhere and nowhere,
 
say goodbye to as their horses break into a canter
as night comes down. And last
night, driving to Connecticut,
I understood that the Polish Rider
gleans the permutations of light after dusk,
that its olive-gray smudges reflect
the absence of pitch-darkness. I was wrong
 
about the Polish Rider all along:
he doesn’t depart at nightfall, he stops for a moment
crossing difficult terrain (anticipating rockslide?)
in the night, because, as the faint light
rimming the edges of the sky makes clear,
night is not absolute black, but rough-hewn and curious.
The rider lives in order to depart.
 
 
                                 The Woman Who Rode
 
She hitched her horse to the gateposts of my house.
Bare trees, frost, the whole bit.
 
I wanted our lives to be like that:
as rife with silences as a Quaker meeting.
 
She came to me in her stride.
Dropped her crop on the chair.
 
Peeled off her britches and boots; crawled
under the covers.
 
Her hour in the saddle had “made her ready.”
I felt like an accessory.
 
The wound was open. Drowsily I rolled
onto her, no longer caring if she
 
was using me. As the new
year wore on and black ice made riding
 
a fast track to certain death
or paralysis, she grew tense.
 
Came to me now with clinical terms,
“schi” words I worked hard to break down.
 
The good news was she was not a true
“split personality”—the glitch
 
that “she was divorced
from herself, and could not love or care.”
 
                                                                  *
 
The light in her house
was like the light before dawn.
 
On the last of my rare visits
her mother jarred preserves while we watched
 
instant replays of Robert Kennedy die and die.
Her father skulked upstairs, perhaps
 
testing gadgets; or wishing me off his daughter;
or taking precautions I would not overhear
 
what words were ricocheting
on his “hot line” to the patent office.
 
                                                                 *
 
Any objective observer standing back
from the distraction of the impinging present
 
could see that her torment overleapt
any visible signs and that she was—
 
as a WASP “rider”—the wrong
person for the place she was in.
 
Her resilience could not be in question.
She lived to stray from known paths
 
to leap stone fences and break into open fields.
When her horse went down in an Irish bog
 
and she was trampled—hooves branding her cheek—
the next day she up and mounted him again.
 
                                                                *
 
When she came to me in the dream last night
her smile had loosened.
 
How lovely she looked in her blue silk blouse.
How well it lit up the colors of her hair.


^^EOP^^

Some things no one says aloud.
But he was there if he says he was. 
Bleaching fields and buttermilk.
The stench of breweries and lye. 
Two-thirds of his life before this one? Sky. 
His current city rises off a river not Lek,
though here in the gallery, a train ride away: 
The impossible familiar. The somehow known. 
The curator has written: On the crowded ferry, cows attempt to drink.  
But anyone can see that one scratches her neck,
a good-sailor cow, sickle-hocked, not parched. 
Cows like that. Yes. He remembers. 
Also that, downriver, float the fishmongers’ baskets
of haddock and crab. 
On the way home, this will be also his view,
the river running toward its source, a reverse birthing. 
But now, he sees that Rembrandt has wired coils of light
into the shipbuilder’s ruff. 
He remembers shipbuilders, the horizon
upon which sailed their fluyts, and above which: homesick. 
That was what we call a long time ago
because it has to be called something. 
And now? The guard warns him back from one world. 
Rose hip. Willow. Sea salt.       The infinite clouds.


^^EOP^^

That was the year we drove
into the commune in Cornwall.
“Jesus Jim,” mam said,
“back up quick they’re hippies.” 
Through the car window,
tents, row after row, flaps open,
long-haired men and women
curled around each other like babies 
and the babies themselves
wandered naked across the grass. 
I reached for the handle, ready, almost,
to open the door, drop out and away
from my sister’s aggressive thighs,
Daddy’s slapping hands. 
Back home in the Dandelion Market
I unlearnt the steps my mother taught,
bought a headband, an afghan coat,
a fringed skirt — leather skin. 
Barefoot on common grass I lay down with kin.


^^EOP^^

I am afraid of your transcendental death.
When people say think of a man. I think of a brown man.
Sometimes the earth grows khella because she can feel our suffering.
Yooooooing beneath Costco tikis. 
When people say think of a man. I think of a white man.
I am meant to hold you in your oblique pain, your map-driven pain.
Yooooooing beneath Costco tikis.
I was drunk holding my teeth in like students. 
I am meant to hold you in your oblique pain, your map-driven pain.
You die like an actor.
I was drunk holding my teeth in like students.
My body was a brown dog I shoved back into the water. 
You die like an actor.
I beseeched but couldn’t stay out of the first person.
My body was a brown dog I shoved back into the water.
Hold me, hold me, hold me, holdmeholdmeholdme. 
I beseeched but couldn’t stay out of the first person.
Where does it hurt, we say.
Hold me, hold me, hold me, holdmeholdmeholdme.
I am afraid of your transcendental death.


^^EOP^^

Here comes rain on our roof!
It stays just long enough
to tickle me into writing this. 
It stays just long enough
for everybody to get into
a pair of PJs (silk-cotton blend) 
and then goes poof! At our best
we exude awesomeness. At our best
we are destined to turn pale 
with the rest of humanity.
We are awesome and quick as
decomposing sticks at a trail’s 
end. We bend dreams into circles
of green zone satire. We have
mahogany stuffed in our mahogany 
ears. To all who are not us
we are sorry to say You’re welcome!
Nature thankfully adores a rumor! 
A sunset! A glacier! Clouds
glimmer and cast inevitable
shadows off the groundswell 
footrest. I remember you from
that time before we first met
when our eyes were wet 
like summertime coasters
as we Ubered noiselessly
between pews. The aristocrats 
are failing to panhandle via email.
One aristocrat is sleepily winding
through the face of another.


^^EOP^^

I said cake 
I said top hat 
I said microphone 
four little golden baby heads 
wait I said pirate ghost 
wait wait I said closed eye smiling cat 
he scrawled back oh my god 
I thought fuck yeah I can read this at the marathon 
he said Eileen smiles  ehhh I can use it 
the bell of my computer rang 
same message 
wait the cat is crying with relief 
the cat is a devil now 
the cat is not mad 
the cat making racialized jazz 
uh or not my white hands 
I’m talking to everyone now. 
and I’m using a filter. No I’m not 
I acknowledge that there is an
image of me twice. I only recently 
learned the term jazz hands 
if we fucked Pennsylvania up what is our 
hope to live in a stolen country that was always stolen 
and worked largely by stolen people. Out of a conservative 
diaspora came I mongrel poet from Massachusetts 
to make my mark   love & these things and opportunities 
to speak. We can’t fall down we teem in the new opportunity
we discover what resistance means 
our time & blowing up the inside of my computer 
buck studies 
the phone says delivered 
what is. 
Adam says did you see my beard. 
We talk about money awhile 
I ride my bike. Get off the phone goes
ding. It’s his beard calling. I go oh. 
you have what I want. 
he says lol 
then skull 
then rocket 
then turkey 
green pistol 
and a flame. I 
don’t know what to say back to that 
I say bike and go.


^^EOP^^

scooby-doo was trying to tell us something when every time that monster mask got snatched off it was a greedy white dude.


•
 
in ’97, a black comic gets on stage,  says, you ever notice how white dogs be like woof woof & black dogs be like ruff ruff motherfuckaaaaa!!


•
 
the dog upstairs won’t shut up & i’ve thought of ending his  little  noisy  life but i have to remember he  matters he matters & if i did the  brown girl upstairs would cry forever.

•
 
dog (n.): a man’s best friend. (see: fetch, roll over, K-9, good boy, put down.) ex. my dog died, I had to do it with my own hands.

dawg (n.): a man’s best friend. (see: blunt rolled already, handshake, my nigga, put me on.) ex. my dawg died, he did it with his own hands.


•
 
dogs in this house eat the same thing we do. we eat greens, he eat  greens. fried bologna, neck bones,  leftovers.
 

     ...    he died from the suga, the gout or whatever   came for big mama came  back for the dog.


•
 
everybody love Lassie, but what  about Sounder?

•
 
possible rite of passage #37: graduating from outrunning the  block’s dogs to outrunning the block’s police.


•
 
i too have been called boy & expected to come, kneel.


•
 
what Animorph did you want to be? i wanted to be the boy who turned into the bird limp in the dog’s wet mouth, holding me toward his human saying   I made  this for you.


•


 
the dog upstairs needs to stop running his mouth talking all that shit I can hear him up there fool don’t think i understand he don’t know i got a bark too teeth too thumbs & a terrible child’s mind.

•
 
something about Air Bud felt    ...     the talented obedient beast, the roar of the eggshell crowd.

•
 
dogs aren’t racist but they can be trained to be so as can the water as can the trees as can gravity as can anything marked by a pale hand & turned bloodgold a bitter king’s magic touch.

•
 
i’m the kind of werewolf that turns into a shih tzu. ruff ruff motherfucka.

•
 
while my grandmama spoke on the clean blood of Jesus i watched the hounds in the mud hot for anything warm & thought of something better to worship.

•
 
i stand in the dark bathroom in my tightest shortest shorts my vaselined legs the only things catching light. i say i’m a real bitch 3 times, clap my hands above my head. nothing happens. i walk back into the club, put my hand on a man’s chest & it’s a paw.

•
 
the gay agenda made CatDog to offer your child’s gender to their seven-headed god.

•
 
a dead dog is a hero, a dead lion is a hero, a cloned sheep is a miracle, a dead child is a tragedy (depending on the color, the nation, the occupation or non- occupation of the parents).

•
 
during the new moon i switch from an –a to the traditional –er, i raid the farm, smash the melon patch, swallow chickens whole, spit out the bones ground down  to smoke, howl Geee-zuss! toward the sky’s great nothing.

•
 



•
 
dog bred to smell the coke/dog bred to smell the bomb/dog bred to smell the nigger hid beneath the floorboards.

•
 
dude’s dog won’t leave the room won’t let his lord out of his sight  won’t let his master disappear won’t let himself go hungry won’t let nothing happen to the one who brings the water even if it means being owned, being witness to his hunger. or maybe he’s just dumb.

•
 
stay. open. stay. look at me. stay. open. teeth. bad. bad. stay. open.  
treat. treat. pant. wag. treat. good. stay. good. stay.

•
 
i listen to DMX smoking a blunt doing bout 90 in a 55 when the cop ask if i know why he pulled me over  i say i’m just trying to be me.

•
 
the dog upstairs won’t shut up but i can’t hate him he’s up there alone all  day making noise must be the only way he knows he’s not a ghost.


^^EOP^^

It is pretty to be sweet
and full of pardon like
a flower perfuming the
hands that shred it, but
all piety leads to a single
point: the same paradise
where dead lab rats go. 
If you live small you’ll
be resurrected with the
small, a whole planet
of minor gods simpering
in the weeds. I don’t know
anyone who would kill
anyone for me. As boys 
my brother and I
would play love, me
drawing stars on
the soles of his feet,
him tickling my back.
Then we’d play harm,
him cataloging my sins 
to the air, me throwing
him into furniture.
The algorithms for living
have always been
delicious and hollow,
like a beetle husk in a
spider’s paw. Hafez said 
fear is the cheapest room
in a house, that we ought
to live in better
conditions. I would
happily trade all my
knowing for plusher
carpet, higher ceilings. 
Some nights I force
my brain to dream me
Persian by listening
to old home movies
as I fall asleep. In the
mornings I open my eyes
and spoil the séance. Am I 
forfeiting my mystique?
All bodies become sicker
bodies. This is a kind of object
permanence, a curse bent
around our scalps resembling
grace only at the tattered
edges. It’s so unsettling 
to feel anything but good.
I wish I was only as cruel as
the first time I noticed
I was cruel, waving my tiny
shadow over a pond to scare
the copper minnows.
Rockabye, now I lay me 
down, et cetera. The world
is what accumulates — 
the mouth full of meat,
the earth full of meat.
My grandfather
taught his parrot
the ninety-nine holy 
names of God. Al-Muzil:
The Humiliator. Al-Waarith:
The Heir. Once, after
my grandfather had been
dead for a year, I woke
from a dream (I was a
sultan guzzling flies 
from a crystal boot) with
his walking cane deep
in my mouth. I kept sucking
until I fell back asleep.
There are only two bones
in the throat, and that’s if you
count the clavicle. This 
seems unsafe, overdelicate,
like I ought to ask for
a third. As if anyone
living would offer. Corporeal friends are
spiritual enemies

^^EOP^^

Muscular as a stallion in fact — 
but I have no horse in this race of people against people. 
It was made certain I wouldn’t, that I’d inherit nothing
except a whipping of my hindquarters as a form of correction,
in the cadence of I love you, tar baby, I love you. 
This is not unlike how my parents were raised, to comply,
and their parents before them, and theirs before them and so forth
as far back as anyone cared to speak of what they lived
through, the preposterous preposition of it all. 
Therefore and thereafter, whenever I hear the word pedigree,
I think of the blank check I don’t have behind my name,
and then I think of saddles and stirrups, and then
the soreness of my lower back, and then the source of that. 
How a boss can ride you: of this I am personally familiar,
plus know by blood drawn from two lines of family men
forced to cut out their own tongues to keep food on the table
they could no longer taste or even stand to. 
Their tongues grew back, yes, after some time and with
sharpness I’m told, needing to cut against something,
anything, to be purposeful given their new forms.  Woe! Woe! Woe! How a man rides his wife, his children,
how he’d ride a horse he’ll never have, could never give them
unless said horse is immaterial, hence not a horse at all —  
just muscular, as a stallion is, as a word is that’s denied
striving families horsepower, any engine beyond their
fragile bodies to propel them forward; the whole race:
forward, even if it pits people against a people,
even if it means rearing a rear end tender and raw.
 
I love you, tar baby, I love you something strong.


^^EOP^^

friends! if i may interrupt right quick 
i know y’all working, busy smoking & busy
trying not to smoke, busy with the kids & moms 
& busy with alone, but i have just seen
two boys — yes, black — on bikes — also — summer children
basketball shorts & they outside shoes, wild 
laughing bout something i couldn’t hear
over my own holler, trying to steady
the wheel & not hit they asses as they swerved
frienddrunk, making their little loops, sun-lotioned 
faces screwed up with that first & cleanest love
we forget to name as such, &, hear me out
i’m not trying to dis lil dude, but in this gold hour
he kind of looked like Francine off Arthur
same monkey mouth & all, ole & i say hey looking-ass boy 
tho in a beautiful way, the best beautiful
same as i know all of us have looked
like something off when backlit by love. o loves,
y’all ugly asses have crowned me the worst names:
wayne brady, gay wiz khalifa, all kinds of bitches
& fags (tho only with my bitches & fags), all kinds 
of shit &, once, mark of buddha that year acne
scored my forehead with its bumpy faith.
my niggas & my niggas who are not niggas
i been almost-pissed myself, almost been boxin’
been tears & snot off your dozen wonders
been the giddy swine dancing the flame.
o my many hearts, y’all booty-faced 
weird-ass ole mojo-jojo-looking asses
dusty chambers where my living dwells
roast me. name me in the old ways, your shit-
talk a river i wade, howling until it takes me.
i can’t stop laughing, more river wades
down my throat. could be drowning
could be becoming the water, could be
a baptism from the inside out. 
don’t save me, i don’t wanna be saved.
i’ve died laughing before, been seen
god’s face & you have her teeth, my nig.
but   hers   ain’t   as   yellow   as   them   saffron   shits
you   keep   stashed   in   your   gloryfoul   mouth
my friend! my friends! my niggas! my wives!
i got a crush on each one of your dumb faces
smashing into my heart like idiot cardinals into glass
but i am a big-ass glass bird, a stupid monster 
crashing through the window & becoming
it just to make you laugh. Andrew used to say friendship is so friendship                        & ain’t it
even after Andrew gave it on over to whatever
he was still my nigga. when they turned his body
to dust he was still my dusty-ass boy.
don’t you hear it? the dust on the fan calls me
a bum, says my hairline looks like it’s thinking
about retirement. the dust in the car says i look
like a chubby slave, says i look too drunk, takes 
my keys, drives me home. the wind is tangled
with the dust of the dead homies, carrying us over
to them, giggling in the mirror. hear them. hear
your long-gone girl tease your hair on the bus. hear them
rolling when you sweep broom across the beaten floor.
i miss them. all the dead. how young. how silly
to miss what you will become. i apologize.
sometimes it just catches up in me. love
& ghost gets caught up in us like wind & birds
trapped in a sheet just the same. & my friends
is some birds, some chicken-head muhfuckas 
who i would legit stomp a nigga for, do you feel me?
when they buried my nigga i put on my timbs
walked into that hot august tried to beat his name
out the dirt. i beat the earth like a nigga.
i threw hands at the earth like a punk muhfucka
& the ground chuckled, said my nigga. what is you doing!
you can’t hear the wind drunk off the kindred lent?
can you hear that great roll from way off like a big nigga
laughing in an alley! how your dead auntie laugh
when she see you still ain’t grew into that big-ass head!
like your real friend laugh when you still the same ugly
as yesterday! same ugly as always! same ugly as their last life!

^^EOP^^

I would like 
a century 
a tree 
grows slow 
a crack 
of light 
hits my palm 
while I’m 
reading 
I grab 
to take 
a picture 
& the crack 
is gone 
branches 
pouring 
out of my 
hands 
days has made 
its mark 
I have 
wind 
swept 
hair I think 
of my step 
brother 
who I knew 
more 
like this 
his face 
a photo 
graph 
on a beach 
on a 
book & 
when he died 
I was 
family 
watching 
a tree in 
the wind 
& I wanted 
to speak 
to him 
who was 
truly my 
brother 
that speck 
of light is gone 
on my 
hand and 
him. I told 
her I’d probably 
like to 
end here 
like my com 
puters 
do & my 
dog did. I took 
a chance 
w horrifying 
her. I’m 
shooting 
for this 
love where 
I live. See 
me dying 
now or running 
across 
the beach 
to catch 
the tree 
book 
cover in the end 
of summer’s 
wind. The ocean 
is a feast 
& it’s here 
I bring my 
water tree book 
feet, taste 
branches 
the lot that 
is me 
who wants 
a century.


^^EOP^^

           The sun got its new angel wings tee-shirt
                 smudged with the sandbox’s finest
                     demi-mud. This would render
                  appearances partial, with a cornball’s
               incongruence. Sidewalk chalk radioactive
            Well, we’ll never write that letter to
         the lozenges, I mean that shrinking
postcard on the way to Saturn
     Will someone please hand me
                          my martini, so I can
                            make it through this
   The                                       awful ordeal?
     title                                Name there
       placed                                   in the palm
              the                                                of your natural
           action                                                         tremor
               off-center
rendering that floating
           green eye, well
                        it floated
               off onto some
          bell somewhere
                Yesterday’s duck
                                seemed to have three parents: a vulture
                                                                     a turkey, & a something
                                                                                                           a plastic
                                                                                                     shapeliness
unaccountably
              signaling Dark Star
                          Winged creatures
                                      suspend shyness  
                                                         & we were stabbed
                                                                         with permission
                                                                    all over
                                                         & again, the assemblages
                                                                    of guilt
                                                              frozen in dispossession 
                                           Did that closet just murmur?  
“No mere solar beam can harm the lord of photosynthesis” 
“No barrier can stop one who dwells between all boundaries” 
“Welcome back to life, my former foes” 
“& be tied to the end of your string / flying in the air babes at night”
 
9  /4   /16 Tompkins Square Park


^^EOP^^

there, on the ground like dirt or a bird
december froze & may thawed, blood  misted, crying for any mother, the boy who called your mama a bitch bleeds  our love for you, his wings frozen & fighting
the cold wind of our sneakers.  we storm him because we love you & your mama has fed us & only us  is allowed to call her out her name
because we know her name, Ms. Jones,  & she bad & only we can say that & when we bad she has permission  from our mamas to beat us like we hers.
we hers like you hers. you our boy.  we pool our punches into the boy like quarters for a bag of flaming hots.  we make him look like a bag of flaming hots.
lord forgive me, but i don’t regret it.  &, on the real, all these summers later, i miss it. i wish a little bit to gather around  a man’s body & stomp in the name of love,
beat what he said about my next to blood  back into his vermilion mouth, to make his mouth a beautiful, smashed tomato.  really tho. Leland, you remember
how we beat that nigga? our middle  school ritual, that thirty-second eternity. later, i licked his blood off my nikes  & dreamed we were water lilies
holding the water down.  • 
they were around me like  nigga1  nigga2      nigga3  nigga4     me     nigga5  nigga6       nigga7  nigga8 
& i felt    ...    safe?  what could be safer than a circle of boys too afraid of killing you to kill you? 
the fists that broke my ribs also wanted me to live.  i praise each one true god for each foot that was not a sharp anything.  i had always wanted 8 niggas on me (but not) like that. 
each hand laid upon me like a rude & starving prayer.  after a while i started to           like it i leaned into it      unblocked my face 
the bottoms of their shoes were the sweet of a well-chewed eraser. i was their promise. their ink.  you should have heard them laugh a language so delicious i cracked up cracked grin & all. 
i didn’t know
a thing about love
until those boys
walked away
so happy.  my heart pouring from my nose.


^^EOP^^

October 2017 
You once said: My reward for this life will be a thousand pounds of dirt shoveled in my face. You were wrong. You are seven pounds of ashes
in a box, a Puerto Rican flag wrapped around you, next to a red brick
from the house in Utuado where you were born, all crammed together
on my bookshelf. You taught me there is no God, no life after this life,
so I know you are not watching me type this letter over my shoulder. 
When I was a boy, you were God. I watched from the seventh floor
of the projects as you walked down into the street to stop a public
execution. A big man caught a small man stealing his car, and everyone
in Brooklyn heard the car alarm wail of the condemned: He’s killing me.
At a word from you, the executioner’s hand slipped from the hair
of the thief. The kid was high, was all you said when you came back to us. 
When I was a boy, and you were God, we flew to Puerto Rico. You said: My grandfather was the mayor of Utuado. His name was Buenaventura. That means good fortune. I believed in your grandfather’s name.
I heard the tree frogs chanting to each other all night. I saw banana
leaf and elephant palm sprouting from the mountain’s belly. I gnawed
the mango’s pit, and the sweet yellow hair stuck between my teeth.
I said to you: You came from another planet. How did you do it?
You said: Every morning, just before I woke up, I saw the mountains. 
Every morning, I see the mountains. In Utuado, three sisters,
all in their seventies, all bedridden, all Pentecostales who only left
the house for church, lay sleeping on mattresses spread across the floor
when the hurricane gutted the mountain the way a butcher slices open
a dangled pig, and a rolling wall of mud buried them, leaving the fourth
sister to stagger into the street, screaming like an unheeded prophet
about the end of the world. In Utuado, a man who cultivated a garden
of aguacate and carambola, feeding the avocado and star fruit to his
nieces from New York, saw the trees in his garden beheaded all at once
like the soldiers of a beaten army, and so hanged himself. In Utuado,
a welder and a handyman rigged a pulley with a shopping cart to ferry
rice and beans across the river where the bridge collapsed, witnessed
the cart swaying above so many hands, then raised a sign that told
the helicopters: Campamento los Olvidados: Camp of the Forgotten. 
Los olvidados wait seven hours in line for a government meal of Skittles
and Vienna sausage, or a tarp to cover the bones of a house with no roof,
as the fungus grows on their skin from sleeping on mattresses drenched
with the spit of the hurricane. They drink the brown water, waiting
for microscopic monsters in their bellies to visit plagues upon them.
A nurse says: These people are going to have an epidemic. These people are going to die. The president flips rolls of paper towels to a crowd
at a church in Guaynabo, Zeus lobbing thunderbolts on the locked ward
of his delusions. Down the block, cousin Ricardo, Bernice’s boy, says
that somebody stole his can of diesel. I heard somebody ask you once
what Puerto Rico needed to be free. And you said: Tres pulgadas de sangre en la calle: Three inches of blood in the street. Now, three
inches of mud flow through the streets of Utuado, and troops patrol
the town, as if guarding the vein of copper in the ground, as if a shovel
digging graves in the backyard might strike the ore below, as if la brigada
swinging machetes to clear the road might remember the last uprising. 
I know you are not God. I have the proof: seven pounds of ashes in a box
on my bookshelf. Gods do not die, and yet I want you to be God again.
Stride from the crowd to seize the president’s arm before another roll
of paper towels sails away. Thunder Spanish obscenities in his face.
Banish him to a roofless rainstorm in Utuado, so he unravels, one soaked
sheet after another, till there is nothing left but his cardboard heart. 
I promised myself I would stop talking to you, white box of gray grit.
You were deaf even before you died. Hear my promise now: I will take you
to the mountains, where houses lost like ships at sea rise blue and yellow
from the mud. I will open my hands. I will scatter your ashes in Utuado.


^^EOP^^

gravity accounts for the distance between weight and mass it can also mean alarming importance      human
bones are so full of gravity it’s hard for us to swim I lost my glasses chasing a branch in the ocean
which is far too deep to dredge      sometimes  I imagine the sea’s made of actual tears this would explain the salt      think of all the disconsolate toddlers weeping right now into the earth the tears must go somewhere      it’s important to consider everything to name what we’re able      oceans 
give us rain but we don’t call rain ocean      knot a dozen rats together by the tail and you’ve got a roi de rats
which is harder than rain to hear in the night and far less welcome       who mourns a rat king
frustrated chthonic always the biter never the bitten  they give us the evil we need to stay moored to good still I would break any promise to avoid finding one       O Terrible God of the Mechanical Age I am your favorite pilgrim yet even I am finding it impossible to speak to you now without asking for protection


^^EOP^^

Because it changes O’Hare to o hate,
o hate, o hate — over and over, no matter
how many times I retype it. O hate, like 
an American tune, an American fable
where, yo, you can enter an o hate
bathroom, take a selfie in the mirror 
cuz your sister wants to see the pockets
of your Great American Rhinestone Jeans.
Because, on a street called Viewpoint,  I get home becomes I get guns, off a road
on a mission to kill every squirrel-ish
pedestrian. Because he was packing, 
concealed, threatening to use it, use
his hands or feet. My feet, iamb
of a son of a birch, of a brick chatting 
with the devil, with God, with a listener
not listening. Because he’d gone bonnets,
his garden bounty a faded wine, his wife’s 
linguine a longing for a golden ear,
so I took her to the botanical gardens
in my getaway car, to a fruit on a vine, 
but the limes went lemur, the night to nonfat,
the clear to catastrophic. Because driving away
from the frog man croaking hypocrite,  heavenly went down like a melting hedge,
a gal gone hog-tied, a fish crying, a tiger-
tiger togetherness, flight or fucked, 
a heart, stroked, racing to its vicarious
carousel, a fungus lashed to a beam gone
beleaguered. Because he will kill her, 
that’s his plan: to kill us all. Can’t commit
or commute, can’t debone his breath,
can’t take his acute paranoia, chalk it up 
to cute. Because this here’s a Josie
madhouse, a bedroom bedrock-locked.
Because Blvd morphed to Bled, spirit 
summoned with a Ouija board. Because soap holder went love hen, though love
had flown the Calycanthus 
like the grilled portobellos messing
with his vowels. Please please, I pleaded
to the pleading day. Because prayer 
is like a bread line, a penny for your
exploded mind. Because lots of logs
to you

^^EOP^^

Past the congested interstate, past the long lines
outside the Dorothy Day Center, past the cheering bleachers,
the steam rising from the coach’s face, the fathers straining in prayer, 
past the rusting letters on the marquee, the dim lights along Main,
the couples who will fuck during the movie & the couples who won’t,
past the frozen orchard, past the defaced statue of a saint, a dog 
chews thin the leather cord around his neck. The opposite of hunger
is not satisfaction, it is birth. It is what makes a man chisel a face into stone.
It is what drives the body to lie in the fresh snow. It is what quiets the world 
when she pulls you in close. It is the winning pass, the crowd too busy
counting down to notice. The world puts its mouth on you
& you don’t say a thing. The world digs a hole in your yard 
& it’s up to you to fill it, up to you to find something useful
to do with your sadness. Strange, the yellow beetle, dried
between the pages of the dictionary, staining the page 
with its flattened body — its outline, a dirty halo circling
the word pleased — please, you’ve circled the same two blocks in search
of a place to park, circled the yard howling a name that won’t respond, 
but you still think you know enough to call that enough?
The boat smacks against the dock it’s tied to. Your mother
fixes your father’s tie before closing the casket. 
Everyone you loved refused to die in this town
before they died in this town. The woman beside you
on the plane wants to know where you’re going.


^^EOP^^

Daily, daily scathing roughens the psyche
and veils are unhinged. I too was a planet,
planed and waterless. Wolf-roved. Our roofs
leaked, mischievous sisters locked the Mother General
out in the garth where she prayed to the Foundress
and the dead and the living looked on, entombed
and disapproving. Gray nuns, grave, gave out.
There was weeping in every stall.
Though the stalls be empty of cattle, we trust.
Though our intellects rust, we grow tweedy-brown
and opportunistic, feeding off morsels.
A cosmos of relics in the crypt and a senior
sister led the laity around brilliantly by a
twisted adamantine-ringed nose, to see
broken finger bones, bloody cloths, brains.
Blood so blue and white we redden and hide
our film-star faces. Cagey.
Margaret crushed by a door. Martha martyred
by a window overlooking the park,
with swaggering ducks and blinding water.
Paddlers. What if you had held a grudge,
fondled it, and found that you had fallen in love?
He has turned up finally, his jaw like the suspension
bridge, magnetized with stubble, cheekbones like girders.
Oh no, I am not a cliché. See my inside.
Ten years inside but without the comforts of bantam mornings.
Bodies on beds shimmied into corners with shifty valances. September blues.
Fat satin. Sidling in from the green room. In the gut, a vagabond
ache like disgust. I walk cumbersome honesty sideways
through several doors, park her in the smoky alley.
Pull up compunction by his Jaeger collar, kiss his spandrel nose,
expel him into the snowy street.
I relish jealousy on the side with copious dressing.
Feed depression to a gull called Guillaume
on a bleak beach during lunch break.
Simplify the universe with a pie chart
and chomp down three-quarters of it with mustard and beer.


^^EOP^^

Kant says time is neither event nor thing. 
Well, I think. That’s that. 
But then Teresa calls.
She’s found my old letters.
There are dead dogs in them, old boyfriends;
the miscarriage is happening
(has happened)
and I have to catch a plane.
The plane has      (not yet)
taken off. 
Sundials, T squares,
heartbeats, and the equinox.
In places of worship, incense burns.
All to mark no thing. 
Here, wind moves water in one direction,
then another. Some mornings,
nothing ripples, not leaves,
not iridescence on birdwing, beetle back.
Some mornings,
both: stillness, unrest. 
Last season’s loon calls.
And sometimes? I can’t remember the lake
where I first heard that sound,
though the vision of it rises
through a paint-flecked pane. 
On my morning walk: a hawk
perched on a telephone wire above
what used to be a hayfield:
rusted New Holland baler,
bobolinks and meadowlarks
saved from the mower.
That was a generation ago,
dead farmers, dead cows. 
Now
is not the time,
moles, voles, mice,
to dart into the light. 
Nothing stops in stillness
except solstice
when the sun stands still in declination. 
I should tell someone this,
that we are not propelled beyond a moment
of observation, even loss, into something else:
field edge, lakeside, motherhood.
But that, instead, we are always
on our way. 
On my return, the wire’s empty.
The hawk has hunted or not,
is sated
or continues,
hungry.
Hunger, at least, returns. 
Once, in different water,
my daughters waded naked
after mussels. Appendages,
these daughters were. I was
accustomed to the creases
behind their knees
where I kept their pulse. 
Keep these, too: ships’ bells and steeple chimes,
an hourglass, the pharaoh’s water clock. 
Now, on a floating dock,
my daughters sun themselves, swing limbs
above water that soon enough
will be ice. 
These days, you can lift saliva
off the back of a stamp,
determine who licked it.
And that woman?
That sender? 
She will have stopped
and she will
not yet
have stopped        and she will still be 
bleeding.


^^EOP^^

but there is no proof but proof
no mark but the good news 
that there is no bad news yet. again.
i wish i knew the nausea, its thick yell 
in the morning, the pregnant proof
that in you, life swells. i know 
i’m not a mother, but i know what it is
to nurse a thing you want to kill 
but can’t. you learn to love it. yes.
i love my sweet virus. it is my proof 
of life, my toxic angel, wasted utopia
what makes my blood my blood. 
i understand belle now, how she could
love the beast. if you stare at fangs 
long enough, even fangs pink
with your own blood look soft.  • 
low-key, later, it felt like i got it
out the way, to finally know it 
up close, see it in the mirror.
it doesn’t feel good to say that. 
it doesn’t feel good to know
your need outweighed your fear. 
i braved a stupid ocean. a man.
i waded in his stupid waters. 
i took his stupid salt & let it
brine my skin, took his stupid 
fish into my hands & bit into it
like a flapping plum. i kissed at 
his stupid coral & stupid algae.
it was stupid. silly really. i knew nothing 
that easy to get & good to feel
isn’t also trying to eat you.  • 
knew what could happen. needed
no snake. grew the fruit myself. 
was the vine & the rain & the light.
the dirt was me. the hands drilling 
into the dirt were my hands.
i made the blade that cut me down. 
but i only knew how to live
when i knew how i’ll die. 
i want to live. think i mean it.
take the pill even on the days 
i think i won’t survive myself.
gave my body a shot. love myself 
at least that much. thank you, me.
thank you, pill, seafoam & bland. 
thank you, sick blood, my first husband
dead river bright with salmon.


^^EOP^^

Once, a man named a thing beautiful & so we wore it,
buried it, turned it into currency. Somewhere, maybe here, maybe now,
I stand completely still until he looks in my direction. Sometimes I don’t
believe I exist until someone calls me beautiful. Sometimes
any warm thing will do. Sometimes it’s me, a warm thing in the low
light. Beautiful is what the man called me after he did
what he wanted with — I’m running out of ways to describe it
 — my body, my silence. Beautiful. Why, I ask, in order to love
yourself must you, first, be loved? A bone sucked clean
of its marrow. A trail of ants magnified into ash. & of course,
I’m asking no one. & of course, I know the answer.
Of course, I know it’s not me they’re looking for, the men, I mean.
& I wished he didn’t feel the need to speak, really wished — like me
 — he just kept quiet, but no, he had to speak, he had to say beautiful — 
& now, goddamnit, my body appears, trapped in the long tunnel
of a telescope. & now I am here attending the aftermath
of my own ruin, with nothing but beautiful to keep me company.
Maybe he meant the city beyond the window.
Maybe he was talking to himself. Maybe beautiful, as in good job,
as in look what I just did with my own two hands.


^^EOP^^

I’m overcome 
by the cruelty 
of nature 
no I mean 
I’m with 
it. And each 
little capacity 
it has 
can’t be transferred 
I mean 
a spruce 
can’t give 
its oils to you 
can it. 
But that’s how 
it grows 
in the ab 
sence of 
technology 
my thoughts 
grow. My thoughts 
grow among 
trees 
but I don’t 
help them 
though 
I’m for them. 
I’m for my 
dog & inci 
dentally 
I feed 
her but I 
don’t see 
her much. 
Joe does. 
Joe is 
my friend 
& also 
a dog father 
I don’t 
help mountains 
Mountains 
help me 
I know 
the planet 
is old 
& splashy 
sleep helps 
me. Time 
helps 
me. My mother 
helped 
me. And 
now she 
is gone. She 
also hurt 
me so it’s 
good that 
she’s gone. 
I can grow 
different 
in the 
day or 
three decades 
in which 
I’ve got 
left 
I can 
grow toward 
the mountains 
sit in solidarity 
with prisoners 
or go 
to jail. I’m not joking 
I can 
push different. 
I want 
to say 
something 
about my cunt. 
Because 
that’s 
what you 
ask. But 
I am 
alone. No 
mother 
no phone 
just a notebook 
& a cunt 
& my thoughts. 
I don’t 
even think 
my thoughts. 
You do.


^^EOP^^

Of Tribulation, these are They,
Denoted by the White. — Emily Dickinson

^^EOP^^

i. 
My body a full echo                I dawdle down to the creek  
                          Ask the god of blood for
                          Abundance     continuity  
                                      My offering      the syrup of pressed beans   &
                                      A 7-winged tulip  
 
ii. 
Later the rains swell the creek with coffee            the storm        a beckoned sheet
The immortal herself reaping the earth          the tongues cut out of the cows  
 
iii. 
I walk in                       as the wash      attempts its valiant swallow 
             A cafeteria aid             wipes the cotton from the counter  
             Her bald eyes              aurora with       seeds  
                         You brought that           didn’t you?  
 
iv. 
                                                               My bottom lip a pink venom     My desire a valley with
                                                               legs       His steady fingers toying the tea            I look
                                                               up to a straight line and bury it    Can’t downsize what
                                                               hithers me    
                                                               Every now & then a troubled thirst
                                                               opens my mouth for a song that does not come
                                                                            I feel it all
                                                                      until a fixed voice decides    
                                                                                        No      but wait      you’re the water


^^EOP^^

The Audubon warblers keep the time of their coming,
Arriving on stillness of a storm,
Their breast and backs as dark as low bruised banks of cloud,
Rumps and throats as yellow as blooms of buckwheat.
 
They throng this evening in the newly-leaved
Tender-tipped canopies nervously weaving
Through the catkins like frantic prophets
Bearing some divine prophecy of the coming spring.
 
I wait, hoping for nothing too grave:
News of ruinous lands, of cutting and swarming locusts,
Of withering vines and empty granaries,
Of fasting, weeping, and rending of garments.
 
No, I wait for lighter fare:
Perhaps a promise that the green heron will nest
On the west end of the slough and that the ironweed
And wood lily will once again together bloom.
 
This would be an ample prophecy for another year—
This and a promise to keep the time of their coming.
 


^^EOP^^

For days now a red-breasted bird
has been trying to break in.
She tests a low branch, violet blossoms
swaying beside her, leaps into the air and flies
straight at my window, beak and breast
held back, claws raking the pane.
Maybe she longs for the tree she sees
reflected in the glass, but I'm only guessing.
I watch until she gives up and swoops off.
I wait for her return, the familiar
click, swoosh, thump of her. I sip cold coffee
and scan the room, trying to see it new,
through the eyes of a bird. Nothing has changed.
Books piled in a corner, coats hooked
over chair backs, paper plates, a cup
half-filled with sour milk.
The children are in school. The man is at work.
I'm alone with dead roses in a jam jar.
What do I have that she could want enough
to risk such failure, again and again?
 


^^EOP^^

She could be a Norman Rockwell painting,
the small girl on my front porch with her eager
face, her wind-burned cheeks red as cherries.
Her father waits by the curb, ready to rescue
his child should danger threaten, his shadow
reaching halfway across the yard. I take the
booklet from the girl's outstretched hand,
peruse the color photos of candy bars and
caramel-coated popcorn, pretend to read it.
I have no use for what she's selling, but I
can count the freckles on her nose, the scars
like fat worms on knobby knees that ought
to be covered on a cold day like this, when
the wind is blowing and the trees are losing
their grip on the last of their leaves. I'll take two of these and one of those, I say, pointing,
thinking I won't eat them, but I probably will.
It's worth the coming calories to see her joy,
how hard she works to spell my name right,
taking down my information. Then she turns
and gives a thumbs-up sign to her father, who
grins like an outfielder to whom the ball has
finally come—his heart like a glove, opening.


^^EOP^^

I strip the porch roof, pick out the used
nails, and toss the shingles down onto
 
a drop cloth, remembering when I shingled
my grandmother's roof fifty years ago:
 
the tar smell, the brackets, planks, and
ladders all the same, but level now
 
with hemlock limbs instead of locust.
I lug four shingles up the ladder, kneel
 
and drive the old nails home, slide
another shingle into place, pound,
 
toes bent, knees creaking. Miserliness,
a friend jokes about the nails, but I call it
  caring, thinking of the man who gave
us this land on the cove, the cottage, the boat-
 
house full of boats. The only time I saw
him he was at his work bench, a rich
 
man straightening nails, moving from
the bent can to the anvil to the straight.


^^EOP^^

Massive and black
the frigate birds,
on brambles in the distance.
 
Their bright red gular sacs,
full as spinnaker sails
billow from their feathers,
 
like giant hearts of skin and air.
They remind us of our own
 
hearts, oversized and awkward,
quivering in the lightest wind.
 


^^EOP^^




"There is no object so foul that intense light will not make
  beautiful."
                         —  Emerson, Nature



The renters bring out their greasy table,
End of the month again: It sags,
Weighted and warped like them, unable
To hold much more than glasses and rags.
 
Old clothes and rusty tools compete
For space with magazines they stole
From garbage bins behind our street;
Each shoe reveals a run-down sole.
 
A few come by, inspect, and leave,
Almost always with empty hands.
But when, at sundown, all things cleave
To slanted light, and when it lands
 
So rubber, glass, and metal glint—
And for a moment make you squint—
You'll see our neighbors bathed in gold
As if their worth cannot be sold.


^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^

When bombs are exploding outside, 
it means that there are implosions.  
Vibrations travel through air and liquid. 
My amniotic fluid is imprinted with airplanes
dropping bombs and screams and fire.  
In the bomb shelter in Saigon, 
my father teaches my two-year-old
brother French. "Je m'appelle Chuc Nai Dat." 
"Je m'appelle…"


^^EOP^^

I don't love my son
the way I thought
my mother should love me 
so I handed him a shoe box
to put the dead bird in
and shut the door.  
It was a mistake, 
not to be sure he buried it, 
not to grab the children 
gathered at my back door
by their shoulders
to push them into a half-circle 
and a prayer. 
Should have made them
take turns digging the hole, 
each one of their pudgy hands
finger stiff red's box
to lower it to the ground.  
It wasn't my place
to teach other women's children
about death, so my own son 
snuck the shoe box
into his backpack,
dead-eyed bird rolling 
like a plastic prize ball,
told the principal
this cold puff 
of field bird
had been his pet. 
See him 
clutching a coffin
the size of his feet,
eyes wide over a pout, 
giving a man a reason
good enough to hold him.  
                                                        after Louise Glück


^^EOP^^

are real. They jump from roof-top
to roof-top, do a backward flip
down to the concrete floor and land
perfectly on two feet.  
The metal of swords clang,
the body moves with the precision
of a praying mantis striking 
its prey. 
Their dresses are colorful, long
and lacy, billow and flair
with each turn and twist.  
Jewelry in the hair dangles and sparkles. 
Chinese female kung-fu superheroes
are smart, fight bad guys, do good deeds,
and risk their lives.
They appear when least expected. 
Chinese female kung-fu superheroes
never give up. They travel often alone
by foot through mountains. They work hard
training to master various martial arts forms. 
They do not care about Barbies,
those plastic dolls of only one hair color
that just looked pretty in the 80's. They aren't
impressed; they do not want a boring life.  
Chinese female kung-fu superheroes venture out
and save cities against villains. They steal into the night
in their black ninja-like suits, soundlessly through a house
to recover a magical sword and to release a prisoner,
knowing exactly where to press with their two fingertips
to freeze the guards and to accomplish their mission.    
                                                                            After Jeannine Hall Gailey's
                                                                            

^^EOP^^

A mouth is a sideways woman,
her curves and dips, the way she opens,
how her hollow center can sing. 
Mother, your mouth
is a fallen cello, 
your husband's hands—
a casket. Full of me. 


^^EOP^^

What is skin,
if not a taut swaddle 
loosening, body
if not a warm swaddle 
cooling, blood
if not thread 
in a swaddle
made of body, horizons 
if not lines
where sky swaddles 
Earth. See father. Stars, if not swaddled 
matter emitting light. See spirit. Wind, if it does not trace 
paths around bodies. See blood. Universe, if not outermost 
concentric circle. See mother.
A kiss, if not mouths pressed 
into wet twists, taste
if not flavor swaddling  
tongue, father
if not the option 
to swaddle, spirit
if not the smallest unit 
of the swaddled, mother
if not hips 
swaddling womb. See skin.
See body. See wind. See universe. See blood. 
                                                                ​after Nin Andrews


^^EOP^^

The letter A is awesome!
It simply is the best.
Without an A, you could not get
an A+ on a test.
You’d never see an acrobat
or eat an apple pie.
You couldn’t be an astronaut
or kiss your aunt goodbye.
An antelope would not exist.
An ape would be unknown.
You’d never hear a person
say “Afraid” or “All Alone”.
The A’s in avocado
would completely disappear
and certain words would be forgot
like “ankle”, “arm”, and “ear”.
 
Without the A, you couldn’t aim
an arrow in the air.
You wouldn’t ask for apricots
or almonds at a fair.
Aruba and Australia
would be missing from a map.
You’d never use an ATM,
an apron, or an app.
The arctic fox and aardvark
would be absent from the zoo,
and vowels, as you know them,
would be E, I, O, and U.
There wouldn’t be an A chord
on the instruments you play.
Let’s appreciate, admire,
and applaud the letter A!
 


^^EOP^^

My doggy ate my essay.
He picked up all my mail.
He cleaned my dirty closet
and dusted with his tail.
 
He straightened out my posters
and swept my wooden floor.
My parents almost fainted
when he fixed my bedroom door.
 
I did not try to stop him.
He made my windows shine.
My room looked like a palace,
and my dresser smelled like pine.
 
He fluffed up every pillow.
He folded all my clothes.
He even cleaned my fish tank
with a toothbrush and a hose.
 
I thought it was amazing
to see him use a broom.
I’m glad he ate my essay
on “How to Clean My Room.”
 


^^EOP^^

A bullet is made of
copper or lead. 
Gunpowder is
poured into the case. 
The firing pin hits the
primer at the back of
the bullet which starts
the explosion.  Altogether, 
the bullet and the case are
typically about two inches in length
and weigh a few ounces. 
My father said that
the Vietcongs
told him and the other 
prisoners while in 
"re-education" camp
that they were not worth a bullet.
They would work for the Vietcongs
and then die. 
A bamboo tree is smooth, long
with roots that hold the earth 
with the strong grip of green
knuckles and fingers.
They are used to build houses,
fences, etc.
A bamboo tree can weigh sixty pounds
or more and be twenty feet tall.  
The prisoners were forced to
walk barefoot up the mountains
and carry bamboo back to the camp. 
Due to the weight of the bamboo,
they were only able to carry one
at a time.


^^EOP^^

Our grandma kissed a pumpkin
on a Friday afternoon.
She also kissed a crayon
and a giant red balloon.
I saw her kiss a chipmunk
eating cookies with a queen.
She kissed us in these costumes
at our house on Halloween!
 


^^EOP^^

II.  
The first time I had you killed
I made you a hero of the Vietnam War. 
The third grade social studies textbook said
young foreign boys hid grenades 
during corner games, seamstresses doubled
as spies. Why wouldn't you have died
on those streets, clutching my mother's
photo with your thumb pressed cold 
against her belly, wishing you'd had a chance 
to propose, hoping for a girl? But that war
ended before I was born. Next,
I had a drunk driver end you. Said I visited him
in prison to spit in his face. Forgave him
for a speech during health class. In eighth grade,
I made you die young of natural causes,
so I could teach a grieving classmate
the proper way to mourn. 


^^EOP^^

Recess! Oh, Recess!
We love you! You rule!
You keep us away
from the teachers in school.
Your swings are refreshing.
Your slides are the best.
You give us a break
from a really hard test.
 
Recess! Oh, Recess!
We want you to know,
you’re sweeter than syrup,
you’re special like snow.
You don’t assign homework.
You make the day fun.
You let us play kickball
and run in the sun.
 
Recess! Oh, Recess!
You’re first on our list.
We’d be in despair
if you didn’t exist.
We’re happy we have you.
You’re awesome and cool.
Recess! Oh, Recess!
We love you! You rule!
 


^^EOP^^

Our teacher gave detention
to the fountains in the hall.
She handed extra homework
to the artwork on the wall.
 
We saw her point a finger
at a banner and a sign.
She said their bad behavior
was completely out of line.
 
The principal approached her
and said, “What is all this fuss?
I heard you tried to punish
all the tires on a bus.
 
“You’ve made the teachers angry
by disrupting all their classes,
so if you want to keep this job,
you have to wear your glasses!”
 


^^EOP^^

   I blush quicker than a school of blue jack mackerel
arranging itself into an orb of dazzle to avoid     
nips and gulps from the dolphins who’ve been silently     trailing them, waiting for them to relax. When I hear     
her growl—her scratch-thirst and giggle when she drops     swear words pressed to wax—I can’t even look him
      in the eye when I ask him to give it a good listen     with me. But he does, ever patient, and we both get
      a light bless of sweat on, a bright address that still maps     us to each other after all this time. When I read him     
the lyrics, the pink of my cheeks is like the pink        of an orchid mantis. Just when you least expect it,
      the pretend flower will reach out and snatch a butterfly     from the air. When I say flower I mean how her song
      blooms in the cicada-electric Mississippi night. When I say     pink I mean nectar I mean a long kiss good and sweet.    


^^EOP^^

1 
there are suitcases in my room
full of old photographs
packed and ready to go
i never want to see them again   2 
the men who came to do the concreting
ripped out all my father’s boxing
he didn’t know that with an elephant truck
full of slurry
our driveway could be trumpeted in one   3 
my mother’s engagement ring
with its four diamond twinkle
on the deciding finger of her nurse
to keep it or take it to a fence
or keep it   4 
spending my inheritance
on this flight
as the greenarse gases
make life difficult for all of us
not in first class
unable to get up
or stretch   5 
revisit my teacherly turn of the head
as i graded your story
and did not look back
at the stains on the sleeping bag
to see how they got there
and what you’d said   6 
there are other ways to go
so please
let there be no nurse like me
who felt compelled
at that moment
to pinch the nose of the old dehydrated woman
the doctor said would die for refusing to drink
the junior — who was she? said what
are you thinking?

^^EOP^^




After Denise Levertov



Must be a stumbler, bleeder,
as some floccus remains here, carded
into ragged sleeves by barbed wire.
I’d believe in a God who can learn 
to work new spindles, new pupils
uncomprehending the reasons
light rosins in winter, and still
spill clumsily, bleeding.
Now drizzle caught 
in oily pockets loads the fleece
with wealth. I’ve often wondered
what the fence keeps out
in a country bereft of predators.
I long ago reconciled 
instinctive sympathy
for the perfect innocence of animals
with an equally ardent carnivory.
Arms retreat guilt-free 
through the widest breach
in the garment, having chosen a meal
the stauncher faiths call impassible,
withdrawing to empty folds.
I hope you feel safe when you die.


^^EOP^^

you lie on your back
arms close to your sides
the body as a card run through the slit of the EFTPOS machine
and stopped
rubbed off on a coin or two a set of eyes lingering underneath
when you move them you can feel the iris brush against the profile of Queen Elizabeth
or a native bird
it costs actual material money to change these symbols
it costs actual material money to make actual material money valid and invalid
what does a banker fall asleep thinking about?
hand wrapped around notes stuffed between the mattress and the bed frame
you’re lying next to that body and feel bad
for thinking about ways to kill yourself and/or him
who voted for this system of profit
no one voted on the voting system
you think about dragging his sleeping body to the balcony
he sleeps like the dead
so fat chance of him waking
throw him from the second floor
but you second-guess yourself
not because you don’t think you could do it
you’re not sure the drop would do it
you take the gold from your lids
place it on the bedside table


^^EOP^^

When we arrive at the lounge of everything
with our bags
handfuls of earth     the lives of our grandparents
in our memory devices
we expect an exchange of sorts     that is what
we expect
and I think everyone deep down expects
that we will not turn back
Through a high window we will connect stars
like line drawings
translate the sparkles of the poet
we will
sign the fascinating mouth of the speaker
we will sing
lyrics that someone thought were pretty good
we will sing them
and we will not turn back     we will not 
When our footsteps awaken fresh
from a long
complicated journey during which the planet
slid otherwise
we will likely remember a dream we had once
and tell
a version of it to the next person and the next
and realize hopefully
they also have a dream to tell and we will not
do that thing
where we won’t listen to anyone else’s dream
we will listen
and interpret     signing     singing     saying
even though
we have been instructed not to use ings
we will use
the wisdom disseminated by our devices
we will not turn back 
we will not
If on arrival there is wringing of hands
we will shake hands
and in the eye of a storm we will make tea
with our brilliant
fading bodies we will do a variety of things
while we can
we will bed down on the steps of the assembly
if we have to
we will bed down in a court of law
and all beds
anyway are temporary and when we see
that
and realize we have traveled through the night
we have traveled
and are not turning back     that
will be the point
at which we will arrive


^^EOP^^

I’m in charge of a cage. I know those that won’t.
I don’t mean can’t. Just won’t. There’s a roster
for Tuesdays, Fridays. Dogs to die. 
The disconsolate, the abandoned, those with recurrent
symptoms, the incorrigible mutt — oh, a dozen
choices by way of reasons. Even so, 
some won’t. Won’t play along once their number’s
up. The “rainbow bridge” in the offing
as the posher clinics put it, a pig’s ear 
as a final treat, a venison chew, the profession
behaving beautifully at a time like this.
Still, those that won’t. Won’t go nicely, I mean, 
with a gaze to melt, a last slobbed lick.
Those with a soul’s defiance, though embarrassment
in the lunchroom should you come at that one! 
Even after the bag is zipped, you feel it: We’re real at the end as you are, buster. We sniff
the wind. What say if we say it together? 

^^EOP^^

Later, lying on the lawn of the big house
someone asked could we remove our jackets.
No one had taken charge we were young officers and I took mine off.  And then (or earlier) we were in the battle zone
taking cover behind parked cars postboxes, phone booths and in abandoned trams
when my friend took one full in the chest and went down without a word. “Way to go,” I thought
and imagined the sniper reporting “I got one” and being doubted but I could have attested to it
the perfect shot. 
And then the shelling and the strafing began. 
Later I wrote a report (I was good at that)
and I remembered lying out on the lawn of the big house that was called “Mandalay” in the hot sun and Barry asking about our jackets and I removing mine
and Ian saying “In the enemy army you could be shot for that.” 
The battle zone wasn’t always a city sometimes it was jungle
where our first foes were mosquitoes who took our blood and flew away with it like bees, Barry joked
taking pollen from the full flower of our youth.


^^EOP^^

After twenty years of marriage, we walked out
of the bush and on to a rough dirt road
we followed till we saw a pond
we might be able to get to.
The ground was boggy and buzzing.
The pond was thick with weed
and slime. It was not
the sort of pond anyone would
swim in, but we did — picking and sliding
into the water over the bog and bees,
bees we suddenly noticed were
everywhere, were settling on our hair
as we swam, ducks turning surprised eyes
our way. After twenty years of marriage
what is surprising isn’t really so much
the person you are with but to find
yourselves so out of place in this scene, cold
but not able to get out without
stepping over bees, so many bees.


^^EOP^^




^^EOP^^




^^EOP^^

in his white light dreams
at Discovery Hut
Herbert Ponting meets
the Siberian ponies
he’d once photographed
on the Terra Nova 
the ponies no longer flexible
refuse to wear
equine pajamas
or trap their hooves
in bamboo snowshoes
for his Royal Collection 
inside the stomach of ice
the ponies more still
than life soften
the silver shadows
of Scott and his team
and turn from Herbert’s bromide 
into the drift
and whiff of themselves


^^EOP^^

It came to pass
that I boarded a plane
and as I edged past the man
in the aisle seat he said My name is Dov. I knew
you would come.

^^EOP^^

In Homer, the gods
take the place of consciousness. 
For me, it is birds.
Gray gulls 
seen from above,
a tan and white pigeon 
bringing amoral intelligence
to the balcony wall. 
Geoff says they are really getting tough on birds
in Brighton. Bringing in a bylaw. 
I remember his balcony
it’s really just the roof of the room downstairs 
but when you climb out the window
you get a view of the sea 
and the ferris wheel
which I believe is gone, or going 
it was an eyesore
all the locals said 
though I — of course — 
thought it was wonderful 
and the burned-down pier
out in the water.


^^EOP^^

What song will they play if I don’t come home tonight?
I wished someone would write a song for me, then someone did
but it was a song berating me; it was called “Actually, Ashleigh” 
and I think of the cruelty of songwriters as I get ready —
how their music makes their words sound better than they really are
how our feelings make music seem better than it really is 
and how the difficulty of getting ready is a pure, bitter difficulty
like calculus. In the back row a once-promising student cries.
What will my face become? Strings of demi-semi quavers. 
I partition the day into a wall of smaller
more manageable days, each of which goes black
as I billow past in my bike pants and cleats 
and I see I am not getting ready at all; if anything
I am getting unready, I am trying to be made lovely
by the glow of an Adshel in the rain. 
In youth we are told we will rise up whole
from our baths, from the comforting midwinter soup
of our sadness. We will not devour ourselves tonight. 
The dark broth will always drain from us.
Our legs will drain from our bodies and into the ground
and our footsteps will pour into the future. But the future is hidden 
under thick nests of fat beneath the streets.
It pours out to sea, gently warming the earth
and its creatures. I go down there as I get ready 
and the air turns over, gently exposing
its soft underbelly. My going-out clothes are waiting for me
ironed smooth, laid out like a disappearance.


^^EOP^^

In real life
you are aging at the rate of a short-lived sitcom 
and the only kind of loneliness worth laughing about
is throwing out half a frozen meal for two 
because leftovers
are never funnier the next day. 
In real life
there is no such thing as a gritty reboot — it’s just 
fucking gritty all the time, mate,
because your best-laid plans are always someone else’s 
chance to crash a car into the crowd at a
men’s rights charity concert. 
In real life
the nice guys pull out of the race 
when their tires are slashed or they turn back
because they think they left the iron on 
and no one adheres to sports film clichés anyway — 
we’re all selfish and we want that trophy. 
In real life
you’ll never make it out of your homophobic small town 
alive, so your left hand begs for water
while your right hand swings an ax 
your left foot drags a church bell
while your right foot taps — S.O.S., S.O.S., S.O.S.


^^EOP^^

I buy a Mana Party T-shirt from AliExpress.
$9.99 free shipping via standard post.
Estimated arrival 14–31 working days.
Tracking unavailable via DSL. Asian size XXL.
I wear it as a dress with thigh-high vinyl boots
and fishnets. I post a picture to Instagram.
Am I navigating correctly? Tell me,
which stars were my ancestors looking at?
And which ones burnt the black of searching irises
and reflected something genuine back? I look to
Rihanna and Kim Kardashian shimmering in
Swarovski crystals. Make my eyes glow with seeing.
I am inhaling, long white clouds and I see
rivers of milk running toward orange oceans of
sunlit honey. Tell me, am I navigating correctly?
I want to spend my money on something bougie,
like custom-made pounamu hoop earrings. I want to
make them myself but my line doesn’t trace back
to the beauties in the south making amulets
with elegant fingers. I go back into blackness,
I go back and fill in the gaps, searching through archives
of advertisements: Welcome to the Wonderland
of the South Pacific. Tiki bars, traffic-light cocktails &
paper umbrellas. Tell me, am I navigating correctly?
Steering through the storm drunk & wet-faced
waking up to the taste of hangover, a dry mouth, a strange bed,
shirt above my head is the flag fluttering over everything.
What were we celebrating? The 6th of February is the anniversary
of the greatest failed marriage this nation has ever seen.
In America, couples have divorce parties. We always arrive
fashionably late. Tell me, am I navigating correctly? The sea
our ancestors traversed stretches out farther than the stars.


^^EOP^^

Two feet of snow at my parents’ place, in another season.
Here, the cicadas sing like Christian women’s choirs
in a disused cotton mill. Belief is a kind of weather.
I haven’t seen proper snow for three years. 
The new urban forest for native plants and birds
will be splendid if the local cats don’t kill the birds.
The problem is, all my sympathies are with the cats.
The friendly disturbers are more endearing than what they disturb. 
A trimaran called 3rd Degree spinning around its cable in the channel:
that’s how love is here and should be everywhere.
It seems so unserious or contentedly ironic;
it’s the kind of thing you either look through or ignore. 
But you’d be wrong. The question isn’t: Why is love so strange here?
It’s: Why did it feel normal somewhere else?
In quiet places, the present is just gossip about the past.
The future is a critique of that. All my best.


^^EOP^^




For Síle



I give thee the sun as guarantee
and the Egyptian faience beads 
and the little silver oar that was gifted once
to an English harbor master. 
I give thee the silk dress
with its triple-ruffled sleeves and 
the cloaks with big hoods that fall full
though some are pulled in at a central button. 
I give thee the little colored goats
that go down on their knees as penitents. 
I give thee the death mask
and the plaster hand of Seán Ó Riada, 
for he is among the best loved of the musicians.


^^EOP^^

grandma
you flew once
over mount taranaki 
and landed
on fanthams peak
before the snow fell 
all over your city
and when they looked up
they thought they saw an angel 
but it was just you on your way home
from the supermarket and your feet needed a rest


^^EOP^^

The time of breathing into clasped hands
hovering over a lighter to make a flame 
not knowing
that an angry man threw his eyes into the night 
the belly of his shattered father
weeping rain for separation of earth and sky 
harvesting bitter grudges
from minds like hardened soil 
packing up the wounds with mud and whiskey
and opening doors to wait 
for those curious to know
how sky maps granted our existence 
how the weight of earth
pushed against tongues of oars 
and our tīpuna pushed back
and won.


^^EOP^^

In the warmth of night I put feet to my plan: waited
for my brothers to sleep. They’d spent the day
sharpening their hooks, repairing the great net,
filling gourds with fresh water. They’d bundled
taro wrapped in leaves sitting below the cross seats.
The bundles and the net would cover me,
especially if I said the chant to slow my movement
and my breathing. The moon became brighter
like a big fish eye as the chant hooked me. 
I was holding my grandmother’s hook so tightly
a little cut welled red between my closed knuckles.
“Goodmorning, brothers,” I called and they cussed
and moaned until the next chant took us a further hundred
miles and then another until my chanting made them gasp
as we settled on a patch of ocean black with fish.
They forgave me, not that it matters. I took the bloody hook
and said my business to the ocean. It worked.
The fish rose and our descent was secured.


^^EOP^^

End of the day. A bar where you ought to leave a tip.
The green bird was saying pretty pretty pretty,
loved ones were walking home across the city.
I waved at the girl who waves her whip    ...    
but please be certain I’m a citizen    ...    
I take stuff to the dump    ...    or maybe it’s the tip?
I’m where the nitty really meets the gritty. 
I know I find it hard to listen.
I read too much. I often need a drink.
It isn’t the world that makes us think,
it’s words that we can’t come up with.
Sure, I can work up fresh examples
and send them off to the committee.
But the poetry is in the bird. And in the pretty.


^^EOP^^




For RWT



the other day i was thinking about the term pyramid scheme, and why they called it pyramid scheme and not triangle scheme
and i asked you what you thought
you thought it added a certain gravitas, and linked the idea of  economic prosperity
with some of history’s greatest architectural achievements
unconsciously suggesting a silent wealth of gold and heat
a triangle is two dimensional, and therefore
a less striking mental image than the idea of a third dimension of financial fraud
which is how many dimensions of financial fraud the term pyramid scheme suggests
but i had to pause for a second at the financial fraud part
because it occurred to me i didn’t know what pyramid schemes really were
i knew they had something to do with people getting money from nothing
like
the person at the top of the pyramid scheme, or more accurately
triangle scheme, acquires a number of investors and takes their money
and then pays the first lot of investors with the money from another bunch of investors
and so on and so forth
all the way to the bottom of the triangle
or pyramid face
which is the kind of stupid thing that happens
if you keep your money in a pyramid and not a bank account
although if you ask me banks are the real pyramid schemes after all
or was love the real pyramid scheme? i can’t remember 
maybe it’s better to keep your money in a pyramid than a bank
and i should shop around and compare the interest rates on different pyramids
maybe i should open up a savings pyramid
with a whole bunch of trapdoors and malarias
to keep the financial anthropologists
i mean bankers out
my emeralds cooling under the ground like beautiful women’s eyes 
i think this was supposed to be a metaphor for something
but i can’t remember where i was going with it
and now it’s been swept away by the winds of
whatever
but knowing me, it was probably love
that great dark blue sex hope that keeps coming true
that cartoon black castle with a single bird flying over it 
i don’t know where this poem ends
how far below the sand
but it’s still early evening
and you and I are a little drunk
you answer the phone
you pour me a drink
i know you hate the domestic in poetry but you should have thought of that before you invited me to move in with you
i used to think arguments were the same as honesty
i used to think screaming was the same as passion
i used to think pain was meaningful
i no longer think pain is meaningful
i never learned anything good from being unhappy
i never learned anything good from being happy either
the way i feel about you has nothing to do with learning
it has nothing to do with anything
but i feel it down in the corners of my sarcophagus
i feel it in my sleep
even when i am not thinking about you
you are still pouring through my blood, like fire through an abandoned hospital ward
these coins are getting heavy on my eyes
it has been a great honor and privilege to love you
it has been a great honor and privilege to eat cold pizza on your steps at dawn
love is so stupid: it’s like punching the sun
and having a million gold coins rain down on you
which you don’t even have to pay tax on
because sun money is free money
and i’m pretty sure there are no laws about that
but i would pay tax
because i believe that hospitals and education
and the arts should be publicly funded
even this poem
when i look at you, my eyes are two identical neighborhood houses on fire
when i look at you my eyes bulge out of my skull like a dog in a cartoon
when i am with you
an enormous silence descends upon me
and i feel like i am sinking into the deepest part of my life
we walk down the street, with the grass blowing back and forth
i have never been so happy


^^EOP^^

Here’s what I had in mind, kōtiro, this
clipping at words like overgrown maikuku — 
return the blankets of domestic life; don’t fold
washing or wear shoes, polish these rerenga kē. 
Eh. But this world.
I s’pose neither of us planned to be in politics,
never did do what others told us to — 
wahanui though, go on, get 
your sedition on girl,
your agitator, your defiant speak
to each other eye to eye — 
Māori been jailed for nouns, phrases; 
butcher up a clause, get buried
in Pākehā kupu, then dig that
out like the old people. No one approved
of their language either.
 


^^EOP^^




After Kristen Sze-Tu



the likelihood of forgetting 
the dress she wore when she was young 
the road to Likas Bay 
pictures fell down in the earthquake 
we could keep them 
we could throw them all away 
everything I never asked my grandmother 
I can understand but I can’t speak 
no one has played that piano since 
New Zealand is so far away from here 
let me translate for you the poem on the wall


^^EOP^^




^^EOP^^

                    
                    
                    Who is speaking? Our correspondent on the hill above the river, making pictures for exhibition in other places. Each stroke of his pen ricochets across the valley. He sees what he wants to see. He does not hear what he cannot see. A smoking ruin behind him. Another  waiting just around the bend. airy particulates

A path leads from the pa to a ford of the river hard by, which was that traversed by the raiders on their return.
Nothing was heard but the occasional yell until about 8 pm, when we could again distinctly hear the yells repeated, and then all was again quiet, save the sentinels’ “All’s well.”
was, it seems, waha, mouth 

The stream at this spot is about 90 yards wide, and its depth is about 3 feet.
Then a shout of “stand to your arms,” which was followed by a heavy volley from the rebels, who set up a most unearthly yell.
wavering, with two hearts 

The south bank is flat and low, and on that side there is a good deal of marsh.
They were full of determination, and at times came within speaking distance, inviting our men to come on, who replied by recommending them to stand out.
led the women in resisting the survey 

The north bank is high and steep, and its precipitous sides are clothed with karaka and fern trees, whose luxuriant foliage, thickly matted with the vine, and parasite plants which grow there in abundance, forms a sort of vegetable wall.
Several old women were vociferous in encouraging the enemy.
to get shellfish from the reef 

The landscape is extremely pretty.
They were blowing their horns and shouting for a long time, and in the morning it was found that the sap rollers had disappeared, and also a quantity of gabions.
this white flag is not an emblem of peace 

The camp shows above the windings of the river, which pursues its tortuous course over a shingly bed, and is lost to view in the distance.
All the peach trees, karaka trees, where the picnic parties used to go, have been cut down.
a comet, west northwest, portending 

The sun shining on the white tops of the tents renders their outline particularly distinct.
Every time a shell is thrown they set up a general howl of defiance, followed by such challenges as “Come on, Pakeha!” “Come on,  soldier — come on!”
left on the ground for the pigs and sea gulls (karoro) 

In the distance the sea presents an unvaried, unbroken line, and the snowy peak of the mountain to the left adds considerably to the scene.
During the night they contented themselves by wasting on us all the bad epithets and evil wishes their language is capable of.
“a mate noa,” till death 

The road down to the ford on the north bank is very steep, insomuch that it is a necessary precaution to dismount and lead a horse.
They have several blowing horns, by means of which they mimic our bugle sounds. These horns are heard both day and night, and it is probable that they have certain established calls, which they all understand and adopt on particular occasions.
wrote his name on a tub 

The raiders, however, managed to get their bullock drays up to the top, but it is presumed they were empty, and that their contents must have been brought up by hand.
On Monday night the guard in No. 8 Redoubt were entertained until about 2 o’clock by Hapurona, who was urging his people most vehemently to attack them, and said they were very weak in it. He said the Governor had done him all sorts of injury, and that he would scatter our bones over the Waitara.
a blue shirt braided with scarlet 

The ground about the pa is tolerably clear, and it is in part intersected by fences.
Several of the men in the redoubt knew his voice and what he said quite well.
being covered with myriads of empty cartridge cases 

A solitary canoe was found half full of water near the ford.
During the night voices heard on our right, that of a woman being most conspicuous. She was endeavoring to incite the people to some desperate action by relating the deeds of her forebears.
being pouri (grieved) 

How do they sound, drifting back to him there on the side of the road down by the river or along the beach? A group of riders coming the other way, a group the artist did not catch in his notebook and they were gone before he thought to turn around and look after their retreating voices. Top hat and sidesaddle. Onaero, Urenui, Wai-iti, Pukearuhe.
                

^^EOP^^

Our islands are Tagaloaalagi’s stepping stones across Le Vasa Loloa
small and frail but courageous enough to bear his weight and mana 
high enough to keep us above the drowning and learning
how to navigate by the stars    currents and the ferocity of storms 
Point and sail in any direction as long as you know
how to return home 
You have to navigate the space between the borders
of your skin and the intelligence of the tongueless horizon 
and learn the language of touch    of signs and pain
of what isn’t and what may be in the circle of the tides 
that will stretch until you understand the permanent silence
at the end of your voyage 
and our islands are your anchor and launching site
for the universes that repeat and repeat 
like the long waves of our ocean    like Tagaloaalagi’s
compulsive scrutiny of what is to come and fear


^^EOP^^

People like to mock my town, they mock it
for being too provincial and too boring
and it’s true, not much of import happens here
but I don’t mind. Some people say, when they are asked
what they like about Palmerston North,
that you can always find a park and that’s true,
too, you can always find a park just a short walk
from where you want to go, sometimes right outside,
you don’t have to walk at all, you’re right there.
Of course only people who live in New Zealand
mock Palmerston North, as people who live
outside New Zealand know nothing about it.
People who don’t live in New Zealand mock
our entire little country as a 1950s
throwback with honest, rural folk and unspoilt
scenery which isn’t quite true, our scenery
is spoilt from being looked at too often
and freedom campers, they say, are a problem,
but me, I blame dairy cows. When I lived
in the UK people there thought New Zealand
was a state of Australia, and they would
ask me what was coming up on Neighbours,
thinking I had some kind of inside knowledge,
but the truth is I don’t even watch Neighbours
or indeed any soap operas. Actually
the whole Southern Hemisphere is more or less
written off by people who don’t live here,
as somewhere elsewhere, insignificant,
like Palmerston North, where as I said nothing
much happens. And it’s an undeniable
fact that the magazines I subscribe to
come from exotic places that they flaunt
in their titles, magazines like The New Yorker
and London Review of Books and The Paris Review
but not The Palmerston Northerner.
It’s another fact that The Paris Review
isn’t even published in Paris
and has nothing to say about that city
but it has insightful interviews with famous
writers, some of whom I have read. I have been
to Paris and apart from the architecture
and the food and some very fine cemeteries
and of course the language it’s quite like Palmerston
North, though parking is a nightmare. I never
visited the Louvre but one fine afternoon
I went to the Musée d’Orsay which in the opinion
of many educated people really
is just as good if you like Impressionist
and Post-Impressionist art, which I do.
Still it was nice to come home again, home
to Palmerston North, New Zealand, and to see
the good brown Manawatū River moving
sluggishly under the bridge. It’s not the Seine,
but water is water. Paul Celan threw himself — 
odd phrase, as if he were both baseball and pitcher —
into the Seine. John Cleese said Palmerston North
is the suicide capital of New Zealand,
yet you don’t hear of people throwing themselves
into the Manawatū, which would be a risky
business, but only because of the effluent
from those dairy cows leaching into the river.
We live on a floodplain, and the river is ever
in our thoughts and sometimes our houses.
At such times we are downcast but we lift up
our eyes unto the hills and the windmills
perched on them that turn and turn. One time
I saw a middle-aged woman in the Plaza,
our only shopping mall, with her head tilted
to where the sky would have been, but for the ceiling
and the mood lighting, a stout middle-aged woman
with black mascara, elegantly dressed,
her wet mouth a dark, soundless O, and the crowd
not unsympathetically parting
and reforming around her — rock in the river — 
noticing and not noticing, which is our way.


^^EOP^^

You yearn so much
you could be a yacht.
Your mind has already
set sail. It takes a few days
to arrive 
at island pace,
but soon you are barefoot
on the sand,
the slim waves testing
your feet 
like health professionals.
You toe shells, sea glass, and odd things
that have drifted for years
and finally
washed up here. 
You drop your towel
and step out of
your togs, ungainly,
first
your right foot, then 
the other
stepping down
the sand
to stand
in the water. 
There is no discernible
difference
in temperature.
You breaststroke in
the lazy blue. 
A guy passing in a rowboat
says, “Beautiful, isn’t it?”
And it is. Your body
afloat in salt
as if cured.


^^EOP^^

• Phone your local police station. They have a 24-hour answering service. Please note your message will be used for training purposes. Your voice print will be added to their database.

• Access Hobbit Rescue (HR) on the Hobbit Rescue app (type in Hobbit Rescue). Type your address in the required box. Wait for assistance to arrive.

• Do not touch the Hobbit. Warner Bros. can recycle most parts of a Hobbit. Interference with any part of a dead Hobbit is a crime. Remember: you will be liable!

• Do not Facebook your Friends. Some of your Friends may not be Friends. Australian Unionists are known Trollers. Be vigilant. Unionists have no part in our film industry.

• When Hobbit Rescue arrives they will ask you questions. You are required to answer. Hobbits are an integral platform in our  national economy. Withholding information from a private company in pursuit of its legitimate profit can be deemed a treasonable act.

• Remember Hobbits are our friends. They were born here. This is their home. They represent our way of life. Do you want to lose that way of life?


^^EOP^^


 


 


 


 


^^EOP^^

When I was “in despair” (the dark days
when I actually used such terms)
I noticed the behavior of animals — 
              sleep when tired, eat when hungry
That made a lot of sense to me
and yet I felt different
              I felt my humanness too much
No fly ever wonders whether it should make
lots and lots of maggots
              It gives birth on a mound of cat food
or inside the rubbish bin
As far as I know
it’s not worried about overpopulation
or what sort of environment its kids
              will grow up in
My humanness sees me at an art gallery
              watching others
                            watching walls
My humanness gives me dark thoughts
of cruel behavior
              You are in the States
a visa glitch and there you remain
              Like Star Trek, I talk to you on a screen
              your face half a second out of sync
with your speech
              I’m in the future
              my Tuesday is already over
and I want to tell you all about it
              to prove my superiority
That lovely conceit of time
              that saw people travel from all over the world
to be in Gisborne
              for the first sunrise
                            of the new millennium
              Remember
how we all thought the sewer pipes would burst
              and the criminals would escape
              or something like that
                            Y2K packs sent to every household
                            because no one knew for certain
                            what the numbers 2000 really meant
              Somewhere, people, important people
                            cowered in bunkers
                                          fearing the worst


^^EOP^^

Given over to love,
she un-balls the socks,
 
lets fall debris of days,
leaf litter, sand grain,
 
slub of some sticky substance,
picks it all for the sake
 
of the stainless tub
of the gleaming new front loader.
 
Given over to love long ago, when her own
exasperated moan bounced off
 
the quaint speckled enamel
of the top loader
 
vowing: she'd do this always and well.
She fell in love then, she fell in line—
 
in a march of millions, you pair them,
two by two, you marry the socks.
 


^^EOP^^

When I open the door
and reach to the light switch
the world opens as it did each time.
 
The garlic jar on the ledge,
the ceramic cup holding
cheese cutters and paring knives.
 
Outside a branch
from the ash tree
worries the window.
 
It was a place where I knew
the drawer pulls, the feel of steps
to the basement, the smell of cool cement.
 
If I open the middle cabinet,
the linen is there as you left it,
well-ordered, none of it fine.
 


^^EOP^^

This notebook is so old the paper is yellow.
I wonder where the tree grew.
 
Seems like you never get one thing without losing another.
There's some sort of law about that
to do with finite resources.
 
Somewhere some guys have figured out to the exact ounce
how much my life has cost the earth,
how many people have died that I might live.
 
Start with my parents, and theirs, and all who died
because of them. It's like we drip in blood.
Who can wake up then tomorrow morning,
do the tasks set out before them
as if it was their work and their work only?
Who has the courage to look out to the east again
at someone else's sun?
 


^^EOP^^

Weeks after ice-out,
last fall’s leaves
make a pathway
to the lake, radiant blue
and still deathly cold.
 
I press my hot forehead
to the window,
smudging it. Blow
and the glass steams.
As if looking at a photo
through parchment,
I’m detached,
the way I saw his body
in the CAT scan
from a foggy distance.
 
I’d like to open the window,
release a wounded bird
nursed to health.
Wiping the glass
with my sleeve
I see white pelicans
wheel and flash in the sky.


^^EOP^^

                    
                    
                    As fresh garbage is. As dirt sucked out of a fingernail. As a wall clean of prostitutes. When I am this I am at the mercy of my nakedness. A pillar of undress whose power I do not know how to wield. I watch porn. I study the geometry of limbs splayed. Not the moan but the angle of a moan. I swallow. In this way I am a thief. Sometimes I forget my body & go untouched until I am touched & scream. Sometimes I want to eat my breasts down to their bitter rind & spit them out. I want to be the bitter rind without suck and easily thrown. Easily thrown I want to be the pebble thumbed & wished upon before enveloping the lake I sink in. I sink in you the lake & by lake I mean gutter a water that does not hold me well. Here we are not the bodies our mothers made. If you are to hold me hold me as a gun. Grip me & profit the dark. The unattended purse. The pair of heels darting from us in dull claps sharpening against the concrete as teeth against a stone.
                

^^EOP^^




It's hard to be humble when you're 235 pounds of twisted steel and sex appeal with a body women love and men fear. —Sputnik Monroe



When my father died, he left me a trove
           of video tapes, a warped memorial
for those men he watched with my mother
           before she left for parts unknown,
for those fights he relived once he was laid
           off from the plane yards. We watched
men like Sputnik Monroe bleed the hard way,
           shook our fists as he broke rules
against guys who were easier to cheer.
           He was a bad Elvis, greased-back
hair with a shock of white, Sputnik Monroe
           mixed it up everywhere, a rodeo
fistfight, a henhouse tornado. My mother
           picked a fight in an Idaho truck stop
once, stabbed a man’s chest with her middle
           finger, then stepped to one side
so my father could fight him in the parking lot.
           Afterwards, my mother was silent
all the way back to Seattle, her disgust
           with him—the way he wrapped his arm
around her shoulder, guided her to the car,
           and sped back to the freeway—hanging
between them from that point forward.
           Sputnik Monroe clobbered men
wherever he went, sneered at those fists
           raised against him in Memphis.
Some nights, as my wife sleeps upstairs,
           I watch my father’s video tapes and
imagine what I would have done that day
           if I knew that my marriage depended
on what I did with my hands.


^^EOP^^

If you subtract the minor losses,
you can return to your childhood too:
the blackboard chalked with crosses,
 
the math teacher’s toe ring. You
can be the black boy not even the buck-
toothed girls took a liking to:
 
this match box, these bones in their funk
machine, this thumb worn smooth
as the belly of a shovel. Thump. Thump.
 
Thump. Everything I hold takes root.
I remember what the world was like before
I heard the tide humping the shore smooth,
 
and the lyrics asking: How long has your door  been closed? I remember a garter belt wrung
like a snake around a thigh in the shadows
 
of a wedding gown before it was flung
out into the bluest part of the night.
Suppose you were nothing but a song
 
in a busted speaker? Suppose you had to wipe
sweat from the brow of a righteous woman,
but all you owned was a dirty rag? That’s why
 
the blues will never go out of fashion:
their half rotten aroma, their bloodshot octaves of
consequence; that’s why when they call, Boy, you’re in 
trouble. Especially if you love as I love
falling to the earth. Especially if you’re a little bit
high strung and a little bit gutted balloon. I love
 
watching the sky regret nothing but its
self, though only my lover knows it to be so,
and only after watching me sit
 
and stare off past Heaven. I love the word No 
for its prudence, but I love the romantic
who submits finally to sex in a burning row-
 
house more. That’s why nothing’s more romantic
than working your teeth through
the muscle. Nothing’s more romantic
 
than the way good love can take leave of you.
That’s why I’m so doggone lonesome, Baby,
yes, I’m lonesome and I’m blue.
 


^^EOP^^

Tonight, I am in search of clues
on how to be a man, not a man
like my father, who traded his motorcycle
for a job in the plane yards after
my mother left. Before my father tried
telling me wrestling was fake,
we watched men scrap with brass
knuckles and bull ropes. Back then,
a dude could get his jaw broke
calling the wrong guy a fake.
Lou Thesz was a bona fide grappler,
stretching men with that toehold
facelock, snapping men’s elbows
to protect his championship belt.
My grandfather saw him lose the title
to Bronko Nagurski, celebrated footballer
who stomped men into the turf on his way
to the end zone. Before my father died,
he insisted my grandfather never saw
that match, that men always invent things
when they have something genuine
to say. Today, everyone knows that fight
was fixed. Tonight, I am thinking about
all those shapes Lou Thesz could twist
out of a man’s skeleton, and how
some nights that just isn’t enough.


^^EOP^^

Come home, our sons, young drivers,
tell us you’re safe, not detained again
by police for your dark color,
sprocketed hair and a crime
you didn’t commit.
Maybe your car’s the wrong make
or rusty in a neighborhood
where cars park in garages at night.
 
Once, when you saw a squad car
you remembered Officer Smiley
and his dog that did tricks
in read-aloud books at J.J. Hill School.
Now, as you reach for your license
with shaking hands, tension raises
the chance something will go wrong.
 
This poem is for you, sons,
and for everyone who is afraid—
citizens of police, police of citizens.
It’s for Philando Castile,
a black school lunch supervisor
in an inner city school
who memorized children’s names
and their food allergies.
And it’s for the policeman
who stopped a car with a damaged taillight.
After he used his gun, his voice broke
like a frightened child’s.
 
Come home, sons, to mothers like me,
alert at night waiting for car lights
to beam in front of our house,
for the car to belong to our sons,
and our sons
to still belong to the world.


^^EOP^^

Blue numbers on my bedside clock
tell I forgot to change the hour.
This sets routines on haywire.
 
Like a domestic goat staked
to its circle of earth.
I don’t do well untethered.
 
I have no hunger for early dinner,
become confused by the sound
of children who seem out
 
too late for a school night.
They’ve found an extra helping
of daylight to romp on new grass
 
and can’t contain themselves,
strip off jackets, scatter
like a rag of ponies.
 
Whatever time says,
their joy insists
on springing forward.


^^EOP^^

falling into unearthed light or something like that is who I was last night. you brought
me a drink you didn’t know the name of & told me I could get it. you
not the drink which I downed even though it was my 9th
of the night the drink not you. dancehall. always
dancehall. a manner of movement learned
& not easily lost so I wind my hips
anyway & something is happening
to you. you bout to start some shit & I say good. not
because it would be.
I haven’t been
touched
in a while. don’t start something you can’t finish is maybe the worst advice
I’ve ever heard as you drop a handful of my ass
thudding down a small flight of stairs.
that’s what I am. a small flight
of stairs, a small
flight, down.


^^EOP^^

Did your father come home after fighting
through the week at work? Did the sweat change
to salt in his ears? Was that bitter white
 
grain the only music he’d hear? Is this why
you were quiet when other poets sang
of the black man’s beauty? Is this why
 
you choked on the tonsil of Negro Duty?
Were there as many offices for pain
as love? Should a black man never be shy?
 
Was your father a mountain twenty
shovels couldn’t bury? Was he a train
leaving a lone column of smoke? Was he
 
a black magnolia singing at your feet?
Was he a blackjack smashed against your throat?


^^EOP^^

Is it you on the other end of the line
     hesitant to speak to me, pausing for a moment
to register my hello so you know my number
     stayed the same, my last name remains mine?
Though my voice isn’t young as when we last spoke,
     don’t you hear a familiar timbre?
Still you hesitate so as not to startle me
     after all this time. Dots string out like an ellipsis
in the endless sentence of your absence.
     I hear static-filled ticking, then
a friendly stranger mispronounces my name.
     Recognizing a pitch to sell something
and feeling foolish, I hang up quickly.
     Won’t you ever break your long silence?
Sorrow and anger keep my line open to you.
 


^^EOP^^

In syrup, in syrup,
In syrup we drown,
 
Who sell ourselves
With a sparkling smile.
 
Padded with pathos
Our winding sheet.
 
The bomb bounded
By buxom beauties.
 
Horror gelded
By the happy ending.
 
How can we swim
Who hold to our haloes?
 
Down we go, down
In syrup, in syrup.


^^EOP^^

In standing position
with arms to the side,
 
jump while
spreading the legs
and lift arms
above the head.
 
Jump back into
standing position
and up again,
spreading the legs
and lifting the arms
above the head.
 
Repeat
 
When a M16 landmine
is triggered, it will
spring into the air
and explode with
a capacity to level
everything in a
150 metre radius.
 
Deadly shrapnel
spreading
a further 350 metres.
 
Metal casings
from an unexploded
bomb can fetch
25,000 Vietnamese dong
or $1
 
for a poor family
in Vietnam.
 
Men comb
the forests
and beaches
of Quang Tri
looking for the metal
that will feed their family,
risking their lives.
 
Children working
in the fields think it’s
a toy they’ve found.
 
Nguyen was hoeing
a small piece of land
his parents gave him
when an unexploded
U.S. military bomb
was triggered
and blew off both
his hands.


^^EOP^^

bijan been dead 11 months & my blue margin reduced to arterial, there’s a party at my house, a house held by legislation vocabulary & trill. but hell, it’s ours & it sparkle on the corner of view park, a channel of blk electric. danny wants to walk to the ledge up the block, & we an open river of flex: we know what time it is. on the ledge, folk give up neck & dismantle gray navigation for some slice of body. it’s june. it’s what we do.
 
walk down the middle of our road, & given view park, a lining of dubois’ 10th, a jack n jill feast, & good blk area, it be our road. we own it. I’m sayin’ with money. our milk neighbors, collaborate in the happy task of surveillance. they new. they pivot function. they call the khaki uniforms. i swift. review the architecture of desire spun clean, & I could see how we all look like ghosts.
 
3 squad cars roll up at my door & it’s a fucking joke cuz exactly no squad cars rolled up to the mcdonald’s bijan was shot at & exactly no squad cars rolled up to find the murders & exactly no one did what could be categorized as they “job,” depending on how you define time spent for money earned for property & it didn’t make me feel like I could see less of the gun in her holster because she was blk & short & a woman, too. she go,
  this your house? 
I say yeah. she go, can you prove it? 
It say it mine. 
she go ID? I say it mine. 
she go backup on the sly
& interview me going all what’s your address—don’t look! & hugh say I feel wild disrespected. 
& white go can you explain that? 
& danny say how far the nearest precinct? 
& christian say fuck that. 
& white go can you explain that?
 
I cross my arms. I’m bored & headlights quit being interesting after I called 911 when I was 2 years old because it was the only phone number I knew by heart.


^^EOP^^

I am tired of having five different names;                      -
Having to change them when I enter
 
A new country or take on a new life. My
First name is my truest, I suppose, but I
 
Never use it and nobody calls me by this Vietnamese
Name though it is on my birth certificate—
 
Tue My Chuc. It makes the sound of a twang of a
String pulled. My parents tell me my name in Cantonese
 
is Chuc Mei Wai. Three soft bird chirps and they call
me Ah Wai. Shortly after I moved to the U.S., I became
 
Teresa My Chuc, then Teresa Mei Chuc. “Teresa” is the sound
Water makes when one is washing one’s hands. After my first
 
Marriage, my name was Teresa Chuc Prokopiev.
After my second marriage, my name was Teresa Chuc Dowell.
 
Now I am back to Teresa Mei Chuc, but I want to go way back.
Reclaim that name once given and lost so quickly in its attempt
 
to become someone that would fit in. Who is Tue My Chuc?
I don’t really know. I was never really her and her birthday
 
on March 16, I never celebrate because it’s not my real birthday
though it is on my birth certificate. My birthday is on January 26,
 
really, but I have to pretend that it’s on March 16
because my mother was late registering me after the war.
 
Or it’s in December, the date changing every year according to
the lunar calendar—this is the one my parents celebrate
 
because it’s my Chinese birthday. All these names
and birthdays make me dizzy. Sometimes I just don’t feel like a
 
Teresa anymore; Tue (pronounced Twe) isn’t so embarrassing.
A fruit learns to love its juice. Anyways, I’d like to be string...
 
resonating. Pulled back tensely like a bow
 
Then reverberate in the arrow’s release straight for the heart.


^^EOP^^




"In spite of everything I shall rise again: I will take up my pencil, which I have forsaken in my great discouragement, and I will go on with my drawing."—Vincent Van Gogh
 



A missile is shaped like a pencil—
its long, slender body and pointed
end creates history.
 
A girl walking down the street
a few steps ahead of her sister and friend,
two medics who were trying to help
injured people, the parked ambulance—
all were annihilated by the same weapon.
 
Above, drones—silent, unmanned planes.
A metal, predatory bird that shoots a missile
with precision, identifying the colors of a shirt,
the features on a face—the shape of a nose,
the color and length of a mustache.
 
In a room far away, in another country, a man
sits at a desk and looks at a screen; he strokes
his thick, dark mustache as he carefully
contemplates, then pushes a button.
 
There is a charred hole in the ground
where the girl once stood.
 
There are pencils that write and erase,
write and erase, so that there is nothing
to be read on the page. The page blank
as the desert sky, blank as the smooth shell of a drone.
 
There is a family drinking mint tea
in a living room.
The man holds a cup to his lips,
the glass touches his mustache.
A silent bird hovers above.
In a split second, everyone is dead,
the house is in rubbles—arms, legs,
splattered organs among broken concrete.
 
Soon, there will be no trace.  


^^EOP^^

On the side of the road a deer, frozen, frigid. Go back to your life, the voice said. What is my life? she wondered. For months she lost
herself in work—Freud said work is as important
as love to the soul—and at night she sat with a boy,
forcing him to practice his violin, helping him recite his notes.
Then the ice thawed and the deer came to life.
She saw her jump over the fence, she saw her in the twilight,
how free she looked. She saw her eyes shiny as marbles,
as much a part of this world as the fence a worker
pounds into the earth. At night she still sat with the boy.
He’s learning “Au Claire de la Lune.”
Do you know it? He has established a relationship
with his violin. He knows that it takes practice to master it:
the accuracy of each note, to wrestle his feelings to the listener.
But he’s impatient. Sometimes what he hears and feels
are not always the same. Again, the poet says.
She knows if he tries to silence his fervor, he might not ever know
who he is. The poet contemplates whether a deer can dream.
Rich blood-red berries on a branch, pachysandra in the garden.
A soft warm bed in the leaves.


^^EOP^^

I close my eyes so that I can see it.
What we so freely eliminate. Who is
 
not guilty of it? We reek of paper.
Everywhere we go is paper. Our
 
hands are stained with paper.
Walls. What echoes from our walls.
 
The sweet whisper of rainforest—
even the name makes the sound of
 
rushing water or perhaps it’s a ghost
that haunts us. They say the dead
 
that did not die a peaceful death are
doomed forever to wander the earth.
 
But perhaps this earth is for them
already a cemetery—stacks and
 
stacks of flesh on a desk. Which
one belongs to which tree?
 
Already, we’ve traded oxygen for
so much.


^^EOP^^

…When that joy is gone for good
I move the arms beneath the blood.
 
When my blood is running wild
I sew the clothing of a child.
 
When that child is never born
I lean my breast against a thorn.
 
When the thorn brings no reprieve
I rise and live, I rise and live.
 
When I live from hand to hand
Nude in the marketplace I stand.
 
When I stand and am not sold
I build a fire against the cold.
 
When the cold does not destroy
I leap from ambush on my joy…


^^EOP^^

           13.
After the dinosaurs fell
asleep, after those terrible lizards
began their slow decay into mythology,
Andre the Giant was there to cradle
their bodies in his soft hands and weep.
 
            24.
Andre the Giant wrestled the Earth
into a globe, carved his name into the ocean
floor with his pinky to remind the whales
who taught them to sing.
 
            32.
Andre the Giant was a village.
Then he became a dragon.
Then he became an army.
Then he became a king.
Now, he is the wind.
 
            40.
A man can’t bodyslam Andre the Giant
unless he’s worthy of slaying a monster, unless
the giant decides it’s time to lie down.
 
            58.
Andre the Giant stole fire from Heaven,
hid it in his mouth, fed it to monkeys
one lick at a time until they learned
to pronounce his name.
 
            67.
Before there were boys with magic
beanstalks, with slingshots or singing
swords, Andre the Giant brawled
with sooty angels, volcanoes spouting
from where he buried their hearts
 
            75. 
Andre the Giant scaled the Empire
State Building with Marilyn Monroe
in one hand, Cleopatra in the other.
They marveled at how small we are.
 
            81.
Andre the Giant once cracked the sky’s ribs.
Then he was thunder churning like trout.
Then he was an avalanche of fists and knees.
Then he was a fire burning through the forest.
Then he was a tidal wave seething offshore.
Now, he will not be a metaphor.
 
            93.
When Andre the Giant pitched a man
over the top rope and out into the crowd,
he aimed at the moon.
 
            100.
A man never tells a lie, always treats a promise
like his mother’s name. Andre the Giant
once threw a silver dollar across the Potomac,
hit a buffalo in the eye and killed it as it grazed.
 
            116.
Andre the Giant drank three bottles of whiskey
and grappled with the Devil in a bingo hall
in Memphis. Then he invented the blues.
 
            125.
On television, Andre the Giant grinned
with a mouthful of shark’s teeth. He devoured
mortal men ten-at-a-time, laughed and spit
their bones into our living rooms.
 
            137.
Andre the Giant was a Frenchman.
Then he became an ogre.
Then he became a movie star.
Now, he is the constellations.
All of them.


^^EOP^^




—after Lorca



I want to always sleep beneath a bright red blanket
of leaves. I want to never wear a coat of ice.
I want to learn to walk without blinking.
 
I want to outlive the turtle and the turtle’s father,
the stone. I want a mouth full of permissions
 
and a pink glistening bud. If the wildflower and ant hill
can return after sleeping each season, I want to walk
out of this house wearing nothing but wind.
 
I want to greet you, I want to wait for the bus with you
weighing less than a chill. I want to fight off the bolts
 
of gray lighting the alcoves and winding paths
of your hair. I want to fight off the damp nudgings
of snow. I want to fight off the wind.
 
I want to be the wind and I want to fight off the wind
with its sagging banner of isolation, its swinging
 
screen doors, its gilded boxes, and neatly folded pamphlets
of noise. I want to fight off the dull straight lines
of two by fours and endings, your disapprovals,
 
your doubts and regulations, your carbon copies.
If the locust can abandon its suit,
 
I want a brand new name. I want the pepper’s fury
and the salt’s tenderness. I want the virtue
of the evening rain, but not its gossip.
 
I want the moon’s intuition, but not its questions.
I want the malice of nothing on earth. I want to enter
 
every room in a strange electrified city
and find you there. I want your lips around the bell of flesh
 
at the bottom of my ear. I want to be the mirror,    
but not the nightstand. I do not want to be the light switch.
I do not want to be the yellow photograph
 
or book of poems. When I leave this body, Woman,
I want to be pure flame. I want to be your song.
 


^^EOP^^

            1.
A man can stand with both feet touching
the ground until his legs no longer reach
that far, until the ground disappears.
 
            2.
Giant Baba stands six feet ten inches tall, taller
in Japan. It doesn’t matter how tall you are. 
            3.
A man can hold a woman, can’t stand to lose
her to the heart’s wreckage. His body will fall
apart one day—a rock crab’s chassis stripped
clean by seagulls, a dandelion gone to seed.
 
           4.
Giant Baba stands over seven feet tall.
When he lifts you over his head, you will be
eight and a half feet above the ground.
 
            5.
A man can stand for anything when seen
from below—fatherhood, majesty, satisfaction
after conquest. In the end all men are seen
from above—patch of lawn, chunk of stone.
 
            6.
Giant Baba towers above your house,
dangles you by the ankle. Your life
looks so small from the sky.
 
            7.
A man and a woman can wrestle together
in the same bed. A man and a woman
and a marriage can brawl all night.
 
            8.
Giant Baba looms dark against the stars, back
blotting out the Milky Way, arms cradling you
and your family history. Listen to his mammoth
heartbeat, war drum, earthquake. Just listen.
 
            9.
A man can stand naked in a foreign country,
can search for meaning in strange tongues. He tries
to find himself in stories about famous battles,
about giants. It doesn’t matter where he stands.
 
            10.
Giant Baba’s body is made of girders
and mastodon bones. When you stand outside
to look at your house from new angles,
when you think of how your father died,
the giant will be there to catch you.
 


^^EOP^^

In those days, though, I never analysed
Myself even. All analysis comes late.
You catch a sight of Nature, earliest,
In full front sun-face, and your eyelids wink
And drop before the wonder of ‘t; you miss
The form, through seeing the light. I lived, those days,
And wrote because I lived–unlicensed else:
My heart beat in my brain. Life’s violent flood
Abolished bounds,–and, which my neighbour’s field,
Which mine, what mattered? It is so in youth.
We play at leap-frog over the god Term;
The love within us and the love without
Are mixed, confounded; if we are loved or love,
We scarce distinguish. So, with other power.
Being acted on and acting seem the same:
In that first onrush of life’s chariot-wheels,
We know not if the forests move or we.
And so, like most young poets, in a flush
Of individual life, I poured myself
Along the veins of others, and achieved
Mere lifeless imitations of life verse,
And made the living answer for the dead,
Profaning nature. ‘Touch not, do not taste,
Nor handle,’–we’re too legal, who write young:
We beat the phorminx till we hurt our thumbs,
As if still ignorant of counterpoint;
We call the Muse ... ‘O Muse, benignant Muse!’–
As if we had seen her purple-braided head.
With the eyes in it start between the boughs
As often as a stag’s. What make-believe,
With so much earnest! what effete results,
From virile efforts! what cold wire-drawn odes
From such white heats!–bucolics, where the cows
Would scare the writer if they splashed the mud
In lashing off the flies,–didactics, driven
Against the heels of what the master said;
And counterfeiting epics, shrill with trumps
A babe might blow between two straining cheeks
Of bubbled rose, to make his mother laugh;
And elegiac griefs, and songs of love,
Like cast-off nosegays picked up on the road,
The worse for being warm: all these things, writ
On happy mornings, with a morning heart,
That leaps for love, is active for resolve,
Weak for art only. Oft, the ancient forms
Will thrill, indeed, in carrying the young blood.
The wine-skins, now and then, a little warped,
Will crack even, as the new wine gurgles in.
Spare the old bottles!–spill not the new wine.
By Keats’s soul, the man who never stepped
In gradual progress like another man,
But, turning grandly on his central self,
Ensphered himself in twenty perfect years
And died, not young,–(the life of a long life,
Distilled to a mere drop, falling like a tear
Upon the world’s cold cheek to make it burn
For ever;) by that strong excepted soul,
I count it strange, and hard to understand,
That nearly all young poets should write old;
That Pope was sexagenarian at sixteen,
And beardless Byron academical,
And so with others. It may be, perhaps,
Such have not settled long and deep enough
In trance, to attain to clairvoyance,–and still
The memory mixes with the vision, spoils,
And works it turbid.
                  Or perhaps, again,
In order to discover the Muse-Sphinx,
The melancholy desert must sweep round,
Behind you, as before.–
For me, I wrote
False poems, like the rest, and thought them true.
Because myself was true in writing them.
I, peradventure, have writ true ones since
With less complacence.
                    But I could not hide
My quickening inner life from those at watch.
They saw a light at a window now and then,
They had not set there. Who had set it there?
My father’s sister started when she caught
My soul agaze in my eyes. She could not say
I had no business with a sort of soul,
But plainly she objected,–and demurred,
That souls were dangerous things to carry straight
Through all the spilt saltpetre of the world.
She said sometimes, ‘Aurora, have you done
Your task this morning?–have you read that book?
And are you ready for the crochet here?’–
As if she said, ‘I know there’s something wrong,
I know I have not ground you down enough
To flatten and bake you to a wholesome crust
For household uses and proprieties,
Before the rain has got into my barn
And set the grains a-sprouting. What, you’re green
With out-door impudence? you almost grow?’
To which I answered, ‘Would she hear my task,
And verify my abstract of the book?
And should I sit down to the crochet work?
Was such her pleasure?’ ... Then I sate and teased
The patient needle til it split the thread,
Which oozed off from it in meandering lace
From hour to hour. I was not, therefore, sad;
My soul was singing at a work apart
Behind the wall of sense, as safe from harm
As sings the lark when sucked up out of sight,
In vortices of glory and blue air.
And so, through forced work and spontaneous work,
The inner life informed the outer life,
Reduced the irregular blood to settled rhythms,
Made cool the forehead with fresh-sprinkling dreams,
And, rounding to the spheric soul the thin
Pined body, struck a colour up the cheeks,
Though somewhat faint. I clenched my brows across
My blue eyes greatening in the looking-glass,
And said, ‘We’ll live, Aurora! we’ll be strong.
The dogs are on us–but we will not die.’
 
 


^^EOP^^


                                         'There it is!–
You play beside a death-bed like a child,
Yet measure to yourself a prophet's place
To teach the living. None of all these things,
Can women understand. You generalise,
Oh, nothing!–not even grief! Your quick-breathed hearts,
So sympathetic to the personal pang,
Close on each separate knife-stroke, yielding up
A whole life at each wound; incapable
Of deepening, widening a large lap of life
To hold the world-full woe. The human race
To you means, such a child, or such a man,
You saw one morning waiting in the cold,
Beside that gate, perhaps. You gather up
A few such cases, and, when strong, sometimes
Will write of factories and of slaves, as if
Your father were a negro, and your son
A spinner in the mills. All's yours and you,–
All, coloured with your blood, or otherwise
Just nothing to you. Why, I call you hard
To general suffering. Here's the world half blind
With intellectual light, half brutalised
With civilization, having caught the plague
In silks from Tarsus, shrieking east and west
Along a thousand railroads, mad with pain
And sin too! ... does one woman of you all,
(You who weep easily) grow pale to see
This tiger shake his cage?–does one of you
Stand still from dancing, stop from stringing pearls
And pine and die, because of the great sum
Of universal anguish?–Show me a tear
Wet as Cordelia's, in eyes bright as yours,
Because the world is mad? You cannot count,
That you should weep for this account, not you!
You weep for what you know. A red-haired child
Sick in a fever, if you touch him once,
Though but so little as with a finger-tip,
Will set you weeping! but a million sick . .
You could as soon weep for the rule of three,
Or compound fractions. Therefore, this same world
Uncomprehended by you must remain
Uninfluenced by you. Women as you are,
Mere women, personal and passionate,
You give us doating mothers, and chaste wives.
Sublime Madonnas, and enduring saints!
We get no Christ from you,–and verily
We shall not get a poet, in my mind.'
'With which conclusion you conclude' . .
                                    'But this–
That you, Aurora, with the large live brow
And steady eyelids, cannot condescend
To play at art, as children play at swords,
To show a pretty spirit, chiefly admired
Because true action is impossible.
You never can be satisfied with praise
Which men give women when they judge a book
Not as mere work, but as mere woman's work,
Expressing the comparative respect
Which means the absolute scorn. 'Oh, excellent!
'What grace! what facile turns! what fluent sweeps!
'What delicate discernment ... almost thought!
'The book does honour to the sex, we hold.
'Among our female authors we make room
'For this fair writer, and congratulate
'The country that produces in these times
'Such women, competent to ... spell.''
                                'Stop there!'
I answered–burning through his thread of talk
With a quick flame of emotion,–'You have read
My soul, if not my book, and argue well
I would not condescend ... we will not say
To such a kind of praise, (a worthless end
Is praise of all kinds) but to such a use
Of holy art and golden life. I am young,
And peradventure weak–you tell me so–
Through being a woman. And, for all the rest,
Take thanks for justice. I would rather dance
At fairs on tight-rope, till the babies dropped
Their gingerbread for joy,–than shift the types
For tolerable verse, intolerable
To men who act and suffer. Better far,
Pursue a frivolous trade by serious means,
Than a sublime art frivolously.'
*
Then I spoke.
'I have not stood long on the strand of life,
And these salt waters have had scarcely time
To creep so high up as to wet my feet.
I cannot judge these tides–I shall, perhaps.
A woman's always younger than a man
At equal years, because she is disallowed
Maturing by the outdoor sun and air,
And kept in long-clothes past the age to walk.
Ah well, I know you men judge otherwise!
You think a woman ripens as a peach,–
In the cheeks, chiefly. Pass it to me now;
I'm young in age, and younger still, I think,
As a woman. But a child may say amen
To a bishop's prayer and see the way it goes;
And I, incapable to loose the knot
Of social questions, can approve, applaud
August compassion, christian thoughts that shoot
Beyond the vulgar white of personal aims.
Accept my reverence.'
                  There he glowed on me
With all his face and eyes. 'No other help?'
Said he–'no more than so?'
                    'What help?' I asked.
'You'd scorn my help,–as Nature's self, you say,
Has scorned to put her music in my mouth,
Because a woman's. Do you now turn round
And ask for what a woman cannot give?'
'For what she only can, I turn and ask,'
He answered, catching up my hands in his,
And dropping on me from his high-eaved brow
The full weight of his soul,–'I ask for love,
And that, she can; for life in fellowship
Through bitter duties–that, I know she can;
For wifehood ... will she?'
                      'Now,' I said, 'may God
Be witness 'twixt us two!' and with the word,
Meseemed I floated into a sudden light
Above his stature,–'am I proved too weak
To stand alone, yet strong enough to bear
Such leaners on my shoulder? poor to think,
Yet rich enough to sympathise with thought?
Incompetent to sing, as blackbirds can,
Yet competent to love, like HIM?'
                            I paused:
Perhaps I darkened, as the lighthouse will
That turns upon the sea. 'It's always so!
Anything does for a wife.'
                      'Aurora, dear,
And dearly honoured' ... he pressed in at once
With eager utterance,–'you translate me ill.
I do not contradict my thought of you
Which is most reverent, with another thought
Found less so. If your sex is weak for art,
(And I who said so, did but honour you
By using truth in courtship) it is strong
For life and duty. Place your fecund heart
In mine, and let us blossom for the world
That wants love's colour in the grey of time.
With all my talk I can but set you where
You look down coldly on the arena-heaps
Of headless bodies, shapeless, indistinct!
The Judgment-Angel scarce would find his way
Through such a heap of generalised distress,
To the individual man with lips and eyes–
Much less Aurora. Ah, my sweet, come down,
And, hand in hand, we'll go where yours shall touch
These victims, one by one! till one by one,
The formless, nameless trunk of every man
Shall seem to wear a head, with hair you know,
And every woman catch your mother's face
To melt you into passion.'
                      'I am a girl,'
I answered slowly; 'you do well to name
My mother's face. Though far too early, alas,
God's hand did interpose 'twixt it and me,
I know so much of love, as used to shine
In that face and another. Just so much;
No more indeed at all. I have not seen
So much love since, I pray you pardon me,
As answers even to make a marriage with,
In this cold land of England. What you love,
Is not a woman, Romney, but a cause:
You want a helpmate, not a mistress, sir,–
A wife to help your ends ... in her no end!
Your cause is noble, your ends excellent,
But I, being most unworthy of these and that,
Do otherwise conceive of love. Farewell.'
'Farewell, Aurora, you reject me thus?'
He said.
        'Why, sir, you are married long ago.
You have a wife already whom you love,
Your social theory. Bless you both, I say.
For my part, I am scarcely meek enough
To be the handmaid of a lawful spouse.
Do I look a Hagar, think you?'
                          'So, you jest!'
'Nay so, I speak in earnest,' I replied.
'You treat of marriage too much like, at least,
A chief apostle; you would bear with you
A wife ... a sister ... shall we speak it out?
A sister of charity.'
                 'Then, must it be
Indeed farewell? And was I so far wrong
In hope and in illusion, when I took
The woman to be nobler than the man,
Yourself the noblest woman,–in the use
And comprehension of what love is,–love,
That generates the likeness of itself
Through all heroic duties? so far wrong
In saying bluntly, venturing truth on love,
'Come, human creature, love and work with me,'–
Instead of, 'Lady, thou art wondrous fair,
'And, where the Graces walk before, the Muse
'Will follow at the lighting of the eyes,
'And where the Muse walks, lovers need to creep
'Turn round and love me, or I die of love.''
With quiet indignation I broke in.
'You misconceive the question like a man,
Who sees a woman as the complement
Of his sex merely. You forget too much
That every creature, female as the male,
Stands single in responsible act and thought
As also in birth and death. Whoever says
To a loyal woman, 'Love and work with me,'
Will get fair answers, if the work and love
Being good themselves, are good for her–the best
She was born for. Women of a softer mood,
Surprised by men when scarcely awake to life,
Will sometimes only hear the first word, love,
And catch up with it any kind of work,
Indifferent, so that dear love go with it:
I do not blame such women, though, for love,
They pick much oakum; earth's fanatics make
Too frequently heaven's saints. But me, your work
Is not the best for,–nor your love the best,
Nor able to commend the kind of work
For love's sake merely. Ah, you force me, sir,
To be over-bold in speaking of myself,–
I, too, have my vocation,–work to do,
The heavens and earth have set me, since I changed
My father's face for theirs,–and though your world
Were twice as wretched as you represent
Most serious work, most necessary work,
As any of the economists'. Reform,
Make trade a Christian possibility,
And individual right no general wrong;
Wipe out earth's furrows of the Thine and Mine,
And leave one green, for men to play at bowls;
With innings for them all! ... what then, indeed,
If mortals were not greater by the head
Than any of their prosperities? what then,
Unless the artist keep up open roads
Betwixt the seen and unseen,–bursting through
The best of your conventions with his best
The unspeakable, imaginable best
God bids him speak, to prove what lies beyond
Both speech and imagination? A starved man
Exceeds a fat beast: we'll not barter, sir,
The beautiful for barley.–And, even so,
I hold you will not compass your poor ends
Of barley-feeding and material ease,
Without a poet's individualism
To work your universal. It takes a soul,
To move a body: it takes a high-souled man,
To move the masses ... even to a cleaner stye:
It takes the ideal, to blow a hair's breadth off
The dust of the actual.–ah, your Fouriers failed,
Because not poets enough to understand
That life develops from within.–For me,
Perhaps I am not worthy, as you say,
Of work like this! ... perhaps a woman's soul
Aspires, and not creates! yet we aspire,
And yet I'll try out your perhapses, sir;
And if I fail ... why, burn me up my straw
Like other false works–I'll not ask for grace,
Your scorn is better, cousin Romney. I
Who love my art, would never wish it lower
To suit my stature. I may love my art,
You'll grant that even a woman may love art,
Seeing that to waste true love on anything,
Is womanly, past question.'
 
 


^^EOP^^

Why what a pettish, petty thing I grow,–
A mere, mere woman,–a mere flaccid nerve,-
A kerchief left out all night in the rain,
Turned soft so,–overtasked and overstrained
And overlived in this close London life!
And yet I should be stronger.
                          Never burn
Your letters, poor Aurora! for they stare
With red seals from the table, saying each,
'Here's something that you know not.'
 


^^EOP^^

I am the centre
Of a circle of pain
Exceeding its boundaries in every direction 
The business of the bland sun
Has no affair with me
In my congested cosmos of agony
From which there is no escape
On infinitely prolonged nerve-vibrations
Or in contraction
To the pinpoint nucleus of being 
Locate an irritation            without
It is                                           within
                                                 Within
It is without
The sensitized area
Is identical            with the extensity
Of intension 
I am the false quantity
In the harmony of physiological potentiality
To which
Gaining self-control
I should be consonant
In time 
Pain is no stronger than the resisting force
Pain calls up in me
The struggle is equal 
The open window is full of a voice
A fashionable portrait painter
Running upstairs to a woman’s apartment
Sings
        “All the girls are tid’ly did’ly
         All the girls are nice
         Whether they wear their hair in curls
         Or —”
At the back of the thoughts to which I permit crystallization
The conception                       Brute
Why?
        The irresponsibility of the male
Leaves woman her superior Inferiority.
He is running upstairs 
I am climbing a distorted mountain of agony
Incidentally with the exhaustion of control
I reach the summit
And gradually subside into anticipation of 
Repose
Which never comes.
For another mountain is growing up
Which          goaded by the unavoidable
I must traverse
Traversing myself 
Something in the delirium of night hours
Confuses while intensifying sensibility
Blurring spatial contours
So aiding elusion of the circumscribed
That the gurgling of a crucified wild beast
Comes from so far away
And the foam on the stretched muscles of a mouth
Is no part of myself
There is a climax in sensibility
When pain surpassing itself
Becomes exotic
And the ego succeeds in unifying the positive and negative  poles of sensation
Uniting the opposing and resisting forces
In lascivious revelation 
Relaxation
Negation of myself as a unit
          Vacuum interlude
I should have been emptied of life
Giving life 
For consciousness in crises          races
Through the subliminal deposits of evolutionary processes 
Have I not
Somewhere
Scrutinized
A dead white feathered moth
Laying eggs?
A moment
Being realization
Can
Vitalized by cosmic initiation
Furnish an adequate apology
For the objective
Agglomeration of activities
Of a life
LIFE
A leap with nature
Into the essence
Of unpredicted Maternity
Against my thigh
Tough of infinitesimal motion
Scarcely perceptible
Undulation
Warmth           moisture
Stir of incipient life
Precipitating into me 
The contents of the universe
Mother I am
Identical
With infinite Maternity
    Indivisible
    Acutely
    I am absorbed
    Into
The was—is—ever—shall—be
Of cosmic reproductivity 
Rises from the subconscious
Impression of a cat
With blind kittens
Among her legs
Same undulating life-stir
I am that cat 
Rises from the sub-conscious
Impression of small animal carcass
Covered with blue bottles —Epicurean—
And through the insects
Waves that same undulation of living
Death
Life
I am knowing
All about 
     Unfolding 
The next morning
Each woman-of-the-people
Tiptoeing the red pile of the carpet
Doing hushed service
Each woman-of-the-people
Wearing a halo
A ludicrous little halo
Of which she is sublimely unaware 
I once heard in a church —Man and woman God made them—
                                               Thank God.
 


^^EOP^^

Flour on the floor makes my sandals 
slip and I tumble into your arms.  
Too hot to bake this morning but
blueberries begged me to fold them 
into moist muffins. Sticks of rhubarb 
plotted a whole pie. The windows 
are blown open and a thickfruit tang
sneaks through the wire screen 
and into the home of the scowly lady
who lives next door. Yesterday, a man  
in the city was rescued from his apartment
which was filled with a thousand rats.  
Something about being angry because
his pet python refused to eat. He let the bloom  
of fur rise, rise over the little gnarly blue rug, 
over the coffee table, the kitchen countertops 
and pip through each cabinet, snip
at the stumpy bags of sugar, 
the cylinders of salt. Our kitchen is a riot
of pots, wooden spoons, melted butter.  
So be it. Maybe all this baking will quiet
the angry voices next door, if only 
for a brief whiff. I want our summers 
to always be like this—a kitchen wrecked
with love, a table overflowing with baked goods
warming the already warm air. After all the pots 
are stacked, the goodies cooled, and all the counters
wiped clean—let us never be rescued from this mess. 


^^EOP^^

To keep me from staying out late at night, 
my mother warned of the Hell Pig. Black and full 
of hot drool, eyes the color of a lung—it'd follow me
home if I stayed past my curfew. How to tell my friends 
to press Pause in the middle of a video, say their good-byes
while I shuffled up the stairs and into my father's waiting 
blue car? How to explain this to my dates, whisper
why we could not finish this dance? It's not like the pig 
had any special powers or could take a tiny bite
from my leg—only assurances that it was simply 
scandal to be followed home. When my date and I
pull into my driveway and dim the lights, we take 
care to make all the small noises that get made
in times like these even smaller: squeaks in the seats,  
a slow spin of the radio dial, the silver click of my belt. 
Too late. A single black hair flickers awake the ear 
of the dark animal waiting for me at the end of the walk. 
My fumbling of keys and various straps a wild dance 
to the door—the pig grunting in tune to each hurried step, each
of his wet breaths puffing into tiny clouds, a small storm brewing. 


^^EOP^^

Miracle fruit changes the tongue. One bite, 
and for hours all you eat is sweet. Placed
alone on a saucer, it quivers like it's cold 
from the ceramic, even in this Florida heat.  
Small as a coffee bean, red as jam—
I can't believe. The man who sold
it to my father on Interstate 542 had one
tooth, one sandal, and called me 
"Duttah, Duttah." I wanted to ask what  is that, but the red buds teased me 
into our car and away from his fruit stand.
One bite. And if you eat it whole, it softens 
and swells your teeth like a mouthful
of mallow. So how long before you lose
a sandal and still walk? How long
before you lose the sweetness? 


^^EOP^^




           Fredonia, NY



Of course I regret it. I mean there I was under umbrellas of fruit
so red they had to be borne of Summer, and no other season. 
Flip-flops and fishhooks. Ice cubes made of lemonade and sprigs 
of mint to slip in blue glasses of tea. I was dusty, my ponytail
all askew and the tips of my fingers ran, of course, red 
from the fruitwounds of cherries I plunked into my bucket
and still—he must have seen some small bit of loveliness
in walking his orchard with me. He pointed out which trees
were sweetest, which ones bore double seeds—puffing out
the flesh and oh the surprise on your tongue with two tiny stones 
(a twin spit), making a small gun of your mouth. Did I mention
my favorite color is red? His jeans were worn and twisty
around the tops of his boot; his hands thick but careful, 
nimble enough to pull fruit from his trees without tearing
the thin skin; the cherry dust and fingerprints on his eyeglasses.  
I just know when he stuffed his hands in his pockets, said Okay. Couldn't hurt to try? and shuffled back to his roadside stand
to arrange his jelly jars and stacks of buckets, I had made
a terrible mistake. I just know my summer would've been
full of pies, tartlets, turnovers—so much jubilee. 


^^EOP^^

This is a demon that can take a grown brain and squash it to sponge. There is no loving the state
of a decrepit mind that encourages a decrepit body. Is he sleeping or just not there? States of
awareness flicker inside a gauzy lens. We’ve seen this before—in a film, the man disappearing
as he stands right there, his body stolid.
 
Let’s say this man worked as an Assistant Principal and admired his own IQ.
Let’s say this man had a brutish body but was not a brute. All of this becomes portraiture but
there can be fractures of truth.  Looking at him you think: Am I in this film or is this a vapory
memory?

^^EOP^^

I saw you fall to the ground.
I saw the oaks fall.  The clouds collapsed.
I saw a wildness twist through your limbs
and fly off.  The river fell, the grasses fell. 
The backs of six drowned cattle
rose to the surface ice—nothing moved.
But a wind touched my ankles when the snow began.
You left that night and we stayed,
our arms braced with weight.  What power
there was was over.  But I switched on the light
by the porch to see if anything was falling—
and it fell, a few glints in the air,
catching sun although there was no sun,
and the long descent over hours, all night,
seemed like years, and we buried our faces
in what came to rest on the ground
or moved our feet over it, effortless,
as nothing was in our lives, or ever will be.
 


^^EOP^^

I have become wealthy in a foreign land
gravity makes me sick in
my slippery throat the devil makes me lousy
with summer like I'm buried in the sun
in its sounds
with my mother
there's something about having
a heart beat like traffic
like wind I did it afterall: I had a sweaty
body in Berlin it was all right
I'm taking some time out
from being alive with daughters
It's OK I'm impersonating a kiss
of lilacs a murder of crows
are settling over my corpse the dust
covers my photographs I only
ever write about childhood
because that was before I died
and now the devil has brought me
back to Berlin in summer
in Stockholm I'm starting to make sense
of my body which is becoming
buried in pop music and now ooh-ooh
I have to rebuild the wall
an erotics based on occupation
I write you a letter ett brev
about my body as if it were
split between foreign words
whispered by stringy angels
and soldiers who march in
through the eye of a needle
I write my body with the eye
of a needle with nålen I write
when I'm sick with gravity
in summer in summer
I'm sick in light summer light
musical light from hell and you
dare call it heaven
my body you dare to call it heaven


^^EOP^^

      after Neruda
 
Go ahead, ask: where are
the pomegranates, the dates,
the girls with skin brown as hash,
the hash?
 
Listen to what’s happening
 
One morning bonfires
began to leap from the earth,
devouring human beings,
lit by matches flicked across
the sky with joysticks.
And from then on fire,
from then on burning hair,
from then on limbs and meat.
Invisible bandits, pickpockets
from ten-thousand feet,
faceless, thoughtless, dumb
except for humming,
bandits marked with tiny flags,
controlled from continents away
by children, child bandits
with letter jackets left hanging
in their girlfriends' closets,
child bandits with bibles
thumbed and highlighted,
spear missiles through the sky to kill other children
and the blood of children runs through the streets,
neither seen nor heard, obedient,
simply, like children's blood.
 
Ask away: why doesn’t his poetry
describe our urban loneliness,
the body drenched in metaphor?
 
There’s nothing to see here,
nothing to see,
just blood in the sand,
blood in the streets,
nothing to see.
 


^^EOP^^

It’s unbearable to shadowdrift along the
seabed. It’s unbearable to grieve when
sleeping is more important.
 
The boat is a hammock without strings.
As the body is a sleeve not strung to the
soul. The boat is chained to the shadow;
when the shadow drifts, the boat drifts
too.
 
Is it at sea? Or is it just in air? Can a
boat live on air alone?
 
The man’s back bleeds. This is all
expected of creatures who sacrifice their
nudity for solitude and immortality.
 
The flesh is eager to float, fully
captivated by the impulse to preserve an
array of stillness. The horizon is not
skirring and nothing can move on that
river made of air. This boat. This boat.
 
This boat that the horizon can’t coat
with its own monolithic entreaty.
 
The man bathes in all blemishes of the
moon. The man’s body can take
imperfection, as he feels complete. His
white-grey hair is a type of condensed
cloud he can rest his head on. If he must
commit suicide, he knows he will rest on
a very comfortable pillow, one that he
grows from the ovoid base of his skull.
 
It’s good to get all the hard work done
first and then unbutton one’s corporeal
flesh calmly before the undiluted
enterprise of air.
 
His penis is one finger pointing to the line
that separates his thighs. Everything
is hidden deliciously inside his pituitary
gland.
 


^^EOP^^

You are as even tempered as a frying pan
In a sudden downpour 
A campsite in disarray 
A long time coming
Laughter from two yards over 
The neighborhood a claim on space
Involving multiple parties
 
It must be Father’s Day 
Judging by the heightened attentions of daughters and sons 
Thus a man enjoys solitude, stillness, pink petals of the carrier rose
And in a certain light 
The sonic continuum of tires against the road 
The sensation of being carried along toward the end of a sentence
After the disappearance of the period
 
Air to breathe, water to drink 
The suggestion box is empty 
Obsolete equipment piles up in nooks and crannies
This is all wrong, that’s messed up 
We go on in and make ourselves comfortable 
The movie has just begun 
It’s Nick and Nora Charles and their little dog Asta
 
They’re visiting Nick’s parents in the suburbs 
He’s on the wagon and trying to keep a low profile 
But of course she brags about him to the local paper 
And soon he’s embroiled in detective work despite himself
There is crime everywhere, even here in the suburbs 
It must be human nature
Desperate characters on the loose
 
“Yoke yourself to your strongest conviction”
Was a piece of advice derived from the Y in JOY
But Pam doesn’t buy that 
And I say it sounds too slavish 
Remember the Groucho line 
“These are my principles
If you don’t like them I have others”
 
When the pen runs out of ink 
You simply replace the cartridge 
And continue writing 
To the sound of jet planes overhead 
It’s time to revive the typewriter 
For the benefit of kids 
Now entering the ranks of the scribe force 
Sliding the paper under the roller 
Striking the surface with heavy metal blows 
History curls right into the future 
A Möbius strip 
That brings bygone media around and back 
With all the drama, character, sound, light and destiny
Alive in an imagination of living


^^EOP^^




A species of tiny human has been discovered, which lived on the remote Indonesian island of Flores just 18,000 years ago. . . . Researchers have so far unearthed remains from eight individuals who were just one metre tall, with grapefruit-sized skulls. These astonishing little people . . . made tools, hunted tiny elephants and lived at the same time as modern humans who were colonizing the area.
—Nature, October 2004



Light: lifted, I stretch my brief body.
Color: blaze of day behind blank eyes. 
Sound: birds stab greedy beaks
Into trunk and seed, spill husk 
Onto the heap where my dreaming
And my loving live. 
Every day I wake to this. 
Tracks follow the heavy beasts
Back to where they huddle, herd. 
Hunt: a dance against hunger.
Music: feast and fear. 
This island becomes us. 
Trees cap our sky. It rustles with delight
In a voice green as lust. Reptiles 
Drag night from their tails,
Live by the dark. A rage of waves 
Protects the horizon, which we would devour.
One day I want to dive in and drift, 
Legs and arms wracked with danger.
Like a dark star. I want to last.


^^EOP^^

Inside every world there is another world trying to get out,
and there is something in you that would like to discount this world.  
The stars could rise in darkness over heartbreaking coasts, 
and you would not know if you were ruining your life or beginning a real one.  
You could claim professional fondness for the world around you; 
the pictures would dissolve under the paint coming alive, 
and you would only feel a phantom skip of the heart, absorbed so in the colors. 
Your disbelief is a later novel emerging in the long, long shadow of an earlier one— 
is this the great world, which is whatever is the case?
The sustained helplessness you feel in the long emptiness of days is matched 
by the new suspiciousness and wrath you wake to each morning. 
Isn’t this a relationship with your death, too, to fall in love with your inscrutable life? 
Your teeth fill with cavities. There is always unearned happiness for some, 
and the criminal feeling of solitude. Always, everyone lies about his life.  
 


^^EOP^^

When he called, there were 261 emotions
at play. I thought there were only wistfulness,
humiliation, and mere bitterness left, but lo,
I see now the brilliance in the numbers. 
Emotions 75 and 78 made me happy just to know
they existed. I felt less alone, more impervious. 
I was emboldened by the existence of 152. 
Though, how was I supposed to accept 9, 14, and 179?
We deserved better, distress and indigence aside. 
Something about 260 broke the spell inside me
and offered up a tiny shift: I opened my eyes in the fog
and tore off the surfaces of 261 and 4 with a great shout. 


^^EOP^^

                    
                    
                    Perhaps you can tell children that the world is always a more beautiful place than you can suppose,

and then you release them into their future, the black row of trees in the distance. 

She died suddenly in midwinter, in the same bed in which her husband died years earlier; it still sagged on his side. Her second husband remained in Japan with his first family. 

She used to say, what my three girls do when they are on their own is unimaginable to me. 

My mother is the middle daughter, a garden of inaudible tunes. The four of them lived in a mean house in Seoul. 

One yellowing picture of my grandmother remains, and her face turns away from the camera, as the rabbit senses the hound; 

she was said to be a solitary eater, an inner thing. What did she promise the world that she wasn’t able to make good on? 

A child who abruptly feels the frontiers of experience assert themselves in her: at the funeral my mother cries so hard she can’t feel her hands for days, 

it explains how she scratches herself raw, meaningless. 

You have always believed these are your themes: fate, the negative pleasures of dipping oneself in acid. 

You think it will rescue you from your simplicity, remarks my mother from the doorway, but art is never the ace in the hole. 

I am not a stupid child. I am not even a child any longer, with her hesitant, then terrible certainty, that loss is tragic, not only pointless. 

When she is lonely, my mother cooks; and when she is happy, she knows to hide it. 
                

^^EOP^^

A lamb blinking over a patch of earth
does not know what you have done. Feed it, 
and it will eat from your hand
as if you wore the skin of a washed grape. 


^^EOP^^

HOW TO SUCCEED IN TORTURE 
WITHOUT REALLY TRYING 
1. FIRST THINGS FIRST:  
Surprise,
            catch your source off balance             when he least expects it: At the moment he opens his eyes in the morning
While he shits on the can.  
Detain and confine, 
                      quickly,        quickly              ​cut him off from the known.  
Plunge your source into the strange,  
                      the invisible wells gone dry in his bones Drained by his eyes 
         He’s in occupied territory— 
            he could walk a long time and find nowhere, nothing, nada 
                  no doors, no tunnels, windows  
2. KEEP IT SIMPLE: 
        
      Familiar clothing reinforces identity.  
       Replace the source

^^EOP^^

I try not to cast too much shade.
Sin would be
to use the excuse
of her growth in my womb,
to imagine her as a limb of myself.
She is her own tree,
late-winter’s indomitable shoot.
She takes cupfuls of sun. 
I stand well clear
as the branches stretch
like flutes playing allegros.
Not for anything
would I poison her
with an act of possession,
conceal her from the woodsman
whose task is to make room for all.


^^EOP^^




'Life passes through places.'
–P.J. Duffy, Landscapes of South Ulster
Patrick Farrell, of Lackagh, who was able to mow one acre and one rood Irish in a day. Tom Gallagher, Cornamucklagh, could walk 50 Irish miles in one day. Patrick Mulligan, Cremartin, was a great oarsman. Tommy Atkinson, Lismagunshin, was very good at highjumping—he could jump six feet high. John Duffy, Corley, was able to dig half an Irish acre in one day. Edward Monaghan, Annagh, who could stand on his head on a pint tumbler or on the rigging of a house.
          –1938 folklore survey to record the local people who occupied the South Ulster parish landscape.
                                                                                                                      * * *
 
 




           Kathleen McKenna, Annagola, who was able to wash a week’s sheets, shirts
      and swaddling, bake bread and clean the house
                   all of a Monday. 
            Birdy McMahon, of Faulkland, walked to Monaghan for a sack of flour two days before   her eighth child was born. 
  Cepta Duffy, Glennan, very good at sewing—embroidered a set of vestments    in five days. 
  Mary McCabe, of Derrynashallog, who cared for her husband’s mother in dotage,    fed ten children, the youngest still at the breast during hay-making. 
   Mary Conlon, Tullyree,
   who wrote poems at night. 
   Assumpta Meehan, Tonygarvey, saw many visions and was committed to the asylum. 
   Martha McGinn, of Emy, who swam Cornamunden Lough in one hour and a quarter. 
   Marita McHugh, Foxhole, whose sponge cakes won First Prize at Cloncaw Show. 
   Miss Harper, Corley, female problems rarely ceased, pleasant in ill-health. 
   Patricia Curley, Corlatt, whose joints ached and swelled though she was young,    who bore three children. 
   Dora Heuston, Strananny, died in childbirth, aged 14 years,   last words ‘Mammy, O Mammy!’ 
   Rosie McCrudden, Aghabog noted for clean boots, winter or summer,    often beaten by her father. 
   Maggie Traynor, Donagh, got no breakfasts, fed by the nuns, batch loaf with jam,    the best speller in the school. 
   Phyllis McCrudden, Knockaphubble, who buried two husbands, reared five children,    and farmed her own land. 
   Ann Moffett, of Enagh, who taught people to read and did not charge.


^^EOP^^

We are not responsible for your lost or stolen relatives. 
We cannot guarantee your safety if you disobey our instructions. 
We do not endorse the causes or claims of people begging for handouts. 
We reserve the right to refuse service to anyone.  
Your ticket does not guarantee that we will honor your reservations. 
In order to facilitate our procedures, please limit your carrying on. 
Before taking off, please extinguish all smoldering resentments.  
If you cannot understand English, you will be moved out of the way. 
In the event of a loss, you’d better look out for yourself. 
Your insurance was cancelled because we can no longer handle
your frightful claims. Our handlers lost your luggage and we
are unable to find the key to your legal case.  
You were detained for interrogation because you fit the profile. 
You are not presumed to be innocent if the police 
have reason to suspect you are carrying a concealed wallet. 
It’s not our fault you were born wearing a gang color. 
It is not our obligation to inform you of your rights.  
Step aside, please, while our officer inspects your bad attitude. 
You have no rights we are bound to respect. 
Please remain calm, or we can’t be held responsible 
for what happens to you. 


^^EOP^^

You hear the sun in the morning
through closed shutters. As you sleep
the early sky is colored
in fish scales, and you open your eyes
like a street
already lined with fruit. 


^^EOP^^

Your husband is stretched out on the ground
as if he were listening for something. 
Ask him to come back to the table. 
Whatever was there is now here. 


^^EOP^^




After Lorca



mother’s malison   The burr of the wind is seeping through the door,
pink stumps of rhubarb are breaking through the soil.
Though it is February I have the mind of autumn.
Though it is February    

^^EOP^^

Son of Man. Son of Marvin & Tallulah. Son of Flatbush & roti & dollar vans bolting down the avenue after six. The boy grew like a debt, & beautified every meter of the pockmarked, jet black asphalt which held him aloft on days he sped from much larger men along its skin. Godfathers & hustlers, Division 1 scholarship forfeiters, alchemists, liars, lasagna connoisseurs, Internet mixtape DJs & baby mama conflict consultants, each one appearing as if from the smoke of our  collective imagination, Jordans laced, drawstrings taut, all of them gathered one by one to race the gangly, mop-top prodigy from the front of Superior Market to the block’s endarkened terminus, the same corner where Man Man got jumped so bad at the back end of last summer, neighborhood residents came to regard the place as a kind of memorial & it was like this every other afternoon, you know, from June through the final days leading up to the book drives & raucous cookouts which signaled our school year’s inauspicious return, this was the manner by which Mycah Dudley first gained his fame, dusting grown men without so much as the faintest scintillation of sweat to make the performance ethical. It was damn near unsportsmanlike, his effortlessness, mass cruelty in a New York City dreamscape, the laughter of girls with hip-length, straight-back braids & baby powder Forces making every contest an event worth leaving the perch of your bunk bed, stepping out into the record-breaking swelter that summer held like a trap door for kids with broken box fans & no mother home for at least four more hours to fill the quiet with discipline.

 
•


We gathered in swarms to gawk at our boy before takeoff. His flesh maroon-clad from head to foot like an homage to blood, black plastic afro pick with a fist for a handle jutting from the left side of his high-top fade, his high-top Chuck Taylors, size 12, sounding like ox hooves once he entered the groove of a good run & the distinction was basically moot at that point is what I am saying, the line between him & any other mystical creature, any worthwhile myth, any god of prey or waning life.

 
•


The entire block was out that night. Firecrackers packed the blackening air, their fury matched only by the exorbitance of dope-boy  convertibles turned mobile dancehalls by the moment’s weight. Which might explain why no one quite remembers when, or how, the now-infamous brawl began. Only that Mycah was in rare form earlier that evening, having just embarrassed Mars Patterson — so named, it bears mentioning, for the chocolate bars he loved to steal & trade on the 4 train, not the red rock planet or lord of war — but was now in his everyday mode, seated on the stoop, a seer with so few words for devotees & passersby, each eventually stopped asking for his backstory,  for his praise or functional wisdom, & instead were content to let him eat his veggie patty with cheese without interruption, which he did, which he was, when the din that always accompanies someone’s son’s public pummeling rang out, cut through our scene lengthwise, compelled the boy, for the first time on record, to leap from the steps of the brownstone his nana died braiding hair inside of, enter the scrum, thresh the crowd for signs of the conflict’s center.

 
•


General consensus has it he was looking for his little cousin, & found him, even before the initial cop car ran like a living ram through the people. Before the boys in blue sprang, a spray of navy fléchettes, from behind its doors. Before they were caught in the scuffle, released ten to twenty rounds of ammo into the crowd without warning, bullets glancing off of Cutlass doors & corner store glass built for battle, all but three or four of which entered the boy mid-stride, lifted his six-foot frame from the ground, legs still pumping. For a second, you would almost swear he was running through the gunfire, preparing for liftoff or something, baby cousin held firmly in his arms, shielded from the onslaught. They never would have caught him if he hadn’t been holding that child, said no one, though we all thought it during the weeks following that moment we each froze, the moment his body collapsed slow as petals upon the unremarkable cement, & we stared at our champion felled by an outcome so common we don’t even have a special name for it. Still. No one standing ran that day. Most of us turned to face his killers, hands at our sides, determined to make them make it a massacre. But all that was before we heard Man Man let off a scream so full it rent the crowd in two, split the circle we had built around the boy’s corpse, our human wall parting to watch each casing fall from Mycah’s still-wet, dark red sweatshirt onto the street. Hear me. I heard the gunman’s greeting. Saw hollow points etch  apertures into the boy’s clothes. They shot Mycah Dudley, quite  legally. He died that night. He rose.


^^EOP^^




In heaven I mean to go and talk to Pythagoras and Socrates and Valerius Publicola. I shan’t care a bit for Rosie there, she needn’t think it. What will grey eyes and red cheeks be good for there?
— John Ruskin, letter to Susan Beever, from Assisi, Sacristan’s Cell, June 25, 1874
To-day, being my sixty-first birthday, I would ask leave to say a few words to the friends who care for me, and the readers who are anxious about me, touching the above-named illness itself. For a physician’s estimate of it, indeed, I can only refer them to my physicians. But there were some conditions of it which I knew better than they could: namely, first, the precise and sharp distinction between the state of morbid inflammation of brain which gave rise to false visions (whether in sleep, or trance, or waking, in broad daylight, with perfect knowledge of the real things in the room, while yet I saw others that were not there), and the not morbid, however dangerous, states of more or less excited temper, and too much quickened thought, which gradually led up to the illness, accelerating in action during the eight or ten days preceding the actual giving way of the brain.
— John Ruskin, Fors Clavigera Letter 88 (February 8, 1880)
Too fast and far again! by much; the impetus of phrase running away with me.
— John Ruskin, additional note no. 54 to Modern Painters Vol. 2 (1883 revised ed.)



                    
                                               My dear little birds,
      before me on my desk this morning
where I sit preparing tomorrow’s lesson
      lies a copy of The Witches’ Rout by Agostino de’ Musi — 
                           Agostino Veneziano your teachers will call him — 
            wherein a carriage made of dragon bones
and drawn by two naked figures
     is depicted making topsy-turvy progress through a jungle
scattering goats & geese & winged skeletal reptiles
      and there, look now, there atop it all the witch squats
            as one at stool — manly forearm,
muscular shoulder, pendulis mammis — 
                                        the narrow dugs it is
                                        her business to possess — 
filthy hair streaming contra natura — 
      out in a headwind of mephitic vapors    ...    
                           Time out of mind such creatures have impressed
            the dreams of those who live, as it were, by watchfires,
            fearful of neighbors, fearful that the law
            they hammered into whatsoever shape as pleased them
            may yet prove versatile — 
                  their sensual rites & ceremonies,
                  novelties & conceits;
                  their pharisaical holiness    ...    — 
and this is but a scholar’s imitation you will say, rude work
though of  a fine school — a fine school be it allowed, and good enough
to lose itself  beside the master’s — 
                           & yet
                           & yet

                                 steady the hand that hovers over
                                       the acid-bitten cliché
                                 steady the elbow
                                       behind this
                                 engraving on paper

Fro spot my spyryt þer sprang in space

                                                    so now

 
Piazza Sta Maria del Pianto, Rome (1840). A pensive study of old clothes sun-sipped dry in the Jews’ quarter, hanging out of a marble architrave smashed & built into a piece of Roman frieze moldering into broken brickwork projected over wooden windows propped on gray entablature. A vestige of yet-legible inscription: nomine fortuna. No important lines, no beauty of object. A pendent hodgepodge of contrasted feeling cheesecaked into picturesque febrility. An episode. A grief in, as it were, parenthesis. A match without a marriage, as after news of an engagement. A church embedded sans façade among the common sort of houses. A succor from St. Peter’s mere bewilderment & worry. Graphite heightened w/ touches of white body color on gray-green paper.


Beresford Chapel, Walworth: a bare, oblong,
low-ceilinged barn, each brick-arched window filled
with small-paned glass requiring iron bars
threaded like halves of cobweb to stay true.
No traceries, no clustered shafts, no vaulting.
No fantasies. No perpendicular flights
of aspiration. Clean lines, and severe.
Pews shut-in with partitions of plain deal
and neatly brass-hatched doors. No pulpit, merely
a stout, four-legged box of well-grained wainscot,
but decorated with a velvet cushion — 
crimson, with golden tassels at the corners — 
which formed my one resource, for when I tired
of Dr. Andrews’s sermon I could watch
the colors texturing the folds & creases
each time he thumped it. Beresford. That’s where
we worshipped: Papa, Mama, and I.
Poor preparation, this, for Rouen! Rouen
wardered by groups of solemn statuary
clasped by stems of sculpted leafage crowned
by fretted niche & fairy pediment
like inextricably meshed gossamer;
Rouen with her surge & foam of pious chivalry
breaking on crystal cliffs to stand revealed
as every hidden thing shall be, insatiable at prayer
or pillage, lending grace to English rudeness,
venom to Italy’s cunning    ...    Rouen with all
her avarice & intricacies, gargoyles
open-mawed, molten, drenching ornament
down spires vertiginously pinnacled — 
insanae substructiones! Inutiles domos! — 
yet piping pastoral songs of innocence — 

 
The Palazzo Contarini-Fasan, Venice (1841). Higgledy terraced structures the colors of ice creams & sorbets w/ no bland tinting. No calligraphic decoration. Graphite, watercolor & body color. A thorough spell in the vernacular. Stone filigree spidering rhythmic tessellations w/ some scratching out. Details that become a refuge. Detail that becomes a refuge. A long-drawn replica in which new life may even now be in the offing. A sulky grandeur, by the bye. A naughty jailer. A determined postulant. A barber-pole mooring post. A dipped oar tilting  for trouble. The Doge’s tottering state stepping off on gray paper.


Worn somewhat, and not a little weary,
Sandro’s uncommon Fortitude, in this
his first recorded work. Consider it
a moment, if you please, before you pass
hurriedly on to see The Birth of  Venus
next door, and notice that Sandro began
where you perhaps will end: with weariness.
Would you have guessed that Fortitude allows
(allows? approves of!) reverie? See how
her fingers play in restless idleness
or nervousness about her sword hilt
(sword or mace? I’ve lost my notes about her    ...    ).
She is no match, it may be, for the trials
that are to come, yet see her armor shine
in readiness, her gentle fingers apt
to grip her sword (or mace) should she be called.
Lips pursed and eyes averted, she has smiled,
and not a little ruefully, at her fate
from time to time. She has no smile today.
Her quality must be borne daylong, lifelong.
To flaunt it ever is not to possess
it quite. See Pollaiolo’s Virtues pose
and attitudinize: thus they perform
their various meanings. Fortitude must
contain — must be — all that she stands for. Go,
see whatever the Uffizi has
to tempt you; but remember Fortitude
whose battle did not begin today,
nor yesterday, nor on the Sunday last.
Many a day has passed since it began.
They are so wedded to their righteousness,
those lesser Virtues, quite incapable
of  being tempted. They would not dare risk
complacency. She would be lost without it.
But sword or mace? Go now. It is no matter.
I will not need you until tomorrow morning.

 
Ravine at Maglans (1849?). Deeper brown on brown. A limestone precipice stepped with horizontal cleavages to overlook the void. No water but a dream of water years back, far down, running harum-scarum strong enough to turn a mill. A spate become a thread. A visit out of season. A torrent bed of what must have been snow-melt now entirely dry. No stones crumble but flow, subside, rhythmic as cloud, as high-built, as unsubstantial over the long haul. Quartz strips ribboning a treed crevasse fringed w/ curled & unfurled fronds. Leaves shook to palsy by the noon wind’s spite. A rock fissured. A great fault. A graphite rock fissured in brown ink & ink wash heightened w/ flesh-toned body color on white paper.


Last night St. Ursula sent me her dianthus
out of her bedroom window, with her love — 
living dianthus, and a single dried
sprig of  her other window flower, vervain    ...    
how many flowers are named in Genesis?
Good answer! Not one. Plenty of trees, however.
It was a poet planted flowerbeds
that Eden might be filled with tremulous,
frivolous petals — I dare say he was right,
they were made to be noticed! And to see
a poppy husk fall from a bursting flower
is to know something of the life to come
once the body has turned to dust & ashes,
even as our dying breath aspires
toward our Father’s house    ...    as for the trees,
what can we learn of noble constancy
more than we find in the pure laurel leaf,
so numerable, so sequent and serene?
 
open the envelope
petals & may
spill on the table
where I remain
preparing the lesson
 

bruise-edged rose petals
cling to my fingers
dust motes dancing
gnats in a sun-shaft
myrrh, or a snuffbox?
 

write to me, tell me
who do you dance with
oftenest, often?
gray eyes & red cheeks
useless in heaven
 

undowered, garlanded
with no forget-me-nots:
compassed about
with the forgetfulness
of all the world
 

honor unwon
kind words unsaid
good deeds undone:
none of these, none
touch me more nearly

Now, if  I say “St. Ursula has sent me
a pot of pinks!” some will say I have gone
heartily, headily mad, but all it means
is that the flowers I received of  late
(from the hand of whatsoever friend or stranger)
helped greatly in my work, and afterward
reproved me in their own way for its failure.
But how much love of mine have others lost
because one poor sick child would not receive
the part of love that yet belongs to her!
Think now, sweet milkmaids of Albion
whose face is your fortune, think of one
lying still there, nearly a skeleton,
and ask yourselves: We have a little sister 
and she has no breasts: what shall we do for our sister 
in the day of  her espousals?

 
South Side of the Basilica of St. Mark’s, Venice, from the Loggia of the Ducal Palace (c.1851). An eerie vantage. A capricious helter-skelter variety of application, quickening details of watercolor passing  for time-veined marble scaled-up from a daguerreotype. An echo’s volume. Shadows lilt & flourish over chessboard floor tiles. A kind of hectic color. Disallowance of perspective. Sculpted relief without recession. Megrims & mysteries; conceits & divertisements. The uncapped St. Jean d’Acre’s pillar giving on to the southern portico. A Byzantine capital. A sonata on a virginal. Graphite & watercolor heightened w/ white on three jointed pieces of paper.


           Up my spirit leapt, so glad
           to shed this gross flesh and have done!
           My ghost, given up by the grace of God,
           was led where marvels are counted common.
           I climbed to where cliff-top meets cloud — 
           vertiginous heights no man has known — 
           my soul drawn on toward a wood
           decked with countless jewels & stones.
           It is hard to credit a sight so fine
           as the wash of  light in which they shone:
           woman never wove a gown
           so dearly adorned, so lit with splendor.

           In splendor, cliffs of crystal stood
           crisp as ice, clear & clean.
           At their foot, a forest spread:
           the trees were touched with a red-blue sheen
           and leaves of  burnished silver slid
           quivering to & fro between
           limbs that shimmered like blue jade
           each time a light-gleam touched the scene.
           The gravel underfoot was strewn
           with gems, and the sun seemed quite outshone
           by those precious, oriental stones
           so dearly adorned, so lit with splendor.

           The splendor of the grove was such
           that my grief left me — it lifted clear;
           the fragrance of the fruit so fresh,
           I found I needed no other fare.
           Birds flew together, branch to branch
           like flecks of flame — now here now there;
           no human symphony can match,
           nor voice nor string delight the ear
           with such a song: they blessed the air
           with a sweet accord that swooned & shone
           with harmonies you will never hear
           but there where all is lit with splendor.

           So adorned in splendor was
           that forest where I met my fate,
           a cunning man could not devise
           a fitting way to tell of it.
           Climbing pear trees, apple trees;
           browsing wonders — pretty sport!
           And soon the flowers & fields & hedgerows
           turned beautifully intricate
           with burns & water gardens. Bright
           as burnished gold the fellside shone
           where I trailed a stream that ran with light,
           dearly adorned & lit with splendor.

           But a greater splendor was yet to come:
           a riverbank of  beryl ablaze
           where water swept & swirled in a foam
           of  hurrying murmurs & confused airs.
           The stream bed glinted with a gleam
           like sunlight filtered through stained glass
           or winter starlight, when it may seem
           we’re all alone when the clouds pass.
           Each pebble bright as Hesperus:
           sapphire, emerald — each one shone
           with a light too bright for similes,
           dearly adorned & lit with splendor.

 
Study of Gneiss Rock, Glenfinlas (1853–54). A living witness. A verticality more smooth than the water over wch it rears. Glib-channeled water rushing; dry rock dripping — fluid, labial rock, less still than the wildflowers & feathered grasses that cling in unguessed cracks & overhang. Mapped lichens. Lampblack, body color. A cumbrous slab. An unobtrusive majesty. A happenstance long sought before seen, loved long before understood. A lesson of devotion to be found always, found but once. An obstinacy gladdened by the river’s flux, the ice floe’s pluck & laving. Pen & ink over graphite on wove paper w/ some scratching out.


In Santa Croce, here we are
well quit of restoration, for who cares
about this slab with its poor bit of sculpture?
An old man in the deeply-folded cap
worn by the scholars & gentlemen of  Florence
c.1300–1500, dead,
a book upon his breast, and over it
his hands lie folded. At his feet, the legend:


.bordered {
    width: 500px;
    height: 200px;
    padding: 20px;
    border: 2px solid black;
  }

temporibvs • hic • svis • phylosopye •
atq • medicine • cvlmen • fvit • et magister
galilevs • degalileis • olim • bonaivtis • qvi
etiam • svmmo • inmagistratv • miro •
qvodam • modo • rem • pvblicam dilexit
cvivs • sancte • memorie • bene acte •
vitepie • benedictvs • filivs • hvnc • tvmv
lvm • patri • sibi • svis • & • posteris • edidit


The worn face, still the old man’s perfect portrait — 
though one struck out by a master’s chisel
at a venture, just so, with a few rough touches;
the falling drapery of  his citizen’s cap
subtle beyond description, with the choice of folds
exquisite in its ornamental pattern;
the carpet he lies on almost uninjured,
elaborate with fringe & frond
relieving the severity of the figure    ...    
and see now, see how the cushion’s nearly-perfect tassels
balance to fill the angles of the stone — 

 
Study of a Peacock’s Breast Feather (1873). A single plume, painted of its natural size. One iridescent throb transitioning from the active plume’s obliquity to the decorative’s dualed symmetry. An uncertain correspondence w/ a heart-shaped flower petal. A cold thrill: a pang as of a nice deep wasp sting. Moss green moving via jade to emerald, indigo to lapis lazuli: as much as is allowed, having neither hocus-pocus nor heaven to dip a brush in. A heraldic emblem; watch & ward against incipient commodity. A lost key to a blue box for blue girls w/ gray eyes. Watercolor & body color on paper.


                          whirrrrrrr-r-r-r-r-r-r
                   pink! pink! pink! cherry-erry-erry
             pew-pew-pew-pew-poor-pew-pew
the chaffinches chirp but feebly; this June snow
      discomposes them
                                              Coniston
             bright as glass
                          ill-cast
             by an undiscerning hand
                                       wave-lines
             showing like flaws in planes of fine crystal

   unsteady, unstill
   troubling & troubled

             What is it droppeth as the gentle rain from heaven?
     Child, according to this morning’s Spectator
’tis nothing but the filtration of money from above downwards — 
             an oft-observed phenomenon
                          concessum propter duritiem cordis
                                             a thing allowed
                   and properly recorded in our holy book of double entry
             I mean St. Usura’s Gospel of  Filth
                   wherein we learn his doctrine of arithmetic
                                             that 2 + 2 = 5    ...    
                              O we are so humane,
                                    forsooth, we are so wise,
                              that whereas our ancestors had tar barrels for witches
                              we have them for everybody else — 
                              and we will have our cauldrons cooled, please Hecate,
                                          after Mr. Darwin’s theory
                                             with baboon blood!
                                          Occulted by daylight
                              we will drive the witches’ trade ourselves
                 as, once, I saw a boy with his basket of rotten figs
                       poor little costermonger
      before the south façade of the Ducal Palace
                       stooping to cry Fighiaie! Fighiaie!
                                             Inibito a chiunque il vendere frutti cattivi
                                             19th June, 1516
                                            (i.e. before that nobody thought of doing so)
        as, more than once, I have seen the girls at the windows: poor girls
              at the windows, in the alleyways,
        in the slums by the Euston Hotel, by the railway lines,
                      take Camden Rd. toward the canal basin, lift your eyes,
                      do but lift your eyes as you leave the hall, gentlemen,
                      and you will mark them, they hold themselves
                      liberally, knowing our likings, poor girls, nothing to sell
                      but everything; nothing to sell
                      but themselves I dewyne,
               fordolked of luf-daungere too fast & far,
      boiled to rags by morbid violence — No
            they cannot touch me for coyning
               me so misby — so misby — so misby
                                                         me wish me was a clergyman
                                                         tellin lies all day
                            & Flint — & Tukup — & But — 
                      cujus sancte memorie
                                      those rich-left heirs
                                            Fighiaie!

O Love,
      sane as the proud flesh
            about a healing wound
                  in the side of my nation

that yet may pass
      at a crisis
            into morbific substance,
                  let this man work.

O Love,
      give us work
            and set us to it,
                  for we are corrigible:

O fettle us
      for we are not
            after all entirely corrigible
                  & stay our hand

when we would set our soul upon a cast:
teach us how to give & hazard all
we hath upon your coming, for the soul
cannot be bargained otherwise — only lost.
Impregnable to our economies
whatever the deceiver promises,
the soul is not for sale. And now, the cost
                  diligently accounted for, the sum
                  entered in the ledger, see this bound
                  and shelved in sequence where it may be found
                  by any who enquire, should any come    ...    

         Love sets no term. Love schedules its appearances
         according to no clock of ours:
         to moon-bewildered waves we each of us receive
         our summons, unreluctant. Let walk upon them
         all who can.

                                     ...    came Phaedra then, and Procris,
                                next Ariadnè, fairest of all,
                            whose daddy’s mind was a slaughterhouse
                      bright Ariadnè
                      whom Theseus once from Crete
                      to the tilled acres of sacred Athens led — 
                      nor had he the joy of  her, his heart’s desire,
                      poor Ariadnè
                      fair, moon-bewildered — 
                                false Dionys̄us witnessed against her;
                                Artěmis slew her    ...    


                  O, feed her with apricocks & dewberries,
                  with purple grapes, green figs & mulberries

Is she not with me here among the hawthorn blossom?

     Diodati, a year with no summer,
          and the world was void — 
               þe fyrre in þe fryth
                     — she was the Universe

                              At dusk
pipistrelles flit like black rags torn at the edge
     bonfire cinders
     riding the vortex
     spiraling circuits
     all round the terrace
     all day have I sat here
     preparing the lesson

My dear little birds, did you not see the gleam of sunshine yesterday?

Hadst thou but seen her in it
     bareheaded, barefoot
between the laurels & the primrose bank

 
Moss & Wild Strawberry (1873). Gentle, hesitant line. A suggestion in the genitive. A secret in midsummer. A slackening deft moss nested in cleaved stone. Traces of body color on gray-blue paper trefoiled w/ dewy sequins. Seekings. Rooting a subtle declivity in the rock revealed now by a berry’s posture. A gaze darkening where lines triangulate palely. A beckoning. A suggestive gesture.


^^EOP^^

At the mouth of the river,
Moon, stars, an Arctic calm,
The twin lights at the end of the piers
Revolving with the smoothness
We expect of supernatural machinery. 
Seen from down here on the beach
The harbored ocean slowly tilts,
Like a mirror discreetly manhandled
By night from the giant room
It was supposed to occupy forever. 
The mind says now, but the stars
On their angelic gimbals roll
And fade, a tide of constellations
Breaking nowhere, every night
About this time. Strike up the band. 
In the tumbledown bar, the singer
Has fallen from stardom and grace,
But though her interests nowadays
Are wholly secular, she can
Still refer back to the angels, 
And knowing that song, we share
A moment with the saved before
We leave to make the crossing.
No captain, no ferry, but
Cross we shall, believe you me.


^^EOP^^

What are you going to do
With what is left of yourself
Now among the rustling
Of your maybe best years?
This is not an auto-elegy
With me pouring my heart
Out into where you
Differently stand or sit
On the Epidaurus steps.
What shall I say to myself
Having put myself down
On to a public page? 
Where am I going now?
And where are you going
Tricked into reading
Words of my later life?
Let me pretend you are
Roughly of my age.
Are you a boy or a girl?
And what has happened to you? 
Look at the chirping various
Leaves of Mr Graham’s
Spanking summer. Where are
You at? I know my face
Has changed. My hair has blanched
Into a wrong disguise
Sitting on top of my head. 
Beside each other perched
On the Epidaurus steps.
Where am I going to go?
Shall I rise to follow
The thin sound of the goats
Tinkling their bells?


^^EOP^^

Music, wind, someone’s car horn
Imagining to return
Buddha’s big toe on the lake
Your intricate gaze of form 
Eating the lake like a word
Unzipped carefully by day
You walked it hesitantly
You taste something step by step  • 
Losing my way, wildly blue
Perhaps annotated past
The return gaze, my snowfall
My city gate firmly shut 
Even to wonder how you’ve been
Isn’t what you want, therefore
Lightly enclosing my text
Cast down toward what I’ve not seen  • 
Happily a ceiling fan
You grasp the word sweltering
Days are tectonic, the sound
Of one memory spoken 
Who waits for you at the lake’s
Wild edge? Bright glint of the noun
You knew dissatisfaction
Speaking even against time  • 
Recorded a length of time
I held memory tightly
Unoriginal dimming
Of  the light there, a found scene 
Number three on the dirt path
Father carries his school bag
Without use for meter, yet
Both skies open to thunder  • 
Don’t speak to me of sorghum
Red fields, pressed up toward a sky
Whatever called to me there
Too wild, attempting a face 
Old verses for my father
Dignify the cooling page
Black earth is the word it makes
Tilts forward, consequential


^^EOP^^

Say they still tie ropes to the caskets of immigrants they find  in the desert. That a rope saves time should someone come looking.

^^EOP^^

Warmth activates the sugars,
and sugars rally
in the gorse, in the flowers
it sees with, the scent
that is its voice, the nontoxic fragrant wood
good for cutlery, and for burning,
though it flares out quickly,
unlike smoldering peat. Are they converting 
sugars of their loneliness
to conviction? Burning
their sugars on the wicks
of their frailty,
one can nearly read by them,  as Fillan in his own cave read
by the light of  his broken arm,
one of the horrible miracles
of the times —  St. Fillan, the Human Flashlight, patron of the mentally ill —  
an unenviable between-worlds
position. Whereas marsh orchids,
fully in this one,
change their clothes
out in the open, hard candy
in their mouths,
the sugars plump, round, smooth, unlike seawater’s jagged molecules,
which when drunk like anger
will tear through you.
Like bitterness, desiccate you.  To survive, suffering burns
the strength of the afflicted. If,
left in Fillan’s cave,
bonds of the stricken
were loosened by morning,
his spirit had intervened to convert 
the molecules of their madness, and still later did smugglers stash there
some of those little things
that make life worth living.  The highly edible
sweet gorse flowers
produce a coconut-flavored wine
if one enjoys the luxury of time,
and a tea prescribed in cases
of uncertainty, for those who appear
to have lost all hope.


^^EOP^^

Somewhere in kentucky she went for kicks spiked polka-dot mint julep grade 1 stakes white-gloved clubhouse how-you-do-sees  until all the horses broke their legs & for all the horses my ex  joined the seine-et-oise thoroughbred liberation front & she  crashed all the bentleys & it was I who bled  in derby countryside where horses die in japanese slaughterhouses defrocked of rose blanket & blue ribbon  & how very they went in the kind of darkness knowing only my old kentucky 
home no longer a run for the roses it’s besieged with cannibals & thieves & only millionaires row sings  a hero is a horse without a heart that never aches  for lovers who cross them one too many times  when we kill one horse all of them die waiting long after kentucky & she  
slips
white gloves on my hands
bent from carrying her on nyc streets
jammed
the wrong way in every direction  how merry are we  how merry  how bright-shine beaming no longer weeping & she bears my head to the heat & I let it all go & bet my last hat & home & how & how very are we & it changes everything


^^EOP^^




After Rilke



I carried a bowl of menudo into the forest / I carried my bisabuela’s tripas not daring ask whose intestines I carried / con cilantro y radish y cebolla chopped fine / I carried the sewing machine they’d chained her to in the garment district downtown I carried the forest crackling against asphalt where her chanclas burnt & melted so I carried her too / I wore no red / I bore no basket / there was no forest but an avocado tree in the backyard of the house they made her sell to get her Medicare for her diabetes shots / I carried her sugarwater / a hummingbird great-granddaughter I carried her flickering / her black-  & white-screened / I carried her face / the scars her warped esposo left her granddaughter / carried those wounds through the womb / not wolf but blue-eyed man / I stirred the menudo / my belly the pot / & scalding into the forest I carried / & that tree I chopped down chopped into a boat & carried my mother & my bisabuela across the chile-red sopa the blood-water broth / named her daughter / what forest have we made for her I cannot see / I carried darkness into the forest & sliced it out.


^^EOP^^


each  night  I  count  ghostlets  of  how  my  body  was
wanted  /  behind with deadheading  /  rose hips have
come  /  behind with actions that count only  /  when
the  timing  is  right  /  I  took out  a contract  /  it was
imprudent  in  value  /  behind  with  asepsis  /  hello
microbes  of  my  body  /  we   sleep  together  /  hello
cats  /  I  make  my  bed  daily  /  of the three types of
hair on the sheets  /  only one is human  /  I count the
bedrooms  /  I never had sex in  /  but there were cars
 /   wild    woods   /   blackfly    has    got   to   all   the
nasturtiums  /  you cannot dig  up  a grapevine  /  and
expect shelter to come  /  I am touched by  your letter
/  writes  a  friend  /   you  prevaricate  desire   /   says
message  /  all  this  fucking  / with  no  hands  on  me



^^EOP^^

she at last
had permission to use
the marble bath
for the marble bath
she untied a paper bag
of periwinkle bath salts
& flicked them into the water
as though cracking a whip
she untied her hair
she untidied her hair
tested the water
with the soft pads of her toes
(tips of bladder wrack
in the sun)
her skin her markings
(as for the bath) — 
interior-of-Stilton
at last underwater
she drew breath
from every shell collected
from every beach
later in the evening
when dressed for bed
she rejoined her brothers
& sister &
they were each served
a portion of the last portion


^^EOP^^

Dazed with rambling gossip,
their looming net of mistakes, 
their love of rumor, they all dream
arousal. They are far from indifferent. 
Their language bellows need. 
A gull darts over and behind
bare buildings, shaggy forests, mountains,
city streets. Trees lose leaves, and one 
man insists the leaves aren’t dying
after collecting outdated food at church, 
upswing in full euphoric force, he’s
certain he’s spreading world peace. 
Men at work lumber to dumpsters.
Oaks yellow. Rocks trap leaves. 
Jehovah’s Witnesses mouthed salvation.
Janice listened wishful, 
but today she relays her own bitter story:
lazy sister-in-law fat on a couch, 
quarter-sized bedsores on her ass,
brother-in-law blind, stumbling drunk. 
Hearts rigid and numb, neighbors forget
crepe myrtle blooming pink. 
Impermanent and frenetic worry hums.
Eyes grow glaucoma blue. Sucking 
cigarettes and mumbling, they stand
hardy as an autumn day’s
geraniums, hard before winter.


^^EOP^^




We Had Stalked the Doe 



                    
                    Commerce. Production. Consumption. Who makes? Who takes? 

It's useless to give up cashmere shawls, gold armatures, SUVs, furs
and silks to achieve cross-cultural pollination or transcendence. 

Since we've ceased to celebrate works-in-progress or cutting-edge sound bites, we photo commodities to provide a permanent record of desire in the grass and under the elms. 

Turkey on the chairlift. 

Rooster in the coop. 

Testimony is a cryptic relic deformed by the violence of authority. 

We recall the limited palette of ashen tones when we drove through Eastern Europe. Billboards, even in Estonia, summoned up fascinations with dieting, alcoholism and psychotherapy. 

Should we have eaten those salads of language? 

Should we have risked teased hairstyles and gained weight?

Should we have giggled amidst severest woe?

Mimicry, idolatry, fanaticism, greed. Oh, fervid tangled brushwork, what can we do to hold you at bay?

I am old. I am old. The good day grows cold. 


^^EOP^^




In memory of Dorothy Burns



i. troppo allegro  
Remember seasons? Seem to recall those once were easier.
Reasonably sequenced, regal of tempo and temper,
Reliable change flipped heads-over-tails each quarter,
Recovering the hemisphere with four fine suits, knock-off designer. 
Recently, someone shuffled, cut the deck into disorder:
Relapse, tic, hiccup, snap, weeks reissued like hipster
Rediscoveries    ...    join the club! No closer
Reading required to diagnose this crazy weather: 
Record highs, flourishing lows. April even crueler
Recapitulated each fortnight. Spring hailing like a howitzer.
Reek of summer tickling autumn’s automatic sprinkler.
Redder-neck sunbathers burnt by November’s toaster. A warbler 
Retweeting Keats, well into winter. A death for Easter.    ii. funeral: march  
Remember: misremembering that fishy Faulkner 
Remark, the dead are never passed. Ask: will this chapter
Retain familiar cycles? Lather, rinse, repeat. Swelter, 
Reins, release. Welter, ruins, reseed. Seconds per 
Revolution: top-heavy spinning, simian moods over-
Reaching from swing to swing. For reveler, 
Read revelator: elevator going upper, downer, 
Results of a heart dialed three degrees warmer.
Remedial Ecclesiastes: a time for X, and a-whole-nother 
Reciprocal time for X’s refrain, a dinner 
Reservation for six — make that five — and an altogether
Regrettable time for the long and short divisions of disaster. 
Remainder: only a matter of time. No more time to matter.    iii. scherzo: presto chango  
“Remember, the world’s stage was not set for your metaphor, Christopher
Rex, tragicomic motherfucker: 
Recognize, why don’t you, your relish for the realish, for hinter-gatherer
Relationships between the dank diamond mine of  your inner 
Resources and the Real World (remember that?), our fixer-upper
Residence imperiled enough without your cheesier 
Regrets stinking up the joint — shoulda, coulda, woulda, Gouda. Character
Reassessment sure is fun, but don’t run down the theater. 
Regards, Responsive Reader / Longtime Listener / Other: _______ ”  
(Re: that critique, one childhood scene I’ll offer:
Relatives teasingly wondered why my “gatekeeper,”
Regulator of mind and mouth, would wander
Regularly away from his post. Still no answer.)    iv. finale: re-fugue  
Remember with me (it’s not all mine to remember),
Remind me, under this never-better weather, whether, if ever,
“Real time” and its dead-ahead march to an unlucky number
Really feel right as a royal flush, since time seems so much fairer
Rewound — recoiling counterclockwise, the seasons’ order
Restoring, entropy decreasing, days uncreasing — now faster,
Regress infinitely, till the Spaide family tree, our off-kilter Calder,
Recollects its fallen leaves — relief, pains, laughter,
Reverse it, past, even, it’s not — trust I tamper
Respectfully, gatekeeper, but why not even further, Reductio ad absurdum, back to the very scene I enter
Rehearsal, ninety-nine degrees, summer-hot, set to simmer,
Ready or not, on the twenty-first day of December?


^^EOP^^




And this my hand, against my self uprear.
— William Shakespeare



I took the crooked, arcade-overshadowed road
off the main square built by de Chirico
and chanced upon a watch repairer’s shop
which might have been painted by Bhupen Khakhar
for whose summer show the London weeklies
have just prepared such a frosty welcome.
Wait. Is this ekphrastic or oneiric?
The site Bologna or Bombay?
Are the hanging watches, so sure of their gender,
Bulgari or Janata? Too early to tell.
But there he sat at his workbench working at 
what looked like tiny jeweled bits of time laid out
under his eye loupe in magnolia light.
These fragments he seemed to be reassembling
into a perfect circle, or a sphere seen from above — 
it was like a miracle obligingly performed
in slow motion, or the flight of an arrow broken down
into ever smaller fractions of advancement.
He took his time, and my time, to acknowledge me — 
clearly he didn’t crave an audience,
as though the slow work that so ravished him
required if not secrecy at least discretion. 
Could he mend, I wondered, the cracked glass
on my watch before I had to leave tomorrow?
His black eyes rested on the old Omega
as though bemused such a watch should belong
to someone so importunate, then he cleared the air
with a lenient, experienced smile. Certo. But it will have a different bombatura
not quite as fine as this one was.
Though the word was unfamiliar, it conjured up at once
light skating the rim of a sheer bevel. Va bene. So long, I thought, as I can tell 
the time, and don’t have to squint through cracks
as I had since fending off a drunken punch
which I’d provoked myself enough to throw.
I would have paid extra to watch him clean the face
with the wad of turquoise putty he had to hand,
paid double to have Devanagari numerals
replace the Roman, but he wanted me out. A domani allora. Then as I left
he said it needed una revisione completa
before it got too late. A watch like this deserves
 — he changed the tense — deserved a lot more care.


^^EOP^^

She pronounces Chama the name of the milky green river
with a richness in the ch I cannot muster, puts a hard d
on the end of her ands. anD. anD. anD. Like the river
she is asking to be endless anD shifting. To stream.
I’d scouted the knoll of oaks for rattlers, being beyond the bounds
of Coverage having no means to learn their habits.
So I lay down with her on the ground. Their ground. AnD
I willed to forget the cares of my later-in-life job search. Job.
Which is also Job, a man in the Bible. Which is a book.
The oaks of the knoll were leaning into the Chama like girls
washing their hair in basins. I thought of EB shampooing Lota,
of Frost’s birches, of Plath’s Wych elms which I’d like to have
googled. Did snakes favor oak knolls? Did Georgia O’Keeffe worry
about health insurance costs in Abiquiú? AnD beside me my love
streaming, her poodles distantly nosing the chamisa. Standards.
I thought I had them. Put art at the front of the queue
wych is different from quiú. AnD now this. Biblical
the proportions of this breaking-back-into-a-country-I’d-
locked-myself-out-of phase. Was it scenic? I liked
the pachysandra, branches of oak taking all that space
from the sky. But then everybody disappeared to their offices.
Three times I wrote work work work when woke
was what I wanted to write.
Miniature is the acorn
I fingered in the soft flour-sack pocket of my jeans.
Acorn smaller than East Coast or indeed Irish Oak varieties
wych she handed me anD how hungrily I pocketed its little body.


^^EOP^^




In memory of John Ashbery (1927–2017)



A girl moaning: I don’t
understand
“Wave.”

^^EOP^^

The magnolia before it blooms stands 
bare as a statue from antiquity or 
a shaved puss, it flowers first 
then greens. A pissed off dyke 
climbs into the branches 
to be held by an ancient 
indifference and both 
were me. Yet it’s possible I am 
a short bald man. That I am neither 
a big-bosomed wide-hipped pretty 
nor a short bald man. An antelope, an elk, a deer 
on this rug, a twiggy tree. 
The genderless squat figure, 
solo, blurry, hands on hips, that repeats. 
A plush life of winter and 
summer colors of flowers alongside 
tight checkered bands 
edging the broad green center 
where we look for each other, 
a woods, a pasture, a park, a yard, a median of grass 
set in a concrete mold situated 
within a pay lot. How it feels to stand 
outside a house at night whose lights are on. 
Whose lights are on.


^^EOP^^

Do not allow me to sink, I said
To a top floating ribbon of kelp.
As I was lifted on each wave
And made to slide into the vale
I wanted not to drown. I wanted
To make it all right with my dear,
To tell my cat I’ll be away,
To have them all destroyed, the poems
Which were not objects enough on their own
Even entertainment value. I wanted
Through my saltwater breath to leave
A bubble or two in its abstract sphere
On the surface of their delicious minds.  • 
Outside the window of the world
The midges dance above a bush
Making a complex music holding
A language for which there is no key.
That they are dancing there helps us
To communicate even in the negative.  • 
Time’s not funny enough to dash
My hopes. I go in wide open
To deal with its little team of tenses
To try to win myself a stopped
Place for an instant while I think.  • 
I have left my place to come to speak
To you. Now from this other place
Inhabited by the very beast
I brace myself to speak with good
Tone that will carry. I love you.
How does that sound? I was only testing.  • 
Who murmurs me their secret name?
Is it you? If you could do that
You certainly would be better than me.
Who I am, the name I hunt
After has so far escaped me.
The grammarsow or the waving rook
Surely must think of me as somebody.  • 
Ben Narnain was a love of mine,
Going up beside the Soordook Burn
And bracken and bog-myrtle. The water
Ouzel dipped at the pools. The twite
The mountain linnet caught the eye.
From the top I saw the sword of the long
Loch lying in its scabbard of hills.  • 
Ideosyncracies of the way
We speak eventually become
Currency and only by Art
Skip the expanded chest of rhetoric
To speak nearly from one to another.  • 
Younger my brash prison of joy
Seemed to do me well enough.
Now made modern with its new
Benefits of experience
I can hardly catch a glimpse
Of that young sun and tree-top.
My cell’s window has risen too high.  • 
Is who’s listening who I guess
It is? My dear it is so long
Since I held your heart near.
I wanted just to speak but now
Hearing your little ear I know
So well near me I am put off.
Anyhow I was only going to try
To assail some aspect of Reality.  • 
The blemish is this, I think, I could
I would have if I had known
I really could but me knowing
It maybe too well was not sure
What it was I could and the words
Were all against me and would not help.  • 
Listening through the microscopes of power
I heard a rebec under an olive
Sing to me that certainly
My wife would leave me and go down
To live on the prose plains again.  • 
This is a book. It is blue.
Those are pages. They are black and white.
That is a famous man. The worms
Do not know his name or color.  • 
I am here very much at four
A.M. Am I in a deeper night
Than you whose eyeballs observe terrible
Encounters under your dream’s hill?
I am only still up out of sleep
Trying to burnish an implement
With my mind’s elbow grease to pack
In English and send off to you
For you to put on the mantlepiece.


^^EOP^^

God-My-Father gave me three words: O-My-Love.
O-My-God.
Holy-Holy-Holy.

^^EOP^^

Sheila, we speak here on the fly
Leaf of a book which was myself
     A good few graves ago.
Now I am maintained by other
Words for better or for worse
     To whisper my hello. 
The seasons turn. Threshold on thresh
Hold forms continually and falls
     Under grief’s lonely hammer.
What did you say? I thought between
These fly leaf words I heard you speak
     Out of your Second Summer. 
The summer chimes and turns its blue
Dragon-flying eyes to see
     We two are not afraid.
Hello, Sheila, I can hear
Your breath on the other side of the word
     And see you turn your head.


^^EOP^^




If we meet each other in Hell it’s not Hell.
— Geoffrey Hill



i 
How is it I can never find
Or call to mind
One image of Christ walking slowly in the rain,
In a steady, gentle rain,
The kind that shapes an afterimage
Just for a moment of the man
Like a cloak of shadow following
Or like a blank page
After it’s been turned?
The dead are concealed from us
But not distorted by the rain.
They remember our having remembered.
A woman curls up on the sofa.
Years before the fact she sleeps
Her death and drapes it
Even now, exactly as she must. 
Just after dawn,
In the wren’s eye
There are no blossoms left in the trees,
And yet the sunlight blazons white
New flowers onto every leaf.
The wren’s eye gorges itself,
Bursting the new life.
The memory of a tree is the tree.
Christ could fly.
Impale upon him certain words
Good as Greek
For the impulse of the earth is to seek
A language of flowers
That do not die, turning
A hair’s breadth toward us
Even now, exactly as they must. 
If it was justice I saw
Fall from the sun
Onto boys ruining the one
Flower shared between them,
So be it.
The woman on the sofa wears a little wing
In her sleep. When she awakes,
Its twin will be the wren in the dream
Nearly there, nearly all the way
There into the human day.
Rain falls out of brilliant sunshine.
For a moment, her window
Fills with catastrophe, boys
Torn apart and scattered, white petals
Blackening the glass,
Exacting recent justice. 
So strange that the recent past,
As chaste
As antiquity, as the orangery
Of a blind eye, should at once appear
Preposterous
Yet achingly tender.
Modern times are too cautious.
The boyish, florid love of catastrophe
Has thrust a fist into the dawn,
And the scent of that fist,
Whose citron betters daylight,
Is wasted on modern times.
Not long ago, you and I
Nearly captured a wren.
Christ lifted His face then,
And rain fell all day until evening.   ii 
In a corner of my garden, there is a spider’s web
Entirely armored in rose petals broken off by rain.
The spider will learn to eat roses, or he will starve to death.
This is political economy for modern times.
The planet dies. The planet starves its cruel interiors
First, with a blazon of colors and soft poetry. Next,
It apportions one small bird to every tree and sets fire
To the trees. The rest is the cold business of the oceans
Who have never forgiven us for breathing air.
Homer was tempted. Loose thighs of oblivion
Welcomed humanity away from itself and from life,
And only one of the Bronze-Age host refused that welcome.
He was the father of starvation, entirely armored
In the disguise of a real man, destroyer of oceans. 
We have made ugly war upon distinctions.
Canon bleeds a wedding into the gigue, and “when
I try to imagine a faultless love or” the seedtime
Of my deepest convictions — that the soul is immortal,
That a woman couched upon a fragile little wing
Created the creator of the universe — thought,
Or rather the entire machinery of truth and terror
Usurps a newborn king, i.e. imagination.
Phaedrus, step down. There is a little wing wearing sunshine
Like wind in the white hair of the bee you never imagined.
An infinitesimal distance goes on forever.
At the moment of death, the light hand of Attic stele
Softly lights upon the shoulder of eternity,
And thought yields to flesh and flesh yields to imagination, 
Sexing this or that unimaginable creation
With new hair. It makes a difference. We are bound to one another
And to God by harrowing, albeit helpless distinctions,
Impossible to bridge, imperative to love well.
We are free, but briefly. The pattern of a leaf branches
Out from human hearts, and the blood spills
Into the pattern a stone makes crashing into windshields.
God follows. The wrist and wing of the beloved follow
Close behind, and not even Hell prevails against
This new extinction. Slow time is the beginning
Of no time at all. The light hand of Attic stele
Wrests me from the sleep I’d imagined life to be —
The walking stone, the irreparable Gethsemane —
And I am awake, wearing a green flesh newly fashioned 
From my heart.   coda 
Should the bird outlast the blossom in the tree?
Keep faith, but keep it silently,
Starveling. 
I keenly remember there were two of us,
And a stand of poplars like a kiss
Quavering 
Upon the shade of the earth where no earth was
Ready to bear the weight of us
Relinquishing 
Soul for substance, pistil of white campion
For color, continuance and one
Unbelieving 
Substance of perfect memory.
There were no trees.
The sun was shining.


^^EOP^^

Sit on the park bench and chew this mint leaf.
Right now, way above your head, two men 
floating in a rocket ship are ignoring their
delicate experiments, their buttons flashing 
red. Watching you chew your mint, the men
forget about their gritty toothpaste, about 
their fingers, numb from lack of gravity.
They see you and, for the first time since 
liftoff, think home. When they were boys
they were gentle. And smart. One could 
tie string around a fly without cinching it
in half. One wrote tales of sailors who 
drowned after mistaking the backs of
whales for islands. Does it matter which 
man is which? They just quit their mission
for you. They’re on their way down. You’ll 
take both men — a winter husband and
a summer husband. Does it matter which 
is — don’t slump like that. Get up, we have
so much work to do before —                          wait               you’re going 
the wrong     way               small whelp of a woman!         this is not 
              how we     behave                       where are you going 
                                                                                              this world is already       willing 
to give you anything                  do you want to know Latin 
                                                                                                         okay             now everyone 
here knows Latin            want inflatable     deer               deer !               i promise the winter / 
summer children will barely hurt                   dear        i’m hurt   that you would ever think 
                                         i don’t glisten to you         i’m always glistening 
   tame your voice       and               turn around 
the men are coming                    they’ve traded everything for you               the gemmy   starlight 
              the click                          click                                  click 
                                                                                                              of the universe   expanding  
                                                                                                  stop  
                   aren’t you known              aren’t you
                                                                              known here 
how can you be certain that anywhere else will provide 
                                                                                    more pears than you could ever eat 
                           remember the sweet rot of it all 
come back             you forgot your sweater 
                                        what if there’s nothing there when you — 
                                                                         you don’t have your 
                                                                                                                 sweater  
                                                                                                                                 what if it’s cold


^^EOP^^




^^EOP^^

When one thing is becoming another, when writing is morphing, when the writing of an hour becomes the desire to write at all hours and into the night, fueled on caffeine or wine and desiring instruments of writing; typewriters, even a nib and ink well, and considering all the ways of stretching a space, digital or hard copy; hard copy, an ugly expression for printed matter, and for that matter, printed matter is efficient but lacks beauty. Page, a soft and elongated word; page, an extension at the end of my fingers; page, a screen that holds dreams and desires; the page of legal document that bind. The page is a promise. I read all sides, turning the page counterclockwise and turning the page over for what I may have missed.
Desire is a stick for scratching words into the dirt and for chiseling stone until the words become solid. The pen is a body, an anatomy, not an earthworm with indecipherable ends; the pen has a head and tail, and inky guts. And the brain of the pen belongs to the maker of marks.
later hours/another hour/late hours/early hours/happy hour/visiting hours.

All the elements of the dying hour surround my laptop, in the dying blades of cut grass and in the dying battery. Finches continue their making of a nest of twigs and grasses, but I know the nest is early paper, the raw ingredients and pulp. I know the world is a page turner, a paper globe, and I know that the birds are the great writers of the sky.


^^EOP^^

Drawn by ceremonial obligation
up from sleep I woke and stepped 
into the borrowed black robes
all ghost bureaucrats trained 
to redirect dreaming pretend 
we do not like to wear. I drove 
my black car to the stadium 
to sit on stage and be watched 
watching young expectant spirits 
one by one with dread certainty 
pass before me, clouded 
in their names. Then listened 
to no one in their speeches say 
you’re welcome for allowing 
us not to tell you it’s already 
too late to learn anything 
or defend whatever accidental 
instrument in us causes 
all these useless thoughts. 
Like if you walked for hours 
through the vast black avenues 
of those server farms all of us 
with our endless attention built,
you could almost feel the same 
peaceful disinterest as when 
your parents talking and smoking 
raised their heads for a moment 
to smile and tell you go back 
upstairs and read the book 
you love about myths that explain 
weather and death. Now it is 
almost June and they are finally 
the children they always were. 
So more precise than anyone 
has ever had to be, go forget
everything we told you
so you can fix what we kept
destroying by calling the future.
 


^^EOP^^

I was humbled when my boss mocked me 
for calling from vacation 
I’m broke again 
until Friday 
from my bed 
I see the lights, I see 
the party lights 
it’s torture 
a post-Fordist allegory? 
I appropriated a corporate apology 
and saved it 
in case something happened 
but my end date came 
and my vacation days paid out 
I bought pills 
from the intern I’d hired 
on my way out 
by the seaport 
I texted you 
we made plans to drink 
I like your poochie print workout clothes 
the credit card you keep for emergencies 
I bought a book 
from Strand Annex 
though the poetics 
weren’t to my taste 
later the author died 
I was nervous 
in those days 
always in need 
my dark heart, my secret 
poetry, my drug-filler 
cut into my life and love 
that it and I may last


^^EOP^^

Some people like to relax
and kick back with their friends
just talking and having a drink
 
which is obviously
highly pleasurable.
 
Some people like to be entertained
by music or a movie;
some people like to make some jokes
with people they like,
maybe at a bar
or at someone’s house.
 
Some people like to lay around
with another person,
just touching,
 
or to prepare food,
alone or with others
while listening to music
that they feel a particular
affinity for.
 
But sometimes people like to thrust themselves
into the howling wind and snow,
arms tied behind their backs.
 
I prefer to open my mouth wide open knowing what will happen
if I’m just holding my mouth open,
 
ready to respond or yell or whatever seems appropriate.
 
You know, I keep my mouth at the ready to make a lot of noise.
 
And sometimes it becomes filled
with hard packed snow or with sand,
 
sand being more of a problem,
since, you know,
it won’t melt.
 


^^EOP^^

if you like let the body feel
all its own evolution
inside, opening flagella
& feathers & fingers
door by door, a ragged
 
neuron dangling like
a participle to
hear a bare sound
 
on the path, find
a red-eye-hole rabbit, fat
of the bulbous stalk pecked out
to the core so you can
 
bore back to the salamander you
once were straggling under the skin
grope toward the protozoa
snagging on the rise toward placental knowing
 
who developed eyes for you agape in open waters
 
the worm that made a kidney-like chamber burrows in
directing your heart leftward in nodal cascade, slow at your
hagfish spine who
 
will bury your bones
investigate a redwood rain or tap
the garnet of your heartwood, bark, put
your flat needles on dry ice to inquire
after your tree family, father or mother in the fairy-ring
next to you, find you
are most closely related to grass
your hexaploid breathing pores gently closing at night, when
did you begin your coexistence with flowering
plants from which arose the bee before the
African honey badger but after the dark
protoplanetary disk of dust grains
surrounding the sun become
the earth you
had no nouns, did you
 


^^EOP^^

We walked at the edge of the sea, the dog,
still young then, running ahead of us.
 
Few people.  Gulls.  A flock of pelicans
circled beyond the swells, then closed
their wings and dropped head-long
into the dazzle of light and sea.  You clapped
your hands; the day grew brilliant.
 
Later we sat at a small table
with wine and food that tasted of the sea.
 
A perfect day, we said to one another,
so that even when the day ended
and the lights of houses among the hills
came on like a scattering of embers,
we watched it leave without regret.
 
That night, easing myself toward sleep,
I thought how blindly we stumble ahead
with such hope, a light flares briefly—Ah, Happiness!
then we turn and go on our way again.
 
But happiness, too, goes on its way,
and years from where we were, I lie awake
in the dark and suddenly it returns—
that day by the sea, that happiness,
 
though it is not the same happiness,
not the same darkness.


^^EOP^^

The fish are drifting calmly in their tank
between the green reeds, lit by a white glow
that passes for the sun. Blindly, the blank
glass that holds them in displays their slow
progress from end to end, familiar rocks
set into the gravel, murmuring rows
of filters, a universe the flying fox
and glass cats, Congo tetras, bristle-nose
pleocostemus all take for granted. Yet
the platys, gold and red, persist in leaping
occasionally, as if they can't quite let
alone a possibility—of wings,
maybe, once they reach the air? They die
on the rug. We find them there, eyes open in surprise.
 


^^EOP^^

After my father died, my mother
and my sisters picked the shirt, the tie;
he had just the one suit.
I left them to it, I didn't
want to choose, I loved him
all those years. They took a shirt
from the closet, I don't remember
which one, I'm sure he had worn it
to church and hung it up again.
They held a tie against the cloth
of the shirt. They decided, finally.
It's like that. Things come down
to the pale blue or the white,
or some other. Someone buttoned it
over him, those buttons he had unbuttoned.
 


^^EOP^^

at the third floor window of the tenement,
the street looks shiny.
It has been washed and rinsed by rain.
Beyond the silver streaks of the streetcar tracks
a single streetlight stands
in a pool of wet light. It is night.
St. Louis. Nineteen forty-seven.
I have just come home from the orphanage
to stay. 
Years later, I will be another person.
I will almost not remember this summerónot
at all. But for nowówith the streetlight
reflecting an aura on the wet sidewalk,
with dark behind me in the dirty
two rooms we call home, 
for now, I see it all. 
Tomorrow I will begin to try to forget.
But in this moment everything is clear:
who I am, where I am, and the clean place
that I have left behind.
As clear as the streetlight: how distinct
its limits in the vast dark and the rain.


^^EOP^^

We used to play, long before we bought real houses.
A roll of the dice could send a girl to jail.
The money was pink, blue, gold, as well as green,
and we could own a whole railroad
or speculate in hotels where others dreaded staying:
the cost was extortionary.
 
At last one person would own everything,
every teaspoon in the dining car, every spike
driven into the planks by immigrants,
every crooked mayor.
But then, with only the clothes on our backs,
we ran outside, laughing.
 


^^EOP^^

Outside in the creek that feeds the lake
and never freezes, an otter slaps the water
with his paw to feel the current's pulse— Slip in, lie back. Slip in, lie back. He shuts
his eyes and obeys, knowing the layers
of hair and underfur will warm him while
he floats on a faith we wish could carry us.
 
The sound of his splashing fades, but not
his joy in being pushed, light as driftwood,
back to the mouth of the den I have seen
carved out beneath the roots of a fallen fir
now packed with snow and lined with leaves
that promise his sleep will be deep.
 
Because no dreams wait softly for me,
I open the woodstove and strike a match,
hold the bloom of the flame to kindling
that catches quick as my wish: To be that
slick body sliding into the lake that holds
the moon, bright portal to glide through
without so much as a shiver, no doubt
about where I'm going, how to get there.


^^EOP^^

Cherub-bee-dee how does a man
who doesn’t read English well know that cherub-bee-dum
those aren’t really words-bee-dee.
But birds. 
Cherub-bee-dum, he stumbles, reading to me
by the sliding glass door cherub-bee-dee, through which I watch
my brother play in the dum-dum-yard. 
Cherub-bee-dee, cherub-bee-dum, like how my father says Fine then! Leave! My mother shouts, Stupid! Dumb!
We live in a small bee-dee-nest too, one hallway to bee-dum-slam doors. 
Birds? What are birds?
Thanks to my father, reading with me, I have more feathers. 
T-H-E. First word he ever taught me to pluck    ...     It is a word used all the time. Cherub-cherub-bee-dum!  The mail. The mailbox. The school bus. The the. 
He asks me to read the mail. Not birds, mail.
If you don’t read this, you will turn into birds.
And I read it to him the best I can.
The end. A feather. Two feathers. The. The end. 
Mother, mother. Repeat after me.
Cherub-bee-dee, cherub-bee-dum!
We read together before bedtime.


^^EOP^^

How many books now have the word Last
In their title? Or worry, or some dangling variation
Of mistake? Or empire burning, or The fools have fucked it up? 
Who the hell listens? They roar and
Wriggle, up and down the page,
They screen-print what’s coming next — pinups
Of blocked streets and stone faces. 
How many books sling the word doom,
Or mimic spotlights or air raid sirens,
Regurgitate the Romans, the Kick Down the
Door Guys, our genius with the fiery furnace? 
The quivers, the shakes, the iambic dread,
The anger, the insomnia, the slow tic
Of the wait, the wail, the transcribed too late,
In the manner of those who have gone before us,
Geiger counters, clacking the rising damp.


^^EOP^^

Near the Naked Juices I passed
A man my fingers walking
Across his back he turned and held up
A box said what
Might this be I said oh
You’re tactile too what’s your name
He said William Amos Miller I said
I thought you were born in 1872 he said so
You know who I am yes you’re the man
Who journeyed to the center of Earth
In your mind he smiled on my arm said do
You know that the Earth also journeyed
To the center of my mind I said
I never thought of that he asked
Again about the box I shook it sniffed
Said Mike and Ike is it fruit
He inquired not exactly well
I think I shall have an apple wait
You haven’t paid oh
My money nowadays is no money he pushed
Outside we walked across the ice
To the intersection he made to go across
Wait you can’t go across we have to wait
For help oh help he said crouching
Until our hands touched the cold ground
He said I said we said we see
With our hands I jumped up and said you’re the man


^^EOP^^

I listen and listen but how do I know     Peace Peace in the plural says please or pleads
I hear the whole song divide the state as one     appeals past the last centuries’ pealing bells 
wren under eaves ruins another wren’s heaven     dying sympathies appear as a pear or peas
with her territory her tune I want a nest     clinging to the twine Please Please in the plural
not a flag a mead hall not a circumstance     puts pain’s poor plea deeper in the apparent 
a stable not a stability where animals dream     pressure the daylily plant the possible prayer
and dreaming among them I tell the stranger     pulling apart the sepal petals by their dusty crease
in my mind I can’t I don’t know how to sing


^^EOP^^

These water birds flew out from the minds
Of fishermen and became fishing peons
Wealthy sailors watched as darters emerged again
To spread drenched wings in the sun
And marked them as emblems for spinnakers 
Painters and ornithologists studied darters
Until they became black-feathered arrows
That pierced the souls of their creators
These birds rode surf of bitter laughter
And wiped out on a zoo’s concrete Key Largo 
To imitate darters lovers ripped off their clothes
And plunged into the swiftness of estuaries
Down the water column they entered brackish hell
Their hair transformed to iridescent plumage
Ruffled by memories of earth’s human atmosphere 
We can experience the lives of these feathered beings
By flexing our particular despairs each morning
At evening we take in the news as best we can
On late nights we gaze at dead bodies of water
And almost perceive those wet wings working the tide


^^EOP^^

Last time I had stamina and calluses and a bag of chalk.
It hung from my lumbar like a bunny tail.
Last time I was lighter and the ether better-emptied.
Now blood is so close to my surface I slip off the walls. 
Tonight is the night of a massacre I do not look at.
Although I have been to that city of bricks and black blooms.
Therein I kissed a grave a million others kissed.
A woman with a cigarette asked me for fire there and I provided it.
I had been asked for light before but never fire. 
Tonight I climb three hundred stairs toward the light of my device.
Maybe we’ll be wartime people leading wartime lives.
Skirmishes have sprung from the heads of lesser gods. 
This is the light no one reads by we just stare into it.
We wait for the glyphs that mean it is safe.


^^EOP^^

Cloud cover like a badly made bed, ruched in sections, rushed.
Whatevered for reasons of a lifetime of do-overs. Why bother
trying to change? The gathered duvet sometimes mimics you,
makes double. Dopples a decoy. An escape plan. The safety
of numbers and cover. When the wing dips, a hole in the sky
revealed. Until then, a man in the aisle seat. Calculations
to see if it’s possible to slide through the fisheye window
if he touches your thigh again, your face. We like our planes
fashioned after ships. The illusion one could jump or be forced
off and possibly survive between the distance and everything
that wants to live how it’s always lived. Without compromise.
When does knowing a person begin? Was it when he said
you look like his ex-wife? Hair naturally red, not like yours.
Fake. He can tell, but it’s OK. What your children together
would look like. That if you had been born in Fayetteville,
he would’ve liked to have known you. Feels he does. Not
like the absent husband his mind weds you to. The one who
abandoned you to his company like a firing squad to its post
waiting for a reason to prove worth. The moment he asked
for vodka on the 53-minute flight from Charlotte to Wilmington
to bridge the gap between pre- and post-flight beers. Or how he lifted
his shirt to show you where his lungs had been punctured and once
collapsed, he said he’d briefly died and now is, briefly, alive.


^^EOP^^

We smuggle crates of Beaujolais
through the squeaky pantry door.
We steal cases of cigarettes,
borrow the bulletproof
Mercedes to race through
the capital’s empty streets.
It’s wonderful, the peace.
No local can afford a car,
except the police.
The police stand beside their cars and wave.
The police lack petrol for their cars.
There’s a beer bottle shortage in the nation.
There are no bars. 
Drunk driving is a hobby.
Driving while high is an art.
No one in the bad girls’ group is not
in the back of the Mercedes,
Vijay on Ashanti drum
all the way to the beach. 
Money is worthless.
Cigarettes are money.
We are thirteen.
We rent a hut roofed with palm fronds.
We lie out on the sand with our
bottles of French wine
and our Hong Kong blondes
and look up at the Atlantic
Slave Coast midnight sky: shine all my diamonds shine  ’cause they really diamonds.


^^EOP^^

I’m not sure whether it happened in Manitoba or Alberta: go home, they complained, go back, wherever pakis or niggers come from. Was  I seven years old? Was I five? The day was cloudy; there was wind, and a sidewalk underfoot — a path of cement on which we kids marched. In whose place was I a guest, if home wasn’t this flat territory we were on? The hard sidewalk under my shoes, their sense of here.  I walked home alone — I say “home” — I went where my parents paid rent, right? Our house wasn’t ours? Overhead, the sky spread out; the sky’s country was itself. We had moved from Ontario, but my gut got that they didn’t mean there. Immigrants, all of us, we’d chorused in assembly — the more immigrants, the kindlier the country, the folksier the mosaic. First the English and the French, then Western Europeans and the Ukrainians, I guessed, then Chinese and Indians, then the Guyanese and other such Commonwealth stragglers? Eventually we’d bring into “us,” Canadians, a panoply of the human race — so my sweet young self, in Trudeau’s aftermania, believed. Those children’s hate had a kind of guilelessness, however, that conveyed my abjection straight from their Canadian parents’ hearts. I was foreign to clear distinctions between master and savage — to fantasies of homesteaders who, by subjecting trees to their saws, had “mixed their labor” with “unowned” lands. Homesteaders, they called themselves, by principle: “home” was theirs, because they were first to fence it. As if we still were at war with whatever made entreaty against their fencing, my existence existing too near threatened. My very being entreated something before I ever opened my mouth. Get lost! Here kingly kids drink from institution’s cup. Something older than English yea well knows what with his guts he must disagree. Something français dit bon, histoire-là, je parle  au-dessus du poète: domination, Dominion, domicile, home. I protested: one of my parents is here’s occupying family! Don’t blacken  me! Please see my colonists’ blood, inside! They practiced the  policing of reserve on the surface of my brown skin. They practiced homing in on enemy. The clouds above, the sky above, witnessed. The land underfoot said, here was here first. We thought about  beginnings.


^^EOP^^

  
The city where I grew up
was not a western city,
nor an eastern city.
It lay north of Bohemia, south
of Greenland, below sandstone Switzerland
in a river valley, green with fields.
It was the dump in the middle, the rump
of an exquisite gesture in stone — 
a suite in Hotel “Old Europe.” 
Stuck under layers of wallpaper,
newspapers from a world gone by:
reports of Zeppelin flights,
League of Nations conferences,
“Miscellaneous,” alongside adverts
for brassieres and ironing boards.
But the view to the river
was blocked with gray barracks.
And the southern wing,
and the northern wing,
broken like the Baroque Palace,
furnishings given for junk.
All of it somehow stranded:
the steamers and churches, the domes.
And not much life in the bar. 
But then I found it one day
down on the banks, under rusty nails,
heaps of nuts and bolts
from machines long since dismantled,
factories expropriated, torn-down,
I found it amongst the bones,
unearthed by scavenging dogs,
ribs and vertebrae, splinters
of human and beast, so it seemed — 
the key to the city.
And found a kind of peace.
And knew where I was,
and where I came from —  
until I saw the photographs,
not the ones at home in the album,
but for sale on the street market stall.
Archive pictures, postcards
of street scenes, city views
from between the wars, moments
from a life gone by,
some still with the stamp
“original print, by hand.” 
Past the housefronts, all still intact,
over the bridges, the broad terraces,
along the Königsufer, the banks
of the Elbe, people walking, all dead now,
but the youngest in their prams.
Mothers in dark coats and hats
were chained for all time
to this or that man with a briefcase.
On a traffic island, a boy
in lederhosen who would never age,
staring from the poster
for “Riquet Cocoa Chocolate.”
“Alsberg Ladies Wear, Wilsdruffer Straße:
the new bathing costume from Alsberg.”
And the beauty in silk stockings,
getting out of the tram, no. 11,
picked out by chance, and her too,
fixed in that spot forever.
All of them passersby in time — 
the girl at the flower stall on Altmarkt,
the one by the striped awnings
on Prager Straße. At the station
the clock forever at half past ten. 
A morning that lasts for eternity — 
mostly in spring, in summer,
in a city that was not eastern,
nor western. Scarcely a photo
that ever showed it in deep snow.
The sign for Dresdner Neueste Nachrichten
stood by the entrance to the subway.
Soon an r was missing, an n, then an a.
Power cuts, petrol grew scarce,
people took to bikes again after Stalingrad.
Not long now and almost all of it
will be erased, a phantasmagoria
like the desert palace of Kubla Khan.
And your gaze leaped back and forth
looking for the place it all began.
 
  
Was it the high tide? The moment
that saw the sparkling twenties in.
People peering over the railings
at Brühl’s Terrace, dismayed
at the rising of the Elbe.
Like mourners at a wake
all clothed in black. An entire
people clothed in black, back then.
Though the worst was behind them:
four years of war in Europe, carnage.
All of them losers, people suddenly
with time on their hands, time to
gather in dark clumps. Only a girl
in a sailor suit, laughing and spitting
over the railing into the swollen,
mud-brown river, cold as the grave. 
Or maybe the storm in the thirties,
that wrecks the funfair booths
at the Vogelwiese fairground.
Visitors watch the chaos in despair.
Ghost train guests. Roll up and
test your strength

^^EOP^^

Beauty is my irreparable and today I became geometric.
A faux linear figure that distills a skip trace of First principles.
In a whiteout of Atlantic snow banging stars into the femoral
vein of Euclid while rows of lavender circuits, all porous,
surrounded me. I genuflected before the hospital parking 
of my father’s jaundice, for I am a good daughter of the colony.
The colony which begot the immortal heart of the markets.
Resource nursed all young bucks of the florets, a liquidity
I should service or else receive a lesser dessert. With my smudge
cleanse at the ready I find myself dispensing with the usual 
future haunt of stability; a survival signaling my relationship
to time, or I’m out of it, entirely. Chanting hell as hair veils
my face as if this is a Western. Come polygon and I circumvent
the disaster, do not disturb my circles. Holy I went, holy
all around my head, the holy I am went careening down 
the back stairs of this low-rise rental. Striated by the pinnacle
light of this city that has my blood pooled purple at the center
of its gravity. You can scan the ground from overhead for death
pits. I read this on the internet when I was dehydrated, lonely,
and afraid. Office plants all broad-leafed repositories 
for cognition’s patent heart. I’ve gone and been abominable.
A column extended from the top of my head into heaven.
At the edges of my system an Anishinabek or Indo-European
projection of words my nerves could translate into the crawl
space of animal magnetism. White pine verticals send us up 
as a stomach pumped by filial love. Oh, inconsequent curb
of my street I refuse to kneel, this day like any other, a cousin
charged with trafficking. Still waiting to be ordained, I make
mask of our features that are retreating. Plush pockets of rust
about another falsehood of water, a creek that pleats. I’ve gone 
and got a blister. That summer a black bear’s muzzle was coated
in shellac from the aerosol can she bit through on my mother’s
porch. A half-century after my grandmother’s mother said,
don’t ever shoot a black bear, they are my people. So I continue
to speak more than this mortuary sunrise where I am only just alive. 
Boozhoo, today is over.


^^EOP^^

I was hanging with grandparents in a kindergarten 
and the teacher drew an accordion wall across 
to keep the children in antigravity class together 
the grandparents separately graded balloon worksheets 
sunlight floated in, the grandparents thoughtful about addition, mulling vacation  Come here I said to the little one too little to be in class, soft as peaches  I want to tell you something and you repeat it back to me next time 
She toddled over, put her arms up to hug me, we hugged 
She had stars inside her soul, was visibly celestial beneath her coat  More human than human, got it? I cuddled her  Okay, she said, I’m more human than a human


^^EOP^^

They look at the photo and agree that’s dad in the class photo of Ip Man, Wing Chun master. 
I look at the face and cannot say it looks like him to me. 
My brother asked his forensics detective coworker to look at the face. 
Mom thinks it’s him too, he says proudly. 
My mother often watches game shows and says look it looks like (insert neighbor) and I look up to see some not-even-ballpark bone structure. 
What was my father’s face like when he left his country? 
What was his face like when, alone, he made the pork and peas, washed socks. 
This wretched neighborhood, when I say hi to white people on the street they don’t say hi back. Chinese either. 
Who has mastered this face, no sweeping lashes, just one naked thought after another. 
The young people I think I smile at in a dark crowd who walk away as if my face said, You’re standing in my way move along. 
I’d dress as Robert Smith or The Crow in high school and friends would say, But you look normal that way. 
I mention my Han melancholy and you murmur, No, Grandpa told Uncle DiDi we’re Mongolian, I thought you knew? 
You who had permission to deck any lump on the bus, who got asked later, Are you okay? 
I walk down the street feeling overly safe, I dgaf and want to magic you my extra. 
But my face fails me with a weak best, what friends know as “powered- down mode.”  What in the world is she thinking is what I sometimes ask myself, says a colleague about this face. 
What I partly see, what partly disappears in the mirror.


^^EOP^^




^^EOP^^




^^EOP^^




^^EOP^^

Do I have to dress up or can I wear jeans? Dear Joaquin,
casual Sunday is a plus! Can a woman be fully present in heels?
Remember the other day at the shops, we saw the T-shirt that
read “Blessed” across the front? I know 
you picked it up for me as a joke, but it made me pause. I think
I am blessed in the way I understand people to mean it: having
good fortune. But this is where faith messes with my clean concept,
because practicing Christians don’t believe blessings come 
out the clear blue sky. So here’s God again, all up in the Kool-Aid.
I’m dating myself, but I mean that He gets in the way of
spiritual minimalism. He is at once contained and uncontainable,
which, intellectually, is hard to understand. So being blessed 
must require that one acts in such a way that presses God to bestow
blessings, which isn’t the same thing as good fortune, but I want
to believe that people are saying, “You have such good fortune,
I hope for good fortune, too,” because it means that no one is 
preaching at me like, “You have good God-God,” “Father
God I hope He Gods for us, too,” “You got God?” Et cetera.


^^EOP^^

And there are
Two birds
In this poem
A loon
Hand-carved
From balsa
And a snakebird
On the tide
Of the river
The oily head
Of a water bird
Cuts surface
And glides
Along by
Tarred wooden
Racks
Ideograms
Oyster farms
Low on the tide
Lower than
The hand-carved
Loon it looks
Hardly buoyant
A bird
From two
Worlds it knows
The murk
On the bottom
And waves
Crinkled by sun
It swims
As well
As a black trevally
Sleek and fast
A challenge to
Handcrafted birds
To all things made up


^^EOP^^

The new root of the fern is the part you eat in famine.
Harsh words are spoken, but they’re not the ones that make you turn.
Where the muscle’s smooth. That’s where it doesn’t fray.
The hard part is what comes easy. The hard part isn’t hard. 
It only seems. It only seems. It only seems that way.
The snail inside the shell is tough. It holds the tooth, not tongue.
The fingernail. The hair. What the old ropes come from.
What’s left, dug up, and laid aside. Not the nick that never healed. 
There are lice that live inside the quill of every feather of every bird.
You spoil it with a fingerprint. Artichokes have hearts.
The alligator pear has an endosperm that, when squeezed, weeps only oil.
You shed your skin as you grow cold. The hard part isn’t hard.


^^EOP^^

I swallowed the sweet thing in a dream. I woke up heavy.
I said, what’s the matter with you.
I said, stop seeing what’s the matter with me.
I ran to/from only moving one frantic eye.
Something snitched. Then back to the argument.
It is more acceptable to steal from the ether.
When you said, we take matters into our own hands.
I didn’t start the day with a ritual. Again. Twenty days and counting!
I said, I was supposed to address my wrongs to you.
The sweetgrass still in its plastic. Keep it there for its poetry?
Then the driftwood resting on my father’s ashes.
Well, you said, ecstasy from a fluted throat.
Ha. As if there were presence enough in me to notice, before this.
I said, I’m less angry now that you don’t exist.
Then the aha moment announced.
Whistling nothing like wind through fistulae. That happens here.
Left to my own devices, I said.
As if language were a refuge. As though the sound of walls.


^^EOP^^




^^EOP^^

They broke up and she, either fed up or drunk or undone,
          ached to get back inside. Officials surmise 
she climbed a ladder to his roof, removed           the chimney cap and entered feet first. Long story short, 
she died there. Stuck. Like a tragic Santa. Struggling           for days, the news explains. It was a smell that led 
to the discovery of her body. One neighbor           speaks directly into the microphone, asks how a person 
could disregard so much: the damper, the flue,           the smoke shelf. He can’t imagine what it was she faced. 
The empty garage. The locked back door. And is that           a light on in the den? They show us the grass 
where they found her purse. And it’s not impossible to picture           her standing on the patio — abandoned — the mind 
turning obscene, all hopes pinned on refastening the snap.           Then spotting the bricks rising above the roof 
and at first believing and then knowing, sun flashing its           god-blinding light behind it, that the chimney was the way.


^^EOP^^

A ▶                                                                                                          ◀ B    You — this mucky fire slathered in my mind’s frame  — are as committed to me as artists are to art. At times, your voice is constant — “kill yourself, kill yourself, kill yourself” — fists punching clay with the aim to make me nothing more than punched clay. Other times, you’re a cinema in my skull, screening me mangled: one leg   auger-mauled, hand vice-crushed, eye pencil-blinded to life  — “end it,” you say, in the scene you loop: this cinema’s walls with a bullet burst. At parties, you shape a sinister play from others’ glances: “hate him,” “idiot,” “fool.” When I bloom,
 a sun, all alight and rising, you flatten my lift into lines on a page like Jaffee’s in the back of MAD; you fold it over and now the rise is the wound from a wing cleaved    and then gilded, the bloom’s a thousand-foot fall, the sun a drain. Yet with each step the unrelenting chorus of you circles round me, another chorus surfaces to surround you: the   line of sheltering trees artists grow, loamy and ablaze, against   your gale, the melodies of friends whose works asphyxiate your symphony, the lessons students teach about tipping your plinths, the magic of  bringing nib to page and penning life with urgency and patience, word by word, with abandon
 and care. Even though I know it can never silence you, I love this inky trick because it fills the blank before you can, marks up your script, swallows you choking in a page-mutating fold, so your cruel barks, garbled, almost seem to say:  A ▶                                                                                                          ◀ B    
 
    Click here to fold back so A meets B    ×  frame 
your    life 
with
others' lines  
and you 
line your  life
with  love

^^EOP^^

The last train pulses across the pane
and fireflies spark beside the tracks.
Acne’s red wing flames my face:
I can’t take back 
this skin. In the other room,
a drugstore Timex synchronizes
with the faucet’s drip. If I squint,
the fireflies align their lives 
to map the summer’s migraine
of flowers that were weeds.
You say, but I think
they’re just trying to survive —

^^EOP^^

Lostness is the You Are Here, the red star
that the mall map linked to GPS.
As if you’d stared into your nowhere
like a sun and photoreceptors
compensated with a point. 
Lostness is an immaculately well-dressed
person or a room laid out like charcuterie.
It’s a feeling someone loves you after
a ten-minute talk. Oh yes, but lostness
is loving someone too, knowing you would 
take the raft out further if it meant
a few more minutes. Sometimes,
I want to tell my dog that I’m the only one
in the world who knows her whereabouts
and that’s lostness but it’s lived in. 
It isn’t sadness. Lostness is the job I had
in ’98 in a warehouse unpacking chic decor
where I began to unravel and unmake
the very things the company was selling.
It was the boxes I moved forward 
on the shelves until they lined up well,
pop choruses that played again for the beautiful
and found. It’s almost gladness. It’s the walk
I took one day trying to decide should I live in Montreal?
and thinking that I knew something to make it plain. 
Lostness is the many rains of money
that I once watched from an open window.
It’s long been here. It was the semilunate carpal
flowering in late-Cretaceous bones
where everything was going then never more unclear. 
It was the first prokaryote closing off its little O
and all that it could be instead.
But lostness is a steady wage. I remember
when my grandfather would come home
from the squats and thousand double checks 
of electrical work and wash his hands:
all the dirt moved in his laundry sink
like garter snakes that turned up under stones,
a living current so bearable in its lostness
that I could know it, only, for a hundred years 
and still be happy. Lostness was the school
I went to where leaving crumbs on rectangles of paper
meant showing the way someone would have to come.
It was having your knapsack up on the table
like a personal flotation device. It wouldn’t be wrong 
to say that lostness is always there on the lip of everything,
like lichen or a bomb. There is a loving lostness
that if you look deep into, you see a great
balance beam that everything
that was, or is, or that may be, is standing on.


^^EOP^^

I really fucked up. My E-flat key was loose. I only got a few hours of sleep the night before because Robyn and I were on the phone. They gave me the wrong repertoire list. How was I to know that high altitude affects clarinet reeds? I ran out of beta blockers. I forgot to bring a water bottle. I was worried that they’d hire that asshole who they don’t like because he threatened to blackball them at the union meeting. The acoustics were terrible. The second violinist used a new rosin and that threw her off, which unnerved me. My tinnitus roared the whole time. Robyn auditioned right before me. Just as I blew the first note, it dawned on me that Robyn might be sleeping with the conductor. Someone backstage slammed a door and I had to start all over again. The concertmaster doesn’t know a trumpet from a trombone, but since he’s powerful in a certain tiny corner of the music world everyone feels forced to curry favor with him. I forgot to eat. The audition committee talked the whole time. A clang in the heating system was near deafening. My carpal tunnel flared up. My neck twinges flared up. My arthritis flared up. I only got a few hours of sleep. I would have won the last competition, except that the concertmaster’s student was appointed with no audition, so I kept wondering if the same thing would happen again. I forgot I wasn’t playing the flute. I only got a few hours of sleep because Robyn and I were on the phone all night and decided to end our marriage. I really fucked up.


^^EOP^^




The cause is the consequence.
— Frantz Fanon



1  He would get pulled over
whenever he tried to download Blonde. He would be
searched for f-bombs but not for h-e-
double-hockey sticks. He would get choke-held
for wearing a hat in the hallway. He would
be Tasered for balling his Whopper wrapper
and leaving it on the floor of the streetcar.
He would get shot in the back every time
he incorrectly used MLA format in the essay
on  A Midsummer Night’s Dream.    2  He would take
some E if he didn’t have to preach
austerity. He would hire a tennis coach
if the consultants he hired would actually
fire the people to be fired. He would upgrade
to the latest Galaxy if  millennials didn’t
default on their student loans when he raised
interest rates. He would get his shoes polished
at the airport if the kiosk weren’t so far
from the platinum members’ lounge. He would
be placed on paid leave if  he raped the trainee
from Dawson. Sexually assaulted. Allegedly.


^^EOP^^

When God appears before me he is a burning
woman tied to a bush. 
Her nakedness, a missed 
spot on a busy canvas, where a male hand
has been practicing female gestures. For instance, 
hanging herself like laundry over her own arm. 
Nipple-colons introduce this scene of medieval war: 
horses crowned with riders are leaving;
horses’ tails, like a clock’s hands, whip
flies of hours off their round thighs. 
Time is an insect that leaves
its maggots to hatch on an open wound of a mammal. 
There’s more face on these thighs than on all of the women’s bodies. 
One, with an arrow aimed at her, hands on her bent
knees as if she wanted to ski into death like a scared 
child, mocks the splendid horse tails with hair
so red, all of her blood must have gone into it. 
So, it isn’t a bush on fire. It’s red hair she used
as a shield. In the distance, a town burning. 
Impatiently, horses whip buzzing ashes. The end.


^^EOP^^

In our house, all the clocks are turned off and the mirrors
Don’t work. We sit like bread in a stay-fresh wrapper,
Keep ourselves to our selves. Sometimes the speeches
Are so beautiful it hurts. On the porch where we can’t be 
Seen to smile, the honeysuckle meshes with silent
Weeds. We rock back and forth, back and forth in our long
Black dresses. Mosquitoes taste our blood and find it good. 
Inside, candles are lit every night and keep going
Until they burn themselves down. We kiss our fingers
To our lips like Italians, promise we’ll never look back. Whip-poor-will. When the doorbell rings we don’t answer. 
In winter, the fur grows long on the horses and the ice
Grows long on the eaves. We sleep in the same bed
Like good animals, braid our hair together, tailor
Our limbs to fit. Conspiracy of wood.


^^EOP^^

Fog swaddles the
trunks and so
delineates, from
a vast of green,
the silhouette of
each pine
on the slope. 
Maybe it’s like that,
only all along it was
obscured by what — 
rush, distraction? Fog.
A pine. Querying
grosbeak. Something
shifts. You find
yourself in another
world you weren’t
looking for where
what you see is that you have always been
the wolves
at the door. Left 
ajar, gaping, your own
door. And you burst
in as the Mangler,
you gouge out
your right eye which
hath offended. And you
burst in as the Great
Liar gorging
on your own flesh
and as Won’t
Let Go who shreds
your tendons, gnaws
your femur. You can’t
stop bursting in,
coming upon yourself
alone, vulnerable, in the
privacy of your dying,
bending to pick up
with a tissue a crushed spider 
from the bedroom floor,
half-sensing in your solar
plexus the forces
of that which cannot yet
be sussed, discovering yourself
once again already
to have been inside something
like an equation with
a remainder, a deodand, a
reminder of the impossibility
of reconcilement — 
to what? Once again. Forgive
yourself, they say, but
after you forgive
what you have lived,
what is left? You can’t 
set aside the jigger
of  the present from
the steady pour of hours
or even differentiate
trails of ants
scurrying through some
massive subterranean network
from the shredded
remains of a galaxy
backlit by star glow. Time 
to close the door you think
but your face is changed,
so many crow’s feet. You
must be on
to the next stage
in which you begin
to recognize
your mortal body,
that nexus of your various
holds on the world, as
repository of every-
thing you didn’t know
you took in, human
and not, all of it
charged and reactant
which accounts for the trembling
in your hands as now
you discern the
body of your body — 
like a still,
hanging bell
that catches and concentrates
each ghostly, ambient
reverberation.


^^EOP^^

I’d often seen the runway kissed by refugees
and bought-out hostages, an odd drunk and those
renouncing the flying for good, and thought
that surely there must be worse places to touch
freedom. Between the tailfins and the gray town
in the distance, gravity cropped up only at a newsstand,
and fizzled out with the first bite of the octane damp,
the view of the parking bunkers and stacked hovels
by the motorway. Everything else, before and after,
could have fitted into half a cigarette, the sickly sunshine
and endless nights, the flags and oaths (the very language
I wanted to forget), the Celts, the Saxons, the housebroken
Vikings in crowded trains, hopping frozen behind stalls
selling tat to tourists. Not enough time for loving because of
other loves, nor codebooks nor guides except the perennial A to Z of not giving offense. The words were always there,
smooth like pebbles (soap on the tongue), and sometimes
the mockery of a commonplace, like that time when we put
up a blackened Union Jack instead of curtains between us
and the Poles on the scaffolding across the road.
On occasions it seemed good enough to be happy or scared
with the rest, to bring home from the terraces and parades
that sly acceptance, to sit in the shadow of atavism as under
a palm tree, and chew blissfully on the sweet dirt, the taste
of the crowd. Or for an evening make a shortcut through
someone else’s work, an incomer’s story of a homeland
gained not lost, a fat compendium of patriotic verse;
in essence, cheat again. In other words — never spend
too much on a suit rarely worn    ...    if there had been
loyalty at all, it fell on faces and disappeared with them,
on promises and smiles, crazy schemes for finding
undiscovered shores. The world, I thought, could be unfolded
anywhere, if only you could fit it into a travel bag, into a clear,
irrevocable word. It is strange perhaps that even today
I think the same, still in the same place, buried firmly
like a rock in a graveyard, as heavy, and as pointlessly
decorated by lightness. The vows of yesterday skim
the heights like animal shapes we recognize in passing
clouds; postcards sleep in the unread books. Just like
the nomadic tribes used to, I learn of myself only
with my feet now, from the single map that remained.
And when streets bring the shortened future a bit nearer,
with open palm I seek the roughness of the facades,
and in the friendly pain I find the coarse, unperfected
truth of things. This, I think then, must be what it’s like
in the bellies of gigantic animals: wet and quiet, almost
pleasant, once you get used to the smell of those who
passed through before you, and the immutable truth
that there is no going forward or anywhere else    ...    
 
Translated from the Bosnian


^^EOP^^




On “Sueño No. 5: Botella del mar,” a photograph by Grete Stern (1950)



The woman sits clutching her knees
inside a short-necked bottle on a beach,
looks up smiling at a mouth above
all imagined itineraries.
We like to think she volunteered
to be lowered into the bottle.
On her own idea, even
her own craftiness, lured into being
enrobed with the thick glass that is the gray-blue
of a ukiyo-e sky of flying cranes
who breathe the steam
of that bluish gray ideation and
end of autumn, or a plume of smoke
from a train in the middle distance. 
Swells of warm seawater push wet sand against
spun tips of seashells that sit on the warmed strand
like nobility on a plush settee.
The bottle’s bottom edge lists in the hot
sand, the heat of the morning sunlight penetrates
the bottle walls, and foam and breeze coax
a juddering creature from underneath.
From inside the woman argues with herself that
the horizon is another of the world’s ambitions. 
Those ships slipped into bottles
with volition and self-responsibility,
acquiesce so marvelously,
like the glass fitting
so smoothly around her. She is a person
born to be put into this and admired as perfection
from the outside, which is how we love flowers
and dreams, though our desires may suffocate them.


^^EOP^^

The best-known German goldsmith of the sixteenth century, Wenzel Jamnitzer, is also remembered for his study of the five platonic solids, Perspectives of Regular Bodies, in which he proposed that out of the same five bodies one can go on endlessly making all other bodies.

The five solids originate with Pythagoras, but are named after Plato, who paired four of the five solids with each of the four elements and the fifth with heaven to make up the difference: tetrahedron (fire), octahedron (air), cube (earth), icosahedron (water), and dodecahedron (heaven).

The idea is that the universe is made up of a handful of shapes and out of these shapes other shapes are made.

In a letter to the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame and the Nobel Prize Committee, Chubby Checker claimed to have invented the dance that begat all other modern dances.

Speaking of himself in third person he wrote, “Chubby Checker changed everything. He gave movement to a music that never had this movement before. The styles changed. The nightclub scene is forever changed. Checker gave birth to aerobics.”

The song originally called “What a monotonous melody,” written in five minutes on a dare, begat “Limbo Rock” begat “Let’s Limbo Some More” begat “Mary Ann Limbo” begat “Limbo Rock/Do the Limbo Rock,” as “The Twist” begat “Let’s Twist Again” begat “Slow Twistin’” begat “Twist It Up” begat “The Twist (Yo, Twist!).”

Checker calls his dance “dancing apart to the beat,” not dancing separate from the beat, but two people dancing separate from one another.

“Limbo Rock” ends in a whistle.

Limbo, the dance, comes from Trinidad, where it was danced at wakes, but in reverse: the bar began at the lowest height and was raised to symbolize a rising from death into life.

Dante’s limbo is the best circle of Hell, all those unbaptized babies and old philosophers to snuggle up with at night.

“Mary Ann Limbo” starts with a whistle.

All day, all night, Mary Ann
Down by the sea side siftin’ sand
Even little children love Mary Ann
Down by the seaside siftin’ sand

Take a shape.

Repeat it — translate it, reflect it over a line, rotate it around a point — and you’ve got symmetry.

Go, go, go, go: that’s it!

That’s gold.


^^EOP^^

Once, there was a year where every romance
    had fangs. It was hard to open up a novel
without a vampire bearing down on a young, virgin neck. 
Soon, they were on the television. Later, the sidewalks.
    Teenagers. They owned us with their hackneyed plots.
Platinum fleur-de-lis emblazoned on their jeans.  How do they wash them? I asked. They don’t,
    my friend said. It’s part of what keeps them so dark and stiff.
An entire generation has arrived dark and stiff. Unlike 
my pliable, light, pubescent years. I grew up reading     Little House on the Prairie. Sweet, blind Mary
stole my heart. Turn the page. Oklahoma. Wild mustangs. 
Malaria. And Pa. Talk about a hero. Now they have boys
    so angry they transform into wild, shirtless dogs.
They are maniacs, these fans. They beg their mothers 
to drive them to the theater where they burst
    into dollars and popcorn in their seats. They want the car
tossed off their withering girl bodies. Lured from 
their couches, they are eager to be taken from their lives
    and placed directly in the vampire’s mouth. Younger
and younger. Cha-ching. Is there nothing anyone can do?


^^EOP^^

The sun time of the year died out and never might return.
We made fires big as coffee tables to approximate the sun.
I wanted to be a mountain.
I wanted us all countless mountains in a detailed painting. 
Blood is everywhere as always.
But now it is blown further and oxygenated for longer.
Yet more sad word has come digitally.
We contain no blood with which to soften and warm the sad word. 
Cold wind placed and places the house in its mouth.
We met the end numb and almost still.
Number meant less motion meant even number meant totally still. 
The buildings stand still.
The buildings still stand.
The buildings like the builders take each other by the hand.


^^EOP^^

As grains sort inside a schist 
An ancient woodland indicator called dark dog’s mercury 
River like liquid shale 
And white-tipped black lizard-turds on the blue wall 
For a loss that every other loss fits inside 
Picking a mole until it bleeds 
As the day heaves forward on faked determinations 
If it’s not all juxtaposition, she asked, what is the binding agent? 
Creepy always to want to pin words on “the emotional experience” 
Azure hoplia cockchafer, the caddisworm, the bee-louse, blister beetle, assassin bug 
The recriminations swarm around sunset 
When it was otherwise quiet all the way around 
You who were given a life, what did you make of it?


^^EOP^^

not an answer. She leaned
into the apple tree, which then
was evergreen, to the snake’s
hands, sweet flesh, no need
to be ashamed. We share 
and share alike, the peel
not loose like night on day,
but tight. She took the snake’s
hands, diamondbacked,
and opened its question. 
It was the first time she had
something to give, what
the man couldn’t take, the first time
the man said please:
please let me have a bite. 
He found the iron ore
and brought it home.
He found the coal under
the forest and lit it on fire
to watch it go 
so the snake couldn’t catch her
if she fell and she couldn’t
hold anything but its tongue.
Never let the fire go out or else,
he warned, and she held on.


^^EOP^^

Nobody sings about alligator eyes anymore,
barely peeking out of the water,
bouncing on the ground and rolling
into the pond, leucistic. 
People think of traits,
symmetrical fetuses giving orders from space,
making playlists even as they’re being born.
Things have come to eyes
that gaze in directions we can’t think of.
You are told by a judge that nothing new will ever happen.
You lie to his face
looking straight into the gaps that want to appear. 
Each night I count the celebrities.
The silhouette of this long stretch of time
where opportunities spark and fizzle
like islet cells quickly eaten by bosses and strangers,
nearly identical computer-generated faces,
with smiling or disgusted expressions. 
It appears again, the farcical pulchritude,
hobbits of caution in non-events
first paying a visit to mitigators, then Mario,
then TIAA-CREF. 
Can you escape an alligator
if you run silently and glide into the water?
People with happy faces and no luck at all, good or bad,
jam the signal with a sickle.


^^EOP^^




Arborvitae



It rises in a Champaign County bog
Amid bedstraw and skunk cabbage,
Rises out there in an ice age
River valley gorged with glacial till,
And swills the moraine-filtered rainwater
With the wafer ash and honeysuckle.
Stalwart, set apart, and biblical — 
As if one of that ancient company
That gave its coniferous canonical body
To the tent that shuttled God
Through the wilderness.  • 
They say that cedar and cypress
Are the protectors of  bones.
You see them from the freeway, standing alone,
Statuesque and serious,
In the dead middle of and vigilant
In beanfields, where farmers used to plant
Their families.  •  Who are you like in your greatness?
Consider a cedar of Lebanon, with fair boughs
And forest shade, and of great height,
Its top among the clouds.

^^EOP^^

Memory was the room I entered down a long corridor
Thrown by the white drugs of pain though pain
Was adrift on a glassy stream of green tide
Where images flickered and ran on 
I didn’t write poetry for publication
In those days but to grab the attention
Of readers nearby who had been crushed by life
Who floated across the exercise yard like headaches 
Smoking rag-cigarettes looking sideways
For the next punishment for a break or maybe distraction
Chips of memory kept rising to the surface
Of our minds to take another bite 
I had no idea why poetry the squid caught me
It clung to my brain in the damaging climate
A creature in the alien element of air
Arising from centuries of survival 
Thoughts must be inky and capable
Of working the bait with a black beak
For a quick kill and a metaphysical rise up through the abyss
Poetry in those days was a handmade lure 
There were no fish or birds so I spun my lines
To the ones with heads spring-loaded with resentment
Their temper a red fleck twitching in an eye
While poems of the future waited in line to hear my number


^^EOP^^

One tiny tree frog
with big eyes
sings happily,
“Kokee! Kokee!” 
His brother comes to bother.
Coquí doesn't push him.
Coquí doesn't bite him.
Coquí tells him,
“Kokee-Kee! Kokee-Kee!” 
Two tiny tree frogs
with big eyes
sing happily,
“Kokee! Kokee!”


^^EOP^^




^^EOP^^

It can happen like that:
meeting at the market,
buying tires amid the smell
of rubber, the grating sound
of jack hammers and drills,
anywhere we share stories,
and grace flows between us.
  
The tire center waiting room
becomes a healing place
as one speaks of her husband's
heart valve replacement, bedsores
from complications. A man
speaks of multiple surgeries,
notes his false appearance
as strong and healthy.
 
I share my sister's death
from breast cancer, her
youngest only seven.
A woman rises, gives
her name, Mrs. Henry,
then takes my hand.
Suddenly an ordinary day
becomes holy ground.
 


^^EOP^^

I wore Grandma Liz's pearls
for play, a plastic strand long
enough to pool on the carpet
over my stubbed toes. When I pull
them over my head now, I smell
phantoms: cigarettes, Esteé
Lauder. I don't smoke or spritz
on perfume. I don't layer polyester
or perm my hair. I've slipped off
my wedding ring as she did, signed
divorce. What advice would she offer
for life between husbands? Wear red lipstick and always leave it behind.
 


^^EOP^^

We dressed for church.  I had a white hat
and white gloves when I was fifteen, no joke.
You had to do that to show God you cared.
 
God's eyes were stained glass, and his voice
was pipe organ. He was immortal, invisible,
while my panty-hose itched and my atheist
 
father chewed his tongue and threatened to run
out the door but didn't for my mother's sake,
and she swallowed her fate, this marriage,
 
like a communion cracker, and my brain-
damaged brother lurched around the church
nursery, and my sweeter sister watched me
 
with huge brown eyes to see what I'd do next.
My God, why did I turn my eyes upward when
we were all there, then, in the flesh? I am so
 
sorry about God, sorry we fastened that word
to the sky. God's not even legal in Hebrew.
If you get the vowel caught between the two
 
consonants of your lips, it can carry you
dangerously up like a balloon over what you'd
give anything to be in the middle of, now.
 


^^EOP^^

The dragonfly at rest on the doorbell—
too weak to ring and glad of it,
but well mannered and cautious,
thinking it best to observe us quietly
before flying in, and who knows if he will find
the way out? Cautious of traps, this one.
A winged cross, plain, the body straight
as a thermometer, the old glass kind
that could kill us with mercury if our teeth
did not respect its brittle body. Slim as an eel
but a solitary glider, a pilot without bombs
or weapons, and wings clear and small as a wish
to see over our heads, to see the whole picture.
And when our gaze grazes over it and moves on,
the dragonfly changes its clothes,
sheds its old skin, shriveled like laundry,
and steps forth, polished black, with two
circles buttoned like epaulettes taking the last space
at the edge of its eyes.
 


^^EOP^^

The songs swept down from the northern steppes
with cinerary horse
and sword and vestment
in the wake of battle
suicidal for a bronze
translation of flesh burnt
to a vertical vapor trail
of fame which, so they claimed,
would be undying
by which they meant
the dying would be just
prolonged
a little longer
as on a ladder
made of air each
legendary smoke of name could only climb
by thinning
till it wasn’t there. 
And now as the steel tips of our devices
dig, sort through
and analyze
what’s left behind:
scant traces
of berserk debris, dumb soot of ritual effaced
by dumber ash,
beneath ghost towns
the ghosts have all abandoned,
all we unearth
intact now
are the untranslated
bones of babies,
inhumed at home in older dwellings
on deeper strata
under mud floors
in pits — placed
carefully on sides, knees drawn to chests, 
skulls cupped in pebble bones of hand,
the dead nursling,
the stillborn,
the miscarried — unnamed,
unadorned,
as if the only grave goods
buried with them were
their perishing — 
as if that
were what the mothers
wanted to keep close,
keep hidden, safe
from the heroic
stench of burning
upward while their breasts
still swelling dripping
freshened the black dirt
sucking at their feet.


^^EOP^^

The alcove of your arm
has become my favorite room
for sleep, but I’ve been roused
by nightmares lately. Even thunderstorms
couldn’t wake you

^^EOP^^

Blood of an eye: tamarisk gall.
Blood from a shoulder: bear’s breach.
From the loins: chamomile.
Blood from a head: lupine.
A hawk’s heart: heart of wormwood.  — From Coptic & Greek Magical Papyri

^^EOP^^

 
A flowery old-fashioned
kind of speechlessness.


^^EOP^^

I keep returning to John Constable’s Study of Clouds. Oil on cardboard,
six by seven and a half inches, it shows purple-gray  thunderheads,
one patch of blue, above low hills and two small trees flanked by shrubs in the left 
foreground. A sketch en plein air, a half hour’s worth of work at most, it catches
exactly one scrap of sky and shifting sunlight on a blustery  day in 1820.
The year King George the Third died in Windsor Castle, blind and insane, the year 
50,000 Scottish weavers went on strike and printed a proclamation calling for a new
“provisional government.” Their leaders were caught, hanged, and then  decapitated
for good measure. This cloud study survived that history. Two minutes later, 
the clouds would have taken on a different cast of light and shape just like the thunderheads
now piling up above the Liffey. I hobble out of the Dublin City Gallery,  take a bus to the river,
sit on a park bench with a ziplock bag of ice on my swollen knee. Its wet cold makes the joint 
ache. My body is breaking down, bone spur under the right kneecap. At fifty-eight,
I watch young men and women in black sweats run along the River Liffey —  Abha na Life,
Anna Liffey, river that crosses the plains of Life. I envy them. Once I too could run 
over the asphalt, almost without knowing I inhabited a body whose knees might seize up
and swell. I will not run again in this life. Cirrus and cumulonimbus  scud across the blue
escutcheon of sky. Sun’s blazon through rain rampant, my life is a cloud study for some larger landscape 
John Constable never got around to painting. It hangs in a gilded frame. People stare at it
before passing on to more important canvases, to Renoir’s  Les Parapluies, women
and men opening shiny black umbrellas in a Paris park. There a mother shelters 
her two daughters under an umbrella meant for one. The younger daughter
holds a wooden hoop she has been rolling along tamped dirt paths,  whipping it with a stick
to keep it spinning, before the rain settled in. Renoir painted this small family 
in his lush, impressionistic style. Five years later, after visiting Italy and studying
Piero della Francesca’s frescoes, he came back and finished the painting  in his new “manière aigre”
or harsh style. He handled the gray silk folds of the auburn-haired woman’s dress on the left as if they were 
granite to be sculpted. She carries a market basket filled to the brim with shadow.
To approach old age, one needs a new, harsher style. Here, by the Liffey,  mothers push screaming
infants in strollers. Five teenagers in blue jeans and bright yellow or green raincoats walk by, joking, texting 
on cell phones, smoking. One girl and her boy hang back, embrace, French-kiss a long ten seconds.
Another boy shouts over his shoulder, “Get a room!” A pair  of mute swans
preens and swims down the River Liffey, whose amber waters mirror how the clouds pass, 
avalanche of cumulus that hangs forever on the burnished unrippling surface
of my memory — vast sky surf, cloud after cloud cresting, breaking  to be washed
away to blue nothing. Each of us — lovers, mothers, runners, me — no more than windblown swansdown.


^^EOP^^

Like a child, mind
wants to play, but
even the butterflies
are on the clock. 
Still, attention is happy
to comport
with the swallowtail
as it jerkily
rounds the corner. 
Like a child, mind
follows, imitates.
First and last
it loves sequence. 
I’ve counted up
to one this season.


^^EOP^^

They work fingers to bone & borrow
smudged paper, then make promises
to family, unmerciful gods, the unborn.
Some eat a favorite meal three times
in a row. Others partake only a pinch
of soil before boarding half-broken boats
& rubber rafts — half of the young women
big with life inside them, flesh & blood
for daydreams of the Arabian nights,
as makeshift charts & constellations
work their way through war & rumors
of war. The smugglers count their loot.
Hard winds rattle gongs over sea salt
till the rusty engines die, & cries alert
mermaid sirens as pirated schooners
adrift under a mute sky rock to & fro,
& the fight goes out of the few alive.
Their loved ones & friends, lost folk
songs, mountains & valleys, all left
behind. Searchlights spot the dead
hugging the living, & draglines raise
only those who were braver than us.
The lucky ones stumble out of stupor,
tried by raging water beneath black
skies, listening to the albatross talk.


^^EOP^^

Tell me how you entered this poem, how you even got in
here. Where my parentals come from is where I’m coming from
and where where I’m coming from is from we lock the front door
and the back and the side and can’t spare a single extra key. Where where I’m coming from is from we shut all the windows tight like
our eyes to an ugly view: a jail if I ever saw one, and maybe I did,
and maybe that was enough for me. Maybe you made the mistake,
by coming here. Unannounced. Uninvited. It takes a lot of talent
to step in someone’s crib and be welcomed without any alarms
going off, so shake your ass something dangerous if you can,
sing me a song real sexy-like or be suck out of luck if I feel
like shooting strangers today. If home is where the heart is
then four red bullet wounds across the chest of the city’s flag
say everything there is about my feelings toward you and
the whole damn world right now. Because it was my own
blood this time and yet I’m still here, and the funny thing
about that town and this one is that they both burned down
once. And down the hall they’re burning bud and I want some
kinda sorta but without the friends. Which makes you foe,
I suppose, as if you are the presence of all colors and I am
the absence of said colors. But maybe I got it backwards,
twisted it all up. It just hurts to have my hair pulled even if
it’s by my own hand. My mind is spinning blanks inside every
chamber; everywhere I turn on the TV they’re shooting boys
like what I used to be before I wasn’t anymore and when did that
happen? And what am I now? Are you the phantom or me, me
or none of the above? The last shadow I cast on a sunny Sunday
stole my wallet and bought this gun and all the rounds and all
the rounds at the bar, too. Where I’m coming from, when in love:
squeeze. When lonely, loan yourself some time and don’t pay it
back. Beware, because I’m both lonely and in love like the living
embodiment of the code switch. I’m polluted air and poisoned water
and whatever else they say except when I say I’m not and I’m not
one to play for a fool for the record. Fear me. I’m godly and I’m just
and just get the hell out demon and do come again. Come again:
it’s my igneous ire toward you that keeps me a live wire, and alive.


^^EOP^^

 
Sometimes the blue in Blue Hawaii
gets lost. But Elvis’s eyes speak
pure Esperanto.
 


^^EOP^^

I like that antique tea wagon and small television. I like the computer built by your brother. I like the man in the yellow jacket as the guide. I like free will and predestination and fate. I like how the mind reaches out to touch, literally, the light of the stars. I like how the reader is possessed. I like illusions of self that each new self is born into. I like if you love someone set them on ﬁre. I like how the older lady steals the parking space. I like the sickness of soul. I like how the reader is also being watched by the narrator. The kangaroo leather documentary in the pub really pulled me in. The many levels of watching really pulled me in. I like how the narrator ﬂickers in and out. The last chapter is sharp and honest. The last chapter has many serpents eating their tails. This builds habits of nature. This builds emotional connection. This embodies the novel.


^^EOP^^

We got sent home early & no one knew why. I think we  are at war! I yelled to my sister knapsacks ringing 
against our backs. I copy -catted from Frances 
who whispered it when the teachers got silent. Can’t blame 
me for taking a good idea. I collect words where I find them.     
I’m young & no one around knows where my parents are from. 
A map on our wall & I circle all the places I want to be. My auntie,
not-blood but could be, runs the oil through my scalp. 
Her fingers play the strands of my hair. The house smells like badam. 
My uncle, not-blood but could be, soaks them in a bowl of water. 
My auntie says my people might be Afghani. I draw a ship on the map.
I write Afghani under its hull. I count all the oceans, blood & not-blood,
all the people I could be, the whole map, my mirror.    
The kids at school ask me where I’m from & I have no answer. 
I’m a silent girl, a rig ready to blow. The towers fell two weeks 
ago & I can’t say blow out loud or everyone will hate me. 
They all make English their own, say that’s the bomb. 
I know that word’s not meant for me but I collect words 
where I find them. I practice at night, the crater 
it makes of my mouth. I whisper it to my sheets,  bombbombbombbombbombbombbombbombbombbombbombbombbomb 
a little symphony, so round. I look up & make sure no one heard.


^^EOP^^

When Richmond is finally        one of the 
world’s great capitals I will line the streets 
with apple trees 

^^EOP^^

I was so thirsty, you cracked
an egg into my mouth. I ate it
& thanked you. We were so 
rich then. I imagined the moon,
a being I’d never seen, in every nail
you’d use to tack the tarp 
over our heads. I confused
hens clucking for the ringing
of the phone you’d never 
let me answer. With a spatula
to my ear, I’d pretend to be
a woman on TV & say:  ¿Bueno? Your anger
was the gun you kept by the door,
my fear, the knife I used to chop 
onions. One night you confused
the sound of a snake rattling
for rain. The snake opened 
its jaw & its fangs were the color
of mud. You reached for my thighs
just before you died & I couldn’t 
face you. Once you stopped
breathing I rubbed your beard
between my hands 
& played the most beautiful
cumbia. We danced
for the first time since our wedding.


^^EOP^^

Beneath the waver of the dorsal fin lie the blood-shades
of lamellae, their skin so close to the vein they breathe, 
filter, gather, flex, set down in loose and frangible parallels
you find in gills of mushrooms, clams, and concertinas. 
Wave after wave, the tissues of the water breathers
conceal what they reveal, according to their vital rhythm. 
Fins that breathe flit this way, that, in the give-and-take
of panic and lust and tropical surge from no one place. 
To every fish, flesh, nightmare, and song: a private opening
and the name it bears. Let us call it tomorrow or lament, 
the heart of my volition

^^EOP^^

Nowhere in those kerosene years
could she find a soft-headed match. 
The wife crosses over an ocean, red-faced and cheerless.
Trades the flat pad of a stethoscope for a dining hall spatula. 
Life is two choices, she thinks:
you hatch a life, or you pass through one. 
Photographs of a child swaddled in layers arrive by post.
Money doesn’t, to her embarrassment. 
Over time, she grows out her hair. Then she sprouts nerves.
The wife was no fool, but neither did she wander. 
She lives inside a season of thrift, which stretches on.
Her sorrow has thickness and a certain sheen. 
The wife knows to hurry when she washes.
When she cooks, she licks spoons slowly. 
Every night, she made a dish with ground pork.
Paired with a dish that was fibrous.


^^EOP^^

A vine drapes the fence
in its cool enthusiasm, 
stemmed cascade.
My skin 
has collapsed in flounces,
in anticipation.   •  
Look how I change the subject
without changing, 
I appear to say — 
which seems like nothing 
but is practice
for the bigger change
to come.   •  
My mind is just
like the stance 
and disposition of these trees —  
dense, sparse, conical,
lopsided, frilly 
(as was the mind
of the tenant before me


^^EOP^^

 
They don’t play loud music.
They don’t have a dog.
I think they’re both mimes.
 


^^EOP^^

Did a big brain       raise us
          into mountains
to range           over the valley,
to see           the approach     before
whoever it was     knew           they would walk
a path           between dusk & dawn
half-awake?           An eye squinted,
& sex as idea                      made the lids dance.
Now, the brain           pauses     on the edge
of ascension       or surrender, one           sleepy hand
pointing at a totem,               & the other weighing
a stick           or jagged stone.


^^EOP^^


wolf moon

No moon in sight, so I howled at the exit sign instead. Red runes, electric. Telling an old story of escape, of wind, a wide cold. A distant car alarm. Otherwise: the dark, and our bodies, two strange women trying to touch each other. Breathing strange. Moving toward or away from each other as the red ghost in the sky opened, called us gone, showed us the door to another world. Otherwise, the dark, and our mouths, tearing at what bones we could find. Grinning and hungry for something — something we couldn’t, with all our words, name.

 
snow moon

The magic where the streetlights turn the snow pink lasts only for the first night, the same way, maybe, a blanket loses track of its scent when it’s been touched by too many hands, or the way a body grays when too many feet have dragged their cigarettes and complaints through it. But for that one first night, everything cold- flecked and whispering was ours, the pink light ours, sent from some other world so we could, for a night, feel untouched. So we could feel like sugar—crumbling, and perfect for it.

 
worm moon

Like any girl, I pulled myself into shreds to test the rumor that something with blood like mine could be halved and still whole. And what did I learn? I buried myself all over the garden, but the pieces only sprouted into new riddles: squid leg, spaghetti squash, a jerking thumb. Their names still sounded like mine; everyone in the same dress, chewing dirt to avoid each others’ eyes. I lay down next to the one beneath the porch, hiding among the oyster shells. Don’t cry, I said, but she cried anyway. Her tears fell straight into my eyes. What a lesson—to watch them float back and forth between us until we knew each one’s shape. Until we knew, finally, what to do with them.

 

pink moon

Outside, the colors leapt from the trees. Here, inside, some new word was blooming in my underwear—darker than I’d expected. I’d expected something pink; a slow, sweet trickle. Not this wet tar, treacle, dark, like the blood had been stretching inside me for years, slow-building into a sticky chord, the first falling away. Soil’s been watered; come play. First stuck, first gum, first hum of pollen, calling in the bees and readying to wilt.


 

flower moon

Spring is the season of crying and seeing nothing. Of choking up on someone else’s trash. Barbed tennis balls that lodge wherever air’s supposed to go, nasal cavity homewreckers. All spring my lenses wrenched themselves from my eyes, jumped ship, spore-lined and furious. Everything melted and ran down my face. All the trees wanted my number. Sent fuzzy messengers to murmur in my ears: I get so afraid sometimes all I want all I want is. All spring I brushed confessions out of my hair. Tore the little letters apart and locked myself in the refrigerator, until the world promised to stop birthing such soft things.


 

strawberry moon

The house was filled with the smell of it, the last misshapen, sweet-heavy berries of the season losing their shapes on the stove. The house was filled with the smell of fruit unbecoming, fruit pulled to its knees at fire’s feet. All summer long, the bushes had whispered take me, shown us all the places we could kiss if we wanted. And so, as the light died, we put our mouths on the least lovable, the too-full, the easy-bruised, we shouted, I choose you, and you, and you, and you, and canned that hunger, and spooned it into our mouths on the coldest days.


 

buck moon

Some of the cloven-hoofed things are good at leaping from one rock shelf to another without shattering. Good, in other words, at falling. I never trusted that ankles were any match for my body’s insistence on becoming earth again. So when I found myself on the cliff face, I knew it was dive or dust. A boy called to me from the bottom of the gorge, called me all the names he knew, and I stood frozen, wearing a crown of bones. The gravel laughed as it fled from my feet. I shouted down to the boy, Don’t try to milk me unless you’re fond of being kicked — buck and bray and jawbone. He responded, No, totally, sounds tough, how are you feeling?


 

sturgeon moon

I hid in his rivers and estuaries. I ate his wet earth’s crops. I grew plump for him. Grew egg-lined, thirty tiny hearts in my belly, fruit thumping with seeds. He pulled me from the mud. Laid me out in the sun. Opened me down the center. Scraped every dead daughter from my silly maw. I learned better next time. Next time, I grew three extra rows of seeds. Hid them in my mouth. Sharpened them to teeth.


 

harvest moon

Last winter, when we finally kissed under fluorescent lights, that was the seed we pressed between the ground’s lips. Then I laughed when the sky collapsed into pathetic rivers. Then I drank the dirt through my hooves, and liked it. Then I ate all the sun I could find. Though the weeds claw, sugar-starved, at my thighs. Though the sky casts over, cataract, callous, and the earth fumes as iron claws uproot the children’s children we keep warm in our bellies. Still, when the moon and the horses are fat on the horizon, still you’ll find me, arms heavy with eggplant, chard, tomatoes bruised blue, blushing kohlrabi till the kohlrabi’s gone. Will you pluck me before the dust does, root and all, radicchio tendon? I promise, I’ll feed no upright animal. Only the bees and the bees, beans sitting on the squash’s face. Will you turn your palms to the sky? Will you turn your palms to the prayer hunger makes? Will you feed and feed, and lick the bowl clean when we’re both full?


 

hunter’s moon

I picked up my own scent somewhere on the forest’s edge. Spoiling flour, holy basil, sweat. My oldest smell is the smell that still clings to pajama sleeves late into Saturday afternoon. Toothpaste, mixed with the musk of rest. I pressed my snout to the ground and breathed deep, watched the tendrils of my slug trail bloom blue, bioluminescent. I followed the maze, pushbrooming forest floor with face, followed the promise of a rapid heart. Don’t ask who’s the bloodhound, who’s the hare, when there’s a chase to be made: the clarity of a cardinal direction clicking into place. And: the quickening—the tendons that appear, sudden, when the distant, rabid howl of hunters rolls across the tree line, and you lift your head in greeting.


 

beaver moon

We made our home in the place where the water slowed. Yes. We flooded the plains until the landscape bloomed with wet. We stopped the tub. We drew a bath and called the river to its new, quieter life. Ring-builders. Kingdom carved. At the end of the line, we made our own place. Sure, from above, it looks like a snaking tail, headed by a circle. From here, in the mud, it doesn’t look like that at all. It looks like a world. Like a cleared space. Like everything that’s left when the trees soften and come, at last, crashing.


 

cold moon
 

Back below the ice. Back to swim. Seastar. Creeping brine. We salt, sink. We pull down the cold. We pull the moon to our floor.      Hello.      Waterstone. Brinicle. Cold-blooded and still flesh.    Still    horned    fingers groping the kelp bed. Still salt. Pull. Everything the ice touches. Is ours. Is quiet now. We sink slow. We pray still. For moon. We answer it now. Ourselves.





^^EOP^^

What is a brand?
The hopeful tag 
on the tan underpants
that reads “Metaphor” 
leaves everything
to the imagination 
which by now
is plainly exhausted. 
I could describe these tags
as so many 
flapping tongues,
dropping hints 
about a foreign designer,
himself largely a cover story. 
Someone somewhere must sew a shirt
made entirely of red flags. 
Untiring, music
rises
then falls through
its imagined past.


^^EOP^^

Spandex leggings authenticating my anaerobic
     exit strategies. Crotch but a bumper sticker
in a heretofore-fleeting waterloo. Crunk repentance. I span 
our doomed alphabet soup like Jane Fonda’s antiwar legs
     in calisthenic videos. My zenith of hair a brown, 
          wannabe-Fawcett, mean-ole-toucan pupic papa — .
He who so feeds on an entire corpus and still
starves, helms the colloquium outside the bathroom
of transubstantiation. Tonight — a vastly archived Nietzschean
nighttime — I anal bleach my humpty- 
dumpty stigmatas.
     Boys conch with crimson Hollywood carpets that disentangle
from their cavities, accustoming their catwalks upon the blood
clots of their mamacitas. As twilight uncrowns the shade, 
     I howl effluvium, switchblade hue
to hue. I plié before the gas cloud lifting jumbo leaves.
Like a mythic infantry, the thirsty roaches begin to leatherflock.


^^EOP^^

Jewelry boom box spittin’ bidi bidi bom bom
he verges his groove of slapstick smoke 
across our donated mosquito nets bidi bidi bom bom all night he fingertips our omnivorous junk 
in his cruel maw of tooth gaps magical realistic
funky ass choral arrangements of servitude mighty 
dump truck hip-ee hip-ee dales my rotunda all
over these unsullied shimmies bidi bidi bom bom 
orb-spider thighs cloaking his genocidal hunches
Momma catapulting protection abracadabras 
over our twiggy panoplies we painstakingly
bedecked how many times haven’t we fallen 
for mishandled precipices in the wrongheaded
entirety of machomanic evacuation asteroid 
in mouth-crooked chaps guayabera deep pink
guava pulp rum & coke in his fierce prayerful 
grip to bypass civility a Google-translated wink
inumbrated eyebrows to cast embered mercies 
I pump bidi bidi bom bom hormonal harmonies
for his jawlined mitzvahs bidi bidi bidi bidi bidi 
on wings only light will kerfuffle flight born
at his bidding va-voomed for his favor we puff 
from the tail of his pickup truck we clothes-
line an underwater continent marooned & whiplashed 
for genesis if carnage can charade competency
we too can corrupt castanets timbre compulsory 
penances over his padded knees bidi bidi bom bom
above his life insurance policy rates coma 
with anointed vanity with the right song a stone
will pass for bread break for a fool’s sunrise achieve 
the love ritual cut scorn’s willy bob hither to this bomb


^^EOP^^

My heart was a dystopian
berry budding in water tiger 
lilies claiming hocus-pocus wonder. I was broken 
vanity, vixen vase, victorious tête- 
à-tête — the Scrabble game nobody won because the tiles aspired speculums. 
Ocean-misaligned brook / brook-misaligned agua 
— where else could these gospels have dawned
if not in the bellies of men 
hyenaing a becoming?  Twerking in church, 
I outperformed the candles
diarized in the simpleminded annexation.       Wussup,  Blastoise
with the veiniest homebound pika-pika aim? 
Wussup, Sims Chumbawamba Family Portrait Simulation?  St. Sunny of the Sissies
beheld the bukkake throng  of mojo-coated cartilage
squandered on the refurbished bunk 
for new cetaceans. A dazzling jeremiad shone me dead 
until I gridlocked the algebraic expressions of my body in question marks.  These syndicated fiyahs
stigmatized my herculean magma shades,  but I held these walls apart,
every inch of my mascara cut off apple pie.  You watched me hobble home
while the streets coalesced magenta. Tell Momma  the holes I cover with one error 
swell — & there are only inadvertent landscapes to dollop with nonetheless.


^^EOP^^

In my country our shamans were women
and our gods multiple until white people brought
an ecstasy of rosaries and our cities today
glow with crosses like graveyards. As a child
in Sunday school I was told I’d go to hell
if I didn’t believe in God. Our teacher was a woman
whose daughters wanted to be nuns and I asked What about babies and what about Buddha, and she said They’re in hell too and so I memorized prayers
and recited them in front of women
I did not believe in. Deliver us from evil.
O sweet Virgin Mary, amen

^^EOP^^

Some people say the devil is beating
his wife. Some people say the devil
is pawing his wife. Some people say
the devil is doubling down on an overall
attitude of entitlement toward
the body of his wife. Some people
say the devil won’t need to be sorry,
as the devil believes that nothing
comes after this life. Some people say
that in spite of the devil’s public,
long-standing, and meticulously
logged disdain for the health
and wholeness of his wife, the devil
spends all day, every day, insisting
grandly and gleefully on his general
pro-woman ethos, that the devil truly
considers himself to be an unswayed
crusader: effortlessly magnetic,
scrupulous, gracious, and, in spite of
the devil’s several advanced degrees,
a luminous autodidact. Some people
say calm down; this is commonplace.
Some people say calm down;
this is very rare. Some people say
the sun is washing her face. Some
people say in Hell, they’re having a fair.


^^EOP^^

 
We have orgies at home.
Tonight, it’s The Book of Mormon.


^^EOP^^

is surely a peculiar answer for any teacher to receive when
asking a kindergartner, but on second take, what word best
describes me, crossbreed of butterfly and Super Fly aesthetics,
other than peculiar? I suppose calling me a keen kid would
also suffice in explaining my avidity for the kind of death that
progresses the narrative of a gentling history, because that’s
the only frame for greatness I seem to find for boys my shade
and age to aspire to, short of having the height and hops to
touch the rim, or the bulk and burst to break through the
defensive line like a bullet. And, no, I haven’t given up
on the prospect of Bulls starting shooting guard yet, but
the God-fearer impressed upon me begs the mythology of
goodness delivered to the multitudes like loaves and fish; how King is talked about in a black Christian tradition still in mourning over his lost rays of light, the way mentioning the name of Malcolm makes mice of shady white men some
thirty years after the shotgun and he’s sung of as a prince:
I want to evoke that level of pride in American democracy’s
dark downtrodden because I know what it invokes in me,
young and impressionable, watching Denzel’s mimicry
for the one millionth time in my abbreviated existence — 
drawing an X on my undeveloped chest, pushing it out
into the unknown-ahead hoping a Mecca for melanin rises
from the man-shaped hole I’d left in my loved ones’ lives.  I bet my parents would be so proud of me.
I bet post offices would close on my birthday.
I bet God would dap me up when I got up there and Jesus —   dying on a cross to meet me.

^^EOP^^

Where did the handsome beloved go?
I wonder, where did that tall, shapely cypress tree go? 
He spread his light among us like a candle.
Where did he go? So strange, where did he go without me? 
All day long my heart trembles like a leaf.
All alone at midnight, where did that beloved go? 
Go to the road, and ask any passing traveler — 
That soul-stirring companion, where did he go? 
Go to the garden, and ask the gardener — 
That tall, shapely rose stem, where did he go? 
Go to the rooftop, and ask the watchman — 
That unique sultan, where did he go? 
Like a madman, I search in the meadows!
That deer in the meadows, where did he go? 
My tearful eyes overflow like a river — 
That pearl in the vast sea, where did he go? 
All night long, I implore both moon and Venus — 
That lovely face, like a moon, where did he go? 
If he is mine, why is he with others?
Since he’s not here, to what “there” did he go? 
If his heart and soul are joined with God,
And he left this realm of earth and water, where did he go? 
Tell me clearly, Shams of Tabriz,
Of whom it is said, “The sun never dies” — where did he go?
 
Translated from the Persian


^^EOP^^




After Rilke's “Les Fenêtres”



i 
how much     loss
gains suddenly in emphasis
and     brilliant sadness   
  ii  far from that which lives and turns   
  iii 
languages
of our vain comings and goings wilt and gnaw   
  iv  beat them,                                punish
them for having said and always said   
  v 
tear out, finally,      our spells   
  vi  one life pours and grows impatient
for another life   
  vii 
and the lovers, look on them there,
immobile and frail
pinned like the butterflies
for the beauty of their wings   
  viii  too great in the outdoors   
  ix  like the lyre, you should be
rendered a constellation

^^EOP^^

Say licked clean at birth. Say
  weeping in the tall grass, where
    this tantalizing song begins,
  birds perched on a crooked branch
over a grave of an unending trek
  into the valley of cooling waters.
    The soil’s thirst, lessons of earth
  unmoor the first tongue. Say
I have gone back, says the oracle,
  counting seasons & centuries, undoing fault
    lines between one generation & next,
  as she twirls sackcloth edged with pollen,
& one glimpses what one did not know. Say
  this is where the goat spoke legends ago
    in the ring of fire to deliver a sacrifice.
  To feel signs depends on how & why
the singer’s song puckers the mouth.
  Well, I believe the borrowed rib
    story is the other way round, entangled
  in decree, blessing, law & myth. One
only has to listen to nightlong pleas
  of a mother who used all thousand
    chants & prayers of clay, red ocher
  blown from the mouth onto the high
stone wall, retracing land bridge
  to wishbone. My own two daughters     & granddaughter, the three know how
  to work praise & lament, ready to sprout
wings of naked flight & labor. Yes,
  hinged into earth, we rose from Lucy
    to clan, from clan to tribe, & today
  we worship her sun-polished bones,
remembering she is made of questions.
  No, mama is not always the first word
    before counting eggs in the cowbird’s
  nest. It begins in memory. Now, say
her name, say Dinknesh, mother of us all.


^^EOP^^

In Jinotega women greeted us
with thousands of flowers roses
it was hard to tell the petals
on our faces and arms falling 
then embraces and the Spanish language
which is a little like a descent of
petals pink and orange 
Suddenly out of the hallway our
gathering place AMNLAE the
Asociación de Mujeres women
came running seat yourselves dear
guests from the north we announce
a play a dance a play the women
their faces mountain river Indian
European Spanish dark-haired
women 
dance in gray-green
fatigues they dance the Contra who
circles the village waiting
for the young teacher the health worker
(these are the strategies) the farmer
in the high village walks out into the
morning toward the front which is a
circle of terror 
they dance
the work of women and men they dance
the plowing of the fields they kneel
to the harrowing with the machetes they
dance the sowing of seed (which is always
a dance) and the ripening of corn the
flowers of grain they dance the harvest
they raise their machetes for
the harvest the machetes are high
but no! 
out of the hallway in green and gray
come those who dance the stealth
of the Contra cruelly they
dance the ambush the slaughter of
the farmer they are the death dancers
who found the schoolteacher they caught
the boy who dancing brought seeds in
his hat all the way from Matagalpa they
dance the death of the mother the
father the rape of the daughter they
dance the child murdered the seeds
spilled and trampled they dance
sorrow sorrow 
they dance the
search for the Contra and the defeat
they dance a comic dance they make a
joke of the puppetry of the Contra of
Uncle Sam who is the handler of puppets
they dance rage and revenge they place
the dead child (the real sleeping baby)
on two chairs which is the bier for
the little actor they dance prayer
bereavement sorrow they mourn 
Is there applause for such theater? 
Silence then come let us dance
together now you know the usual
dance of couples Spanish or North
American let us dance in twos and
threes let us make little circles let us
dance as though at a festival or in peace-
time together and alone whirling stamping
our feet bowing to one another 
the children
gather petals from the floor to throw
at our knees we dance the children
too banging into us into each other and
one small boy dances alone pulling
at our skirts wait he screams stop!
he tugs at the strap of our camera Stop!
stop dancing I’m Carlos take a picture
of me No! Now! Right now! because
soon Look! See Pepe! even tomorrow
I could be dead like him 
the music
catches its breath the music
jumping in the guitar and phonograph holds
still and waits no no we say Carlos
not you we put our fingers on his little
shoulder we touch his hair but one of
us is afraid for god’s sake take his
picture so we lift him up we photo-
graph him we pass him from one to
another we photograph him again and
again with each of us crying or
laughing with him in our arms
we dance


^^EOP^^

I would drive to your grave but your grave is the crash 
the froth foam pebbles small rocks the sand smoothed 
soothed each rising each leaving tide you lie in the ocean 
the water in the waves your home the stern the back 
the wake of a boat those curled white lines of leaving 
I would visit your grave but your grave is a single blue 
afternoon of passing isles the green and granite shores 
I would come to your grave but your grave is the fire 
oh mother it is cold tonight and I have no heart 
for this burning for the fine sift of ash which is all 
that comes back all that comes after I would visit 
your house but your things are missing are missing 
your touch as your eyes failed I brought you lights 
and I would see again that brightness I would drive 
to your grave but I am your grave your marker 
oh mother I am your stone
 


^^EOP^^

I said love because it came closest said leave 
because you did we do this peeling off each 
from each each from suddenly other said 
come back but meant don't go I said dead 
and meant every one of those instances of 
vanishment how the dead swim away from us 
in time their tide their closed wooden boats 
I said tide but tide was never right said tide 
because we have no word for that kind of 
unforgiving away I said tether when I meant 
anchor when I meant stay but when I said stay 
one thing I meant was against confusion 
against yet another loss I meant two-faced 
Janus January's god of fallen gates of trying 
to look both ways and when I said farewell 
I meant again don't go but it was too late I was 
here in the hall this tunnel full of mirrors glass 
and strange made-up faces and when I thought 
funhouse I meant its opposite I meant this 
rusty carnival town the men so sad they paint 
their smiles in place they paint their faces 
white paint their eyes wide and full of crying
 


^^EOP^^

That this is the morning in which nothing much 
that the sky is still there and the water dresses 
accordingly that only at night does the water rest 
vanish from sight that the stars are too small too far 
to register there that all our names too are writ 
invisibly on water that abiding requires more hope 
than I can possibly acquire that hope is not a thing 
with feathers that hope is a thing with a fist a thin 
crust sketched over oceans that hope is what despair 
uses for bait come in hope says the water's fine 
that hope is the blood with which you write letters 
that start dear sea dear ocean stop asking so fucking 
much that hope is a telegram delivered by men 
in pairs men in uniform a telegram that says missing 
stop that says once again presumed lost stop
 


^^EOP^^

For I have loved the blade with all my crippled 
with all my awkward soul loved it for the shine 
sheen for the ease and grace of doing what it was 
made to do for I have loved the stubborn womb 
its beloved intent have loved the hope and then 
learned to love the lack for I have loved the water 
the way it comes to me comes for me in all its 
liquid mystery for I have loved what the water 
loves its myriad vessels sky basin runnel channel 
and vein for all it claims and contains for I have 
loved its muscular flex its rise coil and fall so like 
Leviathan's mighty desperate heart for I have loved 
Leviathan for being only for being exactly 
what god hated and what he made for being 
water's own knife this wild unholy blade
 


^^EOP^^

This isn't my dream-job. As a young sheet
of steel and plastic I dreamt of being melted
 
down into a dancer's pole in Vegas. I wanted
a woman in a headdress glossy as a gossamer
 
to wrap her lithe limbs around me. I wanted
to be strewn in lights, smell her powdery perfume.
 
Instead I'm a squat box crouched behind the counter,
noticed only if someone robs me. I'm touched all day,
 
but never caressed. Listen: somewhere gold tokens
spew from slots. I want to drink space-alien-dyed martinis on black
 
leather sectional couches. Watch tipsy women with acid-
washed jeans and teased hair dreamily press their faces
 
against slot machines while people treat currency
carelessly as spit in the wind.
 
I'm everywhere you look, ubiquitous and ignored.
I'm the container of your dreams that tossed aside my own.
 
I've kept my clean, sleek lines but you never say a thing.
Feed me, feed me with the only love we know.
 


^^EOP^^

Everyone burned coal in our neighborhood,
soft coal they called it from the mountains
of western Pennsylvania where my father
grew up and fled as soon as he could, where
my Welsh cousins dug it down in the dark.
 
The furnace it fed stood in the dank
basement, its many arms upraised
like Godzilla or some other monster.
It was my job to pull out clinkers
and carry them to the alley bin.
 
Mornings were chilly, frost on windows
etching magic landscapes.  I liked
to stand over the hot air registers
the warmth blowing up my skirts.
But the basement scared me at night.
 
The fire glowed like a red eye through
the furnace door and the clinkers fell
loud and the shadows came at me as
mice scampered.  The washing machine
was tame but the furnace was always hungry.
 


^^EOP^^

Wind and the sound of wind—
across the bay a chainsaw revs
and stalls. I've come here to write,
 
but instead I've been thinking
about my father, who, in his last year,
after his surgery, told my mother
 
he wasn't sorry—that he'd cried
when the other woman left him,
that his time with her
 
had made him happier than anything
he'd ever done. And my mother,
who'd cooked and cleaned for him
 
all those years, cared for him
after his heart attack, could not
understand why he liked the other
 
woman more than her,
but he did. And she told me
that after he died she never went
 
to visit his grave—not once.
You think you know them,
these creatures robed
 
in your parents' skins. Well,
you don't. Any more than you know
what the pines want from the wind,
 
if the lake's content with this pale
smear of sunset, if the loon calls
for its mate, or for another.
 


^^EOP^^

As I leave for work she holds out her arms, and I
bend to lift her . . . always heavier than I remember,
because in my mind she is still that seedling bough
I used to cradle in one elbow. Her hug is honest,
fierce, forgiving. I think of Oregon's coastal pines,
wind-bent even on quiet days; they've grown in ways
the Pacific breeze has blown them all their lives.
And how will my daughter grow? Last night, I dreamed
of a mid-ocean gale, a howl among writhing waterspouts;
I don't know what it meant, or if it's still distant,
or already here. I know only how I hug my daughter,
my arms grown taut with the thought of that wind.


^^EOP^^

In her last notes, when her hand began
to tremble, my mother tried to teach it
 
the penmanship she was known for,
how to make the slanted stems
 
of the p's and d's, the descending
roundness of the capital m's, the long
 
loops of the f's crossed at the center,
sending it back again and again
 
until each message was the same:
a record of her insistence that the hand
 
return her to the way she was before,
and of all the ways the hand had disobeyed.
 


^^EOP^^

because my voice was not the right voice
and could not be understood I stood
before the mirror — a murky glassen word
this mouth can’t shape right to this day — and was made
to watch my teeth and lips being imprecise.
So this is why I come across a Southron
and not from Yorkshire, or Sri Lankan; but I’ll complain
no more about this clarified and potent tongue 
for when the moustached gent at US Customs
asked me in his hapless twang are you a terrorist, my borrowed posh it sure
abashed that poor colonial; and it was of course
what my child-face perceived or could not in the glass
which made of me a scrutineer of sound,
a listener for and into every glitch
in the aathma, the script, the avid void of English.


^^EOP^^

How they woke, finally, in a bed of ferns — horsetail ferns.
How they died singing. All night, meanwhile, as if somehow
the fox’s mouth that so much of this life has amounted to had
briefly unshut itself — and the moth that’s trapped there,
unharmed, gone free — a snow fell; the snow-filled street
seemed a toppled column, like the one in the mind called
doubt, or that other one,
                                       persuasion, the broken one, in three
clean pieces    ...    Well, it’s morning, now. Out back, the bamboo
bows and stiffens. Thoughts in a wind. Thoughts like (but
nobody saying it): Nobody, I think, knows me better by
now than you do. Or like: The bamboo, bowing, stiffening,
seems like nothing so much as, in this light, competing forms
of betrayal that, given time, must surely cancel each other
out, close your eyes; patience; wait. Maybe less the foliage
than the promise of it. Less that shame exists, maybe, than that
the world keeps saying it does, know it, hold on tight to it, as if
the world were rumor, how every rumor
                                                               rings true, lately.
When I’m ashamed, I make a point of reminding myself what
is shame but to have shown — to have let it show — that variety
of love that goes hand in hand with having wished to please
and, in pleasing, for a while belong. So shame can, like love, be
an eventual way through? There’s a minor chord sparrows make
with doves that’s not the usual business — it’s not sad at all, any of it:
this always waiting for what I’ve always waited for; this not being
able to assign to what’s missing some shape, a name; this body
neither antlered nor hooved — brave too, this body, unapologetic    ...


^^EOP^^




After Ian Sanborn’s ASL poem of the same title



A man with eyes as blank
as the indifference of nature
is staring straight ahead
as the whole thing unfolds.
He has a black beard, black
shirt, black woolen cap — 
he could be a thief — you better
keep your eyes on his hands
which have begun clearing
a clearing. Here he plants
a seed as small as his own
fingernail, and shazam! it sprouts
roots, shoots, stems, branches — 
a whole tree shouldering up,
tossing and swaying in the air
between the sun’s magic hands
and the man’s indifferent eyes.
Next thing you know, an orphan
index finger is worming its way
across the stage that wasn’t
a stage until your eyeing it
made it so. It inches over
to the tree like a lost knuckle
finding its way home, its feelers
testing, feeling, sniffing, finding
purchase, finding a toe-hold,
the tiny, spiny, hairy, leg-like
appendages beginning to wiggle,
to climb, to shinny up the tree,
the elbow, the sheer escarpment,
pausing to send out a line,
a lasso, a long rope as fine
as the filament of a spider
launched from its abdomen
and hooking the thumb
of the lowest branch. A rope for
rappelling, for jumping off
this cliff, taking this dive,
twisting as it untwists, enfolding
as it unfolds, holding on for
dear life as it spins itself into
silk, those indifferent eyes
almost imperceptibly squinting
in sympathy with this closing
up, this cloaking, this cloistering,
this hanging upside down with
a pulse inside. A fluttering
pulse. A pulse like the flutter
of eyelids. Like the flutter
of wings. A heartbeat growing
stronger, stronger, breaking
out, breaking free, the wings
opening, the eyes opening as if
all this time they were closed — 
the blank eyes opening to the
wings, taking them in, incredulous,
in love with them — and the black
and white has grown iridescent;
the orphaned knuckle has found
the hands; the hands have found
their wings, and we are all
utterly blown away.  Ian Sanborn's ASL poem may be viewed here.


^^EOP^^

There are places for chaos on the page,
meaningful, apparent
confusion — temps en temps on the continent
does not mean “time to time” in Kent,
or Greenwich. From stone through weeds and parchment,
through bad times, words made their way to the printed page.
Bibles now not just for those who go to worship by carriage,
but for those who pray with bare feet,
some washed, some smelling of stables and excrement. 
I’m not sure the words ocean and sea
mean the same to you and me.
Ninety-five percent universal confusion,
dark matter was born with the legitimacy
of an onion, the roar of a lion.
I sit in the rumble seat of judgment,
I damn myself for entertainment,
for wasting time on hopeless entertainment.
I am guilty of snarling lines, Gordian
knots in my “Shakespeare” fishing reels.
I must untangle this because eels
have hearts like us. The enemy
is symmetry.
In the spring of content,
I trust glorious chaos. I smell in disorder
the outhouse of order. 
I must have respect for what I kill and eat,
Jesus gave them loaves and fishes, not meat.
He added, “Waste nothing you eat,”
he did not say, “Waste is chaos made by me,
or my Father, one person who is three.”
Rebecca, at the well,
said, “Drink. Water your camels.”
I swear, my hands each on a Bible,
the only evidence admissible is invisible.
At twenty, I was lost in the snow, a sleigh bell. 
Chaos is not a “sometime thing,”
its face and back are turned to and from us,
what I cannot see is beautiful, or an isthmus
that connects almost nothing to almost nothing — 
the great unless, either/or.
I grab on to metaphor,
uncertainty, dark matter, gravity specific.
The motto I nail to my door: The Devil generalizes, angels are specific.
Chaos makes me merry,
string or rose-by-any-other-rose theory,
romance of the rose,
roses that go with any other flower,
from devil’s paintbrush to huckleberry.
From fertile Chaos sprang Eros and Night:
Chaos danced first with Eros, then jealous Night.
Time carries a scythe, women and men sound the hour.
I model for myself, I pose in north light. 
With helpers, his stevedore brothers, Hypnos
and Thanatos, Charon still poles his familiar ferry
across the Styx to an island where skeletons dance.
Einstein said, “I too believe in appearance,”
he didn’t think Old One plays dice, takes chances.
You bet your bottom dollar the universe
rhymes with another universe like verse.
Yeats, Herrick, and Herbert would like that.
To them, I lift my hat.
Delphic chaos is wise,
metaphoric thinking multiplies
bunches of grapes, by tripod, by butterflies.
Chaos is endless longing — 
God’s pussycat.
In Prague, Mozart knew a starling
who sang his piano concerto all along,
except for one note he always got wrong.


^^EOP^^

I was waiting to try out one of my inventions
from the flattop garage roof — parachutes this time — 
when I tasted a black cherry from the next yard, wondering even at that age
who had prior rights and what was constitutional
so instead of  jumping I wrote a brief brief
called Yaakov vs. the Tree Trunk
where everyone laughed herself crazy
at Marlboro vs. Madison
or Red Stain vs. the State of New Jersey
so bless me you fools
for aren’t you mortals?
And don’t you bend your body down
over the water to taste the ice?
And who, in your family,
even ever just thought of
swallowing a goldfish from the bowl,
say, picking up its slippery body,
bending your neck back and gulping it down
even before they entered law school?


^^EOP^^

Ruby, please. A night shift nurse fell asleep at the wheel. The whole earth had a fever and the heated pulse beats faster ’til everything picturesque has her reeling. Just tryna make it real baby, like it is. He condescends. Twitching a trio of flax seeds between the thumb and forefinger in a dirty spiral, these are full of phytoestrogens that turn the gender    ...    generic    ...    generous. Hey, girl! Crease in her hey the size of turning. Is that mean? I live in place where it’s mean to be honest but I come from a place where it’s generous. Freetown is hedged on a slum. The ghetto, everybody’s vigilante. Cut to the footage of a young boy swimming in floodwater made of mud and feces. Constructed. Like shelter, the safest destination the excess has. You see a fugitive, I see my daughter’s future husband, Ma quips, full sunned and sweet, a nigga who can swim, can hunt her free. Glad silk bending his teeth into a Sunday hotel. And the kind of silt that reachers for shatter. All the land is water. You come forth through the cosmic slop by drowning. The sun is a gang of murders. You come through on the new acquittal looking for chicken strips and bourbon with Netflix on in the background and I’ll kill you myself. Back on the Las Vegas strip, the sun is a bouquet of drones chasing promoters through a circus. Stand there and look indignant in a bandana and stop calling the Loa out their names before they answer. You’re on the guest list for lil yachty and one oak and it’s a mouthpiece the boxer’s choking on when the nurse wakes up, a double suicide, American, pie and guns and obscene convenience, proud mascots for an army with no one left to defend


^^EOP^^

In the constant lutte to not become that bougie housewife of an athlete taking too much oxy while the help cooks ethical fried chicken for my family and I’m also the help and the television sighs and wags in the back     some Wendy Williams   rerun and     this is acceptable and celebrating neon israel and soul     is so radio :     I walk alone.   I know myself. Or so I chant in the mirror right around discovering that trap music is all the new negro spiritual / righteous delirium try to defund the clown in the en   in negro       say it a little   less     enter the New Yorker in Desdemona’s     scarf     and be this generative   productive whistle     blower for the radicals / coal at the root of slow kill and not scream     at the Salvadorian man with the leaf blower   in my landscape     and hide him and his hoes       when the ICE raid follows and swallow mister PCs   pcp    ,   in this constant     creaseless / as in iron willed / as in   willow weep for me /     effort to love my enemy I became him       The body of me. Its erotic     disbelief temporarily suspended .    alongside the American eagle     : temptation to define freedom     as   consumerism, justice as my right to an object in a special whites only window : see that seedless eagle run the heavens so : suspended and     hovering over my own safe house and spraying it with liquid hog manure     literally. Check WikiLeaks.     Assange looks like a creep but he saves everybody but himself     so   he must be.         Negro do you wanna be that     creepy?


^^EOP^^

What will you be like when the daylight comes? I’m glad you’re Diana Ross, today. What is she scraping off her face? Two strobing flashlights at the apex of the cheekbones, one on the tip of the nose. I’m so glad you’re Dorothy. Nineties depression chic nirvana flannel and hobo overalls accented with stilettos are back falling through lawn chairs as Rodney King. Your dog ran away in the night and I’m celebrating. Caleb caught a case and I’m running through the streets like there’s a bouquet of swords in one fist and balloons in the other, dissembling my distress. In high school we read Camus’s Rebel but stayed up till midnight to catch the second airing of Jerry Springer on three way. I mostly remember the brawls and such earnest DNA testing, such universal are you my daddy tales. We’d stay on the phone and wait for the results. The audience hated reconciliation and everyone was someone’s mom outrunning the weightless claymation noonnight. Praying for patient doom. Tasting like Cool Ranch Doritos and a room of one’s own. Sullen minstrel cuddling the spotlight won’t you put down your phone and tell me what’s really the matter. Why won’t they call security before she hurls another chair. Their spectacle protects them from sorrow and all sorts of water rots in Chicago and no one seems outraged when the mother’s boyfriend is her daughter’s babyfather     no one turns down the complimentary coffee and hamburgers     or stabs him in the groin.     By default, by heroic shamelessness.     Did you spend at least eight and a half minutes in daylight.     Did you radiate like starch in the Paleolithic age, get so thin it aches. Is the rebel wanted dead or alive? I had asked Diana. She had gone into hiding by then.


^^EOP^^

I mean to really live? Kick a spook in the stomach and commit to yourself and not be committed. Sit through another because I got it like that yoga class where a Coldplay soundtrack competes with the upbeat white chick reminding you to be present, to thank yourself for making it to your mat. Point to any place on the map and blow it up. Blow up spots. Why you gotta blow up spots? I loved Lebanon, never quite made it. I spit out the sudden ash with Don Cherry in Marrakech. I lifted one chiseled leg so high over my head Magic City had called and the ATL was ready to blow me up and I said, please. Do I do. What you do. Sing with me. Another shooter made it first and the ACLU was a petty bunch of pseudo-saviors but they blew up spots that one day. So many sad stories you start laughing at the wrong time and you thought yours was one ’til the time working at Ailey with the girl whose mom was killed by her very own daddy in front of the just-say-no rainbow she drew him in class. She wears heavy aquamarine eyeshadow and closes the gap between feeling and being. I’m glad you’re Dorothy Dandridge. Ban on that word, daddy. Banksy sees the zoo in you and cages hisself in bluer notes. I go wild and will, and will. Myth is a special kind of killer and I love her atonal smile. Without her we’d all go bye-bye, point to a place in the rap and make it a black hole, let it suck us in hug the cuckolded sucker emcees and let it hold us against our certain demolition. Without her you would find it hard to live. All the opiates would shrivel into sickle cell and all the blood running through the streets would keep on believing in bodies —  what obsolete machines, the only ones worth saving. Thank yourself for making it     for being present for the cold ache you sit with and rock into situations     for the way you exploded in nuclear winter and thought you had dreamed it     and made a new world bent as your denial     reached forth to caress it all and it shocked your fingertips     this is the bravest numbness


^^EOP^^

You. You at the door a crumpled thing when I open
surprised. Sing, you hiss. Prosecute, sentence, waving your thin not-arms like dollar
bills, your bewildering moldy skin — one or two of you are you, are you a god now,
bony, wing-beaten down, smaller than
ever, not dead as you should be but not
alive either as you indicate mumbling almost falling in on
your clawed feet — I still have desire — you float — at my
small door — me inside — me inside life. Are you newborn now, I
ask. Are you remnant. Why. Why are there moneylenders
you say swatting me away when I ask can I help, growing more
crumbled, but more than just cloth — all feather,
burlap, beak, fingergrip, all edge and cling. A thing not
formed or not divided yet. Pre-conception. Just at the threshold. Almost falling in your
uneven crouching. Your chest a pulsation. A languishment that will not 
die. What is die. Now there is not blood on the earth
anymore. We disappear. We pixilate. Races or places, is it.
Which? Remember what it was to carry your load? Your you. That
weight. Wondrous it was. At intervals light-struck. Silence and then the
cutting of water, sleeping audible, thrown about by breath, keeping a sharp lookout —
here’s where free choice vanished, here rights, here the
real meaning of the word — (you choose) — consequence, capital, commodity, con-
sumption. Community? Come here says time. Just try to
find it, the here. Such a good game to keep you
occupied for now. The rest of the now. It’s going to be a long
time. Why are you here. What are they lending you. How can it be loaned. What is a loan. The changers.
Who gets to keep it. No one gets to keep it. No one. None of it.
What is it. The money changers. What can 
you change it into. What else do you
want the things to become. But it won’t stay still as
currency either. It will be changed again.
Shape-shifting and all the other tiny adjustments. Currency
manipulation — feel it — all those other
hands on it, each with its own need, having
held it — grasped, changed, folded, tucked, handed — oh
look it becomes virtual — the fingerprint is lifted off,
its little stain — no one’s need is on it any-
more. It’s clean. It has never been, and never again
will be, touched. The looping ledger of the fingerprint’s
wish. I signed my name to this. Did you. In the hush. At the center.
Among the closed shutters at the height of the day I
signed. I clenched the pen and then my dream. It flowed. No one is 
ever at home. I don’t know why. Had been told to live by any means
possible. Did. Beyond, the sea. You could feel this period coming to
an end. All of it. A bomb went off, legs went off, means went
off, blew off, like gossamer — nothing stalled — you couldn’t get it to
stall — seemed painted-on but it was not, was sleeping, reality finally was
sleeping — so deeply — you couldn’t wake it up again, you couldn’t
wake yourself again — it rained — time sputtered now and then like a regurgitation
of space. It’s a jail, light says, but it looks like just being
lost, full of the things we needed to learn, us ready to step up and offer
our lungs, intake and out, change me we say. We want to be
identified, written-in, collected. Worth me up. Give me my true
                                                                               value ...
But still I have to bring this to you in these
words, cracked glaze all over it, little holes over it, belief drilled through,
self, that boutique, gone under, such dark windows, history arrested ... 
History arrested. How is that possible. It flowed. It flowed without us, us on it if we
could catch a ride sometimes. How do you live in this end. I look at you. You have been
through. Your war is done. I try to squint it in. Do you really want to
begin again. Is that why you’re here. I feel I could count your
fingers, each hair left on you, each thread of skin, each crease. Four or five times you
cast a glance on us. But then it’s done. Your passing by us now a
buzzing of flies. You stand at the window and the song begins. We don’t know
what to do with it, the moon, that monster, the fame and the thirst,
the night out there a shirt rolled up to reveal what dusk had
hid — a murky heart, a love that would never be replaced.
But they are still there on the steps — the money changers. The steps
of evening rise. They want you to exchange. That is the sacrament. Why does he
                                                                              keep throwing them out.
Day after day. Forever. Listen to me, you say, you are going off into
thought, it is not a real road. Take yourself 
off the road. He is and is not but he is. And
you are always in the holy place. Because
just being in it makes it holy. Uphold it. Linger. Be eternal for this
instant. Lodge in. I cannot say in what. Have spent a lifetime saying in. In flow,
in promise, rich, in haste experiment crowd season in bias gnawing at
hope invisible in time standing in it confounded tongue in my mouth about to
curl up, speak, promise, taste promise, laugh at the ignorance, cherish
ignorance — don’t leave — this is where I’ve arrived — don’t
slip away, the reverse of the watching and waiting is finally here, wasn’t mine, wasn’t
me speaking either. Not anymore. This is that dream. The darling of
failure. No identification. All impending and then the now strikes. It is
unbreakable. It is. You must believe me. I want to be here and also there where you
receive this but I can’t. That’s the whole story. I will never know
what is there to know. You will not be changed. You must believe.


^^EOP^^

Tournaments lasted days and changed you,
but today the living and dead are speaking
through microphone of “I Voted” button,
erogenous zone, a place in the mind’s wrestle,
pause that votes and bets. Other voters return
to homes, run dishwasher, read to kids,
get high and craft. Still others walk the golf course
turning gold with sprinkler. Returns are noted.
No one hangs who had not already planned to hang.
At some point I’ve thrown almost everything,
and broken within, activated like a glow stick.
It is a sustained throwing; an act with its stink
of trash — power out — each evening, the stairs
and the light switch, and a pause at the open door. 
Unenunciated stair-structures are closing off
the switch from voice to silence. This morning,
a snail bore its huge garden shell, the color of owl,
into the afternoon. How to choose what to bring!
I set the excess down by the door, for nobody
who is there, or seems that way. Near the fire.
Where the weather vane points is where I’ll carry
my father, slung fleece and steady footfall
into the valley of the painting above the couch,
brushstrokes crazed and smoked, enveloping the riders,
us, trot-dazed in a conjectured landscape
paralyzed by the wind’s chisel. The clouds are a sheet
the volcano staples above parking lots to hills
where owners shit and talk on the last phones. 
As long as the sheet holds I will be darling.
Or it is the mildewed sail battened down
where I hide from fathers. Light rain makes
rooftops new. Boughs fracture like lines
an iced-over pond zags ahead of a boot
and in there we get glimpses of inquiry,
otherness to learn more about. Silence
becomes the subject the speaker set out to be,
landscape’s counterpart, and reflection
my resemblance. A hand goes up to stop
the process, and, when the process doesn’t stop,
suppresses until the next moment approaches,
and passes, the bid dizzy with regeneration.
Let’s fold this balloon into animals, vehicles, a weapon, 
the air inside song, or last breath, or first. I’m a dog
when I ape my words. Who would dent or differ?
The teeth of the pig are, it whispers, red and brown
and recede now that they have been mentioned.
When I look close: not us. What is inexpressed?
This departure hurries by and is like the lion
who simultaneously guards the books
and elsewhere tests the river with a paw,
stone in the first and lean flesh in the other
world where the sun is blessing its glide back
into thornbushes and I am stone, guarding stone.
There is no predator I would like to be torn in half by,
from the logging road a cut like a jeweler’s work
down to the shore where the sea stars disappeared 
leaving nukes and love metered and syllabary
and also the rocks they used to cling to exposed
at low tide, green clocks. At dawn a fishing boat’s
uncertain past the rock offshore, chord on chord.
Warped sexual knuckle in flushed purple
and hundreds of shades of orange, herpetic and stone
to touch, cut, they grow back, vitrified, easy to draw.
Round was the dish of mints in the conference room
where we signed over my mother’s liver,
some mints were soft and pastel, some hard
with white covering. Mint grows back in the creek.
The liver grows back too, largest organ in the body.
No, not skin, mother, skin is on the body — 
we addressed this with the host at trivia night 
no, not the one I go to each Sunday with friends,
the constant one I sleep inside of every blink.
Time’s the thing that’s not the mind
or the baby, which wants a nipple.
Time’s a baby in a sling, all the babies
in the park on blankets, beginning,
a minor electricity, water and dust
a kind of suet in a hanging cage
and is larger than whatever the universe
turns out to be (a strawberry pip)
all tough winter, which has been shown
to prosper. Seen from the past the line
is the present when the astronauts came back,
bid us bury our gravity and grow the lines 
that are the story of loneliness, waste,
either enough or not enough. I walk past
the potted plants in the side alley,
marigold, sunfollower, a good plate,
give a little water, adjust the moments.
Constellation of last images before sleep:
a walk around the drained reservoir, arrival
at the island; having a theater all to yourself
and they show the movie anyway. Formless
or forming interior scrumble: the fluttering
of her eyelid is like what floats up the chimney.
Something inside is being stepped-down
to the noises from when I was here last. This time
of year you can see to the bottom of the lake.


^^EOP^^

are our spirits, these loquacious silver gods who glide at
some safe distance above their rank and proletarian bodies. 
Foul though fascinating landscapes they are that they
traverse, besmirched with armpits and fruity genitalia 
and belching gobs and those impulsive blurting sphincters
in whose hot updrafts they might ascend and soar. 
O, but our spirits are so lustrous, so hairless, so advanced
in their glass-bottomed flying machines which run on 
just about nothing! What quick and icy notions they have
that slot into one another like the tightest clocks, and how 
they lick their lips as they gaze down in anticipatory glee,
for though they would not themselves wish to rough it, 
they certainly will peep through their bedroom
windows, each a jiggling voyeur of its own ardent body 
when that body has chanced upon another, and the pair
of them have knuckled down to their immersive work.


^^EOP^^

here. Have been for centuries. No, longer. Everything already has
been. It’s not a reasonable place, this continuum between us, and yet
here again I put the olive trees in, turn the whole hill-sweeping grove down, its
mile-long headfuls of leaves upswept so the whole valley shivers its windy silvers, 
watery ... A strange heat is upon us. Again. That was you thinking that. I suggested it.
Maybe the wind did. We both put in the horizon line now, the great loneliness, its
grip, chaos recessed but still there. After finitude you shall keep coming toward me
it whines, whitish with non-disappearance. We feel the same about this. The same 
what? We feel is there more. That’s the default. We want to live with the unknown in
front of us. Receding, always receding. A vanishing moving over it all. A sleepy
vacancy. It’s the sky, yes, but also this thinking. As from the start, again, here I am,
a mind alone in the fields. The sheep riding and falling the slants of earth. The 
sleepiness a no-good god come to assume we are halfwits, tending, sleepy, the
animals gurgling and trampling, thistle-choked, stinging. A dove on a stone. No sky
to speak of, the god lingers, it wants to retire, it thinks this is endgame, what
could we be — mist about to dry off, light about to wipe a wall for no reason, that 
random. This must have been way BC. Or is it 1944. Surely in 2044 we shall be
standing in the field again, tending, waiting to surprise the god who thinks he knows
what he’s made. Well no. He does not know. We might be a small cavity but it
guards a vast hungry — how bad does that hurt you, fancy maker — you have no idea 
what we turned our back on to come be in this field of earth and tend — yes tend —
these flocks of minutes, whispering till the timelessness in us is wrung dry and we
are heavied with endgame. Have I mentioned the soul. How we know you hustled
that in, staining all this flesh with it, rubbing and swirling it all over inside with 
your god-cloth. Rinse. Repeat. Get this — here with this staff which soon I shall turn
into a pen again — brilliantly negligent, diligent, inside all this self truly formless — I
hear the laughter of the irrigation ditch I’ve made, I see the dry field blonde-up and
green, day smacks its lips, they are back, the inventors, they are going to do it 
again, sprinkle-seed, joker rain coming to loosen it all. How many lives will we be
given, how many will we trade in for this — it comes in bushels, grams, inches, notes,
crows watch over it all as they always have, come back from the end of time to caw
it into its redo again. Cherish us. Will not stop. Nothing to show for it but doing. The 
flock runs across as the dog chases and I walk slowly. I admire what I own what I am
and I think the night is nothing, the stars click their ascent, I feel it rise in me, the
word, I feel the skull beneath this skin, I feel the skin slick and shine and hide the
skull and it is from there that it rises now, I taste it before I say it, this song. 


^^EOP^^

Early in the morning a dough rises from the bowl
curling upward.
He clenches his fists of bean paste, his mouth
dripping a black cocoa stream    ...     
Hey, I say, have you just smuggled
nine knife mountains and nine oil pans from hell?
Deep-fried ghosts are the sweetest the crispiest the most intelligent
even in burned rims, and taste even better with soybean drinks. 
He droops his sad expressions
like Oedipus’s crutch.
Collapsed in the steamer, he squeaks out a sweet smell
of duck soup from his soul — quack, quack.
 
Translated from the Chinese


^^EOP^^

           One conversation, one only, remaining:
It will be that give-and-take
With Larry Littlebird — 
Oral listener — 
All about eagles, their shoulders,
Ospreys, their plummet,
And frogs, their singing
Scratched by rain’s soft claws.             But any of these exchanges will do:
Charlie saying, If you can hum
It you can play it, if you can play at all.
And if not, sing with closed lips to yourself.
Low continuous sound, your refrigerator.
You must not be lonely.
Harold says someone pointed out
Being begins with a hum:
It seems what you are,
You’re happy hearing it, I’m happy for you,
For each other, happy.
Hear it in your colloquial throat,
The syllable meaning human.             Or, if not any of these intercourses, then
Jenny and Chloe, who with a shake
And a nod and a wave of an arm
Toward the East say, We are going
And we’ll go on your behalf
And we’ll carry signs and shout
The last best protest. Cerise and fuchsia
Sisters, ears pointing out.             Or my street signs:
Calaveras (our skull’s tacit mouth) and Eisenhower —  War, a theft from those who hunger And are not fed. Not a way of life at all.
Crossed words on a corner pole.
Movers pack me up, extract me
From that conversation.             I’ve heard a few words — they stay with me,
An earned ear — and yet
Too brief for brooding. Ghost
Of my father, who never said much
But Smell the roses for the camera;
Or when I ask, Can I retire?
He quickly says, Don’t hesitate!
Any of these exchanges will do,
“Now is the perfect time.”
Not “For what?” but stopping it open.
“April Fool,” said my favorite Eleanor,
And then she died. “Good night,” her son
Tipped his hat at me,
From the top of the stairs, and then he tumbled.
“I love you,” I contributed.
And then I buttoned up.


^^EOP^^

In the end, some are incurable. They use lint to
mop up the leaking, or apply cold poultices. 
Creeping mess can be cleared up with pink paste or
trapped in sawdust and swept. 
Blood can pool from their sitting and standing, but
they avoid clots by regular shaking, and the
sucking of sherbet. 
Blue blue for the sky, white for the walls, apricot
for glass and woodwork. 
They devise a timetable by casting lots. They
scrabble around in the dirt for clues. 
Seven is too magical a number to hold, but the soft
ones like to handle it constantly. 
They polish its fine teak head, drive theories
through its shaft and talk into the early hours 
about how it can resemble an ax, or sex, and how
it solves, as well as creates, all conundr/ums/a. 
They admire their creosoted fence for protection
and their own faces in its misaligned hasp. 
A Mrs. Milkwater puts baby brushes to soak in milk
and water (and vinegar). Her sons are successful
barbers. 
At precisely midnight the blue lights go out. The
red lights stay home.


^^EOP^^

            Other than that, all was still — a quiet
so quiet that, as if silence were a kind of spell, and
words the way to break it, they began speaking.
            They spoke of many things:
sunset as a raft leaving the water in braids behind it;
detachment, the soul, obedience;
swans rowing at nightfall across a sky filled with snow;
what did they wish they could see, that they used to see;
to mean no harm, or to not especially, just now, be looking for it;
what would they wish not to see, could they stop seeing;
courage mattering so much less than not spooking easily — 
maybe all nerve is; the search-and-rescue map wildflowers
make of a field in summer; deserving it, versus asking for it,
versus having asked, and been softly turned from.
            They said it would hurt, and it does.


^^EOP^^

She was always elsewhere. 
That’s what Mom wants
carved on her stone. 
When did she first realize
there was an Elsewhere,
and that she was in it? 
What baby songs did she
sing from wherever she was
down to me in my crib? 
The lullabies of   Elsewhere. 
On birthdays
she ﬁlled little ﬂowerpots
with chocolate ice cream 
and a real zinnia,
chocolate jimmies for dirt. 
I tasted the cold chocolate,
I opened the gifts. 
If  they were real, I was real.
I was in the Elsewhere too.


^^EOP^^

1 
“With never a whisper on the main,” so the snow falls,
glaring through the festschrift of acacia leaves
at sunrise and seeping a dye of immortelle
on mild fleece, shrinking back eternity
to flurries stalking summer cairns.
Somewhere, harpies in cruisers blare
beneath prairie clouds. An iceberg flashes, turns
a smoke of ice on the air.
The cold repels, draws out redoubling whites;
in the green heat you hallucinate where the sea runs,
light on light, creeping the heights
your new turret on the house in clouds scorns
nothing: poetry’s sub rosa, ever uncompromised,
as now, infrared crows eclipse the lawns.   2 
And I once brute and stammering to
you toppled in a blue beach chair,
pushed to the meridian-hush island coup
talk, but your eyes search out where
children leap hotels’ sand dams and worry
the guard and his dog. The triumph of
surrender, of love flamed from history,
like that pyro-tailor’s scissors bright roar,
reducing the “treasury of the poor.”
You sputter into a blinding cough
and recover with, “Emerson?” Yes, that culprit
all along, new to me, so was Boston
Common when we waited in the trash fire of autumn
and could feel salt driving off the Atlantic.   3 
Where the mezcal ferns begin and after them
dross wet soil rises from bank to ridge,
sunset’s slow inflation; you point; they change
in one stroke to mountain-blue foliage!
On utility poles hang night’s recessive fable.
Again, you stab the windscreen    ...    out there,
abundant still lifes, the stark inflammable
river you will cross over, recoil at the pier.
What value is the ride? In digression,
art. A mare froths in the sea the following day.
It seems, gathered up by spokes of clouds,
caught in an agonizing conversion.
You jolt towards it, but out laughed a schoolboy, way
too happy — “O Apilo!” — sun-blasted, all colors.   4 
Clinking cavalcade inching up the Sunday
road lined with crowds: none anonymous,
moving as lines do, growing in depth of play,
unstable and absolute where they must.
Each thing has a crack, indeed. Adjust the mirror
beyond the surf’s exhortation and see
arched dolphins at equinox blur
with drizzle Port Antonio into Vigie.
Half mile of bamboo cathedral
tunnels an airy pass there once; its shadows hacked away
and in that vacancy light depreciates now.
Geography is not fate but fatal.
Gone is the corridor to hold your glory.
The sun and sea in your eyes still bow.   5 
Pilgrim of occasional fireflies,
brooding inside the Alliance Française Pyramid,
where the wild honey expires
and the doggerel air embalms all you’ve lived,
relived with lament and praise. Pain’s license.
Silence, then the reciprocity of silence, its
immense language sends an ibis
to absolve and to mark your sins.
Late-in-life astonishment, like bitcoins
on the tongue. What you say is hidden
in noon gossip. Yes, having a gift is to be called.
Since it is given, let it go. The mind irons
bronze in water, a voice radiating:
“We please our elders when we sit enthralled.”   6 
Ascend and bless the devil’s altitude.
Shale drifting from the sky’s blue furnace.
Slant sparks of green off the vale Santa Cruz
below, being so blessed, this is penance,
of a kind, my own road to Emmaus,
wafers upon wafers of oleanders suture
those eyes scattered and staring through dust.
Around each bend arrives the future,
which departs exactly close to Lalibela
one fleeting night the rock churches wept
by my ears, refracted Stoney Hill’s stars,
their ragged music pitching diaspora
against despair. Such music you’ve left
withstands permanently the striation of scars.   7 
To evening air I add, “blown cane blown cane
blown cane,” and step into the Quattrocento
outside the library by the pier. All’s changed.
Blown I am a broad Antillean echo
lost in the marrow wings of a pelican,
or an albatross, cloud remnant, tasseled
low flyer below the radar of the wind.
Trade Winds. Travailed not traveled. Shit-bloodied.
A million blades choir and collapse
on repeat their absolute, surging pledge,
picked up by potholes which I jump to reach
home. Blown canes, singed from the African holocaust.
Dark breaks in me carrying your line, lucid
sandglass, seething uphill. Mine to keep and give.   8 
The kite season is early. Little insurgence
everywhere of souls lifting, subsiding
half transparent in night’s green silence.
By morning they are fallen over the cement fence,
your childhood allamandas annunciate your last withdrawal
into heat so fierce it breaks its own laws
and the man into tears along Lapeyrouse seawall,
his umbrella kite shielding the sun from the murals.
Meantime, I hesitate on a maroon canal in Delft,
crossing water’s filial piety, erring rings whisper
“small honors in the storm” and watch moss lilies
drift into untouchable maze, fastened to each other.
Your ancestors’ spires are of ambergris,
they magnify in the water my spectral self.


^^EOP^^

In a visually spectacular dream some
years back, I took Paul Klee’s posthumous
class in poetry and painting. What luck to
be swept with the elect across the ocean
that night to environs that could only
be by Klee. Klee? you protest. Surely
the dreamer is everyone in her dream.

^^EOP^^

More sky please push open the apartment shutters
crowbar the paint factory’s broken window frames rip
tar paper from the caving roof push it back crack it open 
blast an airshaft through the neighboring buildings snap
it back expose the bird-ridden drafts the wren’s been busy
here mornings year-round churr and chip golden open-throat 
yodel smack in the sleep cycle soldered to feeder suet
in ivy like titmouse chickadee refusing to shift it back
Carolina Canada climate haywire more sky please rik tik tik 
break open more light all the way past oil tank farms
creosote docks the Kill Van Kull slide by kingfisher flap
past cormorant incongruous flights parallel and merging 
plunge into slap out of tidal pools the Fresh Kills beak
full of killifish and silversides crayfish and krill tarp
past the salt grass and bridges fly Pulaski Skyway 
Bayonne’s silver buildings blank tower blocks sky
wide as the river mouth more sky more please push it back
past tankers and tugboats the last hulking cruise ship 
lasers fired across a spinning disco ball wobble bass
and echo chamber dancing on deck past clanging buoys
waveless channels to deepest basin all things even 
terns drop away sea and sky opened wide and empty


^^EOP^^

Because our family is from the countryside,
Your father liked falling from high places.
Limber feet make expert tree climbers.
The coconut — meat for eating, fiber for the buttonmaker. 
Your father liked falling from high places.
Upon landing, he smiles. I carry my share.
The coconut — meat for eating, fiber for the buttonmaker.
Where the bend in the trunk begins matters most. 
Upon landing, he smiles. I carry my share.
Husband and wife walk home, avoiding rice paddies.
Where the bend in the trunk begins matters most.
Even if they are full, trees that stand straight: avoid climbing. 
Husband and wife walk home, avoiding rice paddies.
Your grandmother warned me many times over.
Even if they are full, trees that stand straight: avoid climbing.
But we were young, the city called to us like a wilderness. 
Your grandmother warned me many times over.
Saigon is big, too busy, lacking decency.
But we were young, the city called to us like a wilderness.
The day he died, the sun heated the cement too hot for bare feet. 
Saigon is big, too busy, lacking decency.
Afterwards, home brought no comfort.
The day he died, the sun heated the cement too hot for bare feet.
The New World Hotel stands fourteen stories. 
Afterwards, home brought no comfort,
Because tragedy cannot save face.
The New World Hotel stands fourteen stories.
Everyone here must remember my new dress last fall, 
Because tragedy cannot save face.
Our neighbors recount our tale with great skill and detail.
Everyone here must remember my new dress last fall.
With the white of his palms alone, your father made us a living. 
Our neighbors recount our tale with great skill and detail.
The palm trees out front aren’t tall enough.
With the white of his palms alone, your father made us a living.
Even when we were promised, I could see he had ability. 
The palm trees out front aren’t tall enough.
Mind your father, improve yourself, head upwards.
Even when we were promised, I could see he had ability.
He climbed until he got us to the city. 
Mind your father, improve yourself, head upwards.
Limber feet make expert tree climbers.
Because our family is from the countryside,
He climbed until he got us to the city.


^^EOP^^

Looks to me like you’ve been disinherited, mute-chanting     while sirens scatter the will into a dull blade that can be attached to the muzzle of a rifle like a shadow     or   braid joke.    Stray dreadlock at the bus stop/ black stranded on blue/ and grape flavored bayonet that’s the word, French, daisy-hued lemon enunciation of when. I heard you were leaving this country     and     you tried   holding Rockefeller to daddy’s     promise     in the corridor of  being reasonable     and that he who could not sing should be made to sing     and the crow   pecking at synthetic kinky reggae would stow ’way home     If we   start thinking about the things   that keep us   in   a   place     we know we shouldn’t be in      and as the gates swing   open   jump rope like boxers training in velour short-shorts   and spitfire   just to keep brides in the jungle     sequestered /  the sore lavender nipples of the dairy cows add a rude dimension to the tasting menu   but that’s   what feeds you this sour mold juice, like the tiny yelling hands that piece together these machines   american dolls   and   darn that     charming cardigan made in Stanley Cowell’s   incantatory   shroud of a   winter power outage  ,  every shimmering object settles   in cold blood but I will not be interrupted of it .    I’m sending you two black babies     the greeting card reads     the wood of the reed splits     like the chief’s prophecy/ mask ,     Ma     remembers     the one that sold   her first was   it her father     what is   a   father   bath on   netted   lots .  of stray turtle doves   in this tribe,   ruler and thundering     Bula gnawing on the missing leg     of a queen’s   stool, hers, m aa fa s nursing trumpet was   she her father     I will not be interrupted   even to be my own father   watching me   dance   and earn him   a village .  even by Black Christ of the Tropics   begging to learn his name   in silver verses     I will not be interrupted     I     will   not   be interrupted


^^EOP^^

          By then, of course, they’d done plenty in the name
of recklessness — their word as well, though incorrect,
for wilderness. Ah, scutchweed, rushlightitude, if not,
why not, strowbegone, nor sheep, fa la, shall
          graze. The way, incredibly, for most it’s still enough
to have noticed a similar weather pattern between
regret and the windy plains of remorse, like that must
make them the same, or should, or at least no more
different than a fetish for being eaten alive and
whole is, apparently, from the desire to leave loneliness
          behind forever — a reasonable desire, I suppose, but
in the end a useless one, since actual loneliness isn’t
leavable: love distracts from loneliness, it doesn’t
crowd it from view    ...    some could almost see this,
eventually; others chose not to. Some — the luckiest — 
          arrived at, then clung to, that point in love where
to be understood entirely stops being the main thing,
or a thing at all, even. They could let the nights unfurl
before them, one after the other, each a seemingly
vast underworld of damage they didn’t have to talk about,
          not anymore, they agreed
it was there now, they hovered over it, what light there was
was their own.


^^EOP^^

I like the blue pill best.
Just like a gladiola, its true flower
is invisible.
The rest is holy.
Not like in that Tintoretto
where no one knows god is dying,
just the usual jingle and squawk
from the birdmongers then sudden
downpour, a few of the demons dwelling
beneath the earth tentatively stir.
Not like that. Not tentative. Imploring.
The wound tingles.
A head of foam forms on the mountain.
Into my hand is placed a Mycenaean horse.
Into my hand is placed a wax hand.
The filament will not break.
The fox gets closer.
Mint barks.
5% of its life, an ant is active.
The rest is holy.
Wolfhowl ringtone is holy.
Sticking out your tongue
in the rearview mirror is holy.
Any song that never leaves the lungs,
all us animals garlanded and belled.


^^EOP^^

what a saint you are, shining on everything,
drawn to the world like flames are to moths,
like honey to bees. So readily do you dole
yourself out, and in such abundance so that
we might operate our otherwise redundant eyes.
For they’d be useless even as shiny bibelots
that studded the otherwise dull surfaces of faces. 
No, in your absence, in that total darkness
the eyes wouldn’t see or even be seen. And they
would soon shrivel up and desiccate, die out
from pointlessness like the little toe will
(unless we can find a way to reverse its long
decline). Hey, plump eyes! Isn’t it time you put
your tiny wet hands together for the light!


^^EOP^^

What if the primary colors on your spectrum
were mud, muddled, and muddliest?
Benjamin Franklin invented the Internet
so that I could talk to folk but not face to face
and I know what purple-tailed hawk of thought
just perched on your extended wrist
but try to fit your average feet in my size 17s.
Fact: the average reader processes 300 wpm
and maybe they can read other people’s faces
like a vegan interrogating a list of ingredients
but what if every face was written in Braille
and you had only catcher’s mitts below your wrists,
or IKEA bookcases with reams of instructions
ciphered in tiny print with disappearing ink,
imagine being so literal that when told
to let sleeping dogs lie, you asked
how a Doberman could be dishonest,
imagine every smiling hint a girl ever sent your way
was in a prescription bottle with a You­proof cap
or a personal pizza delivered 30 minutes late
to the door of a boarded-up summer bungalow
then top that double dose of pepperoni
by having even the most casual conversation
served with Denali-sized asides of organic skew.
Fact: the US has 95,000 miles of shoreline,
but on this dinner plate the border between the Country
of Carrots and the Province of Peas can never meet,
say your brain is a slinky bullet-headed train
but your mouth is a horse-drawn Amish wagon
and what rockets across the endless gray rails
of your origamied cranium is ever projected
onto your grinning scrim of skin,
and maybe Ben Franklin didn’t
invent the Internet, but the Internet
has plenty pictures of him inventing electricity
which is almost the same thing,
say your friend Cynthia R. claims it will storm later
and you hear Oran Juice Jones singing
“I saw you (and him) walking in the rain”
and you beam a lighthouse smile,
only Cynthia says, “Seriously, I saw it on the news,”
while all you smell is full-length fur coats
matted by a downpour in MacArthur Park and
now Cynthia R. wants to know what’s so funny
but who can say Oran Juice Jones
without a concentrated face so you try
to collect the loose nickels and pennies
of thought spilling from your front pocket
but Cynthia fires up her smartphone
to show you the seven-day forecast
and now the foil-covered pots on the back
of her electric range are beginning to boil
and you say, “No, I believe you,”
but she believes in tone of voice the way Crayola
once believed in a peach crayon called “Flesh”
or the way banks believe in daily deposits
left by a river’s most assiduous visits.
Fact: the city of Pittsburgh has over 400 bridges,
let’s say you arch quick when softly pricked as
if any foreign finger were a cattle prod
and maybe Ben Franklin didn’t invent
electricity but he certainly earned a shiny penny
by cutting out the lights during thunderstorms,
only your steady tone is mono as a Sinatra single
on the platter of a hand-cranked Victrola,
and Cynthia cocks her head like a small dog
that is not boarding your single­-storied boat
and now you’re a wind-whipped antenna
on an empty dinghy bobbing dockside
as she steams out of range of your radio’s befuddled dial.


^^EOP^^

After I turned forty, I received my first 42 millirem dose of X-rays.
I heated the machine with my uncupped body, tabled my rib cage
to cool shoulders dear as a beloved relative who could no longer see
due to intraocular weather in her eyes. Women in an outer room
awaited bone scans. Backscatter is 5 microrems or .005 millirems.
A dental bitewing X-ray, around 0.5 millirem. Mammogram, 40 to 70.
Do not know about bone scans. Annual background radiation is 300,
higher if we live on a mesa or often fly. Ozone plus uranium decay,
daughters of radon gas.
                                   How about our radiogenic thyroids, butterflies
shimmering with table-salt iodine? Peonies of  bone marrow spun
        rails of flesh in a waiting room of  jacquard chairs,
of  round mirrors and water lilies, paper hydrangeas, African violets.
If  I broke the silence, then I drew the flame of  your sun into my chest.
Unshielded, I entered an inner room to don a rose-colored cotton kimono.
For a minute, I thought of  flying fish roe and forgot its  Japanese name.
What is the risk of carcinogenic harm while estrogen acts on my cells?
Coralline of  the radiology room inside my mouth, the clinical air
exuded an odor of magnolia powder although no one wore it, a scent
riper than radical scavengers of  blackberries. I uttered a prayer
of radiolucence
                      then remembered the word, tobiko.


^^EOP^^

The man I pulled tonight
carried a load of books. 
When I felt him watching
me uphill, I grimaced. 
He gave me lunar
cakes the size 
of two camel humps.
When I answered him, 
I smiled to his face.
He wore the moonlight 
in his specs. Pant
seams clean as the embroidery 
work of his book covers.
One cannot grow rich 
without a bit of cleverness.
Should I have shown 
him the secret of my deft
touch? The Circling Moon, 
the Graceful Swan? How East
Wind beats West Wind 
if other two winds say so?
Snow falls on cedars.


^^EOP^^

To sow the remote morose root.
To sow the virtuous standby.
The backup fodder-crop suffers not
from seasonal vicissitudes,
mildew and blast, caterpillar attack. 
Under Saturn sing the golden-sickled beet.
Under Saturn sing the ringed mangelwurzel.
The great turnip (the dick reuben!).
The pickled paucity-strick stew.


^^EOP^^

Despite all their fervor     they were headed somewhere   limp   in the intellect     nursery rhyme dialect headed   somewhere   all   circumference     hunnid   something for Sumerian   tablet happy meals   where you get     to munch   the   code-cold   sun upfront     the rest   when you’ve     eaten a bit of rat flesh   in the shape of yesterday     perishing

                              youth addiction : Future dreams of codeine nibbles the white nipple wedged between him and his     soul   stice staaay sis what is this?     passes out     on the battlefield, improviser  /    wisest man I ever   mumbled   alongside     Power   with all the wars   in it ain’t shit     in   a   flawed   system     besides   self-destruction   may all our enemies   become powerful   and empty   in the west   while we sell our bodies   these   mumbled   prayers codeine   ain’t got nothin to   do     with my   love, child   either

labor in the holds was painless
bled ’til the chains lost their grip
and there are   tapes   to prove it


^^EOP^^

Good morning, electorate.
We are on good speaking terms
but do not speak, which means
we must be self-reliant,
there are many matters at hand.
We’re not close enough to know each other’s
good news, bad news, private matters. 
There are silent streets off public gardens
for intimacy and come-what-mays.
There is library silence and deadly silence
that is a private matter.
There is happiness written in white
and silent writings, meters overheard.
Silent are the voices I no longer hear — 
after the first word spoken I’d recognize who’s there. 
There is a playwright’s staging called “business,”
silent instructions without dialogue,
and the silence that says, “none of your business,”
but I have an office, a religion, that holds me responsible
for everything.
I hardly lift a finger to stop the slaughtering.
It’s a little like putting a nickel or a dime
in a cup and writing this against death,
raking leaves against the changing seasons. 
My memory is like the first sound picture, The Jazz Singer. I am screening:
it must have been October, 1927,
I remember skipping along Liberty Avenue,
before I learned to dance, I sang,
“Hoover in the ashcan, Smith in the White House.”
Later in Catalonia I danced the Sardana — 
with its opening and closing circles
that made free and equal the young and old,
while the soulful tenora, a revolutionary woodwind,
played the dance forbidden by Generalissimo Franco. 
Further back again toward first silences — 
alone in the Charleville of my den,
I smoked Rimbaud’s clay pipe,
I thought “I will never die.”
I’m simply telling the impossible truth
that made my later studies more difficult.
When I first shaved my fake oxtail beard
invented by Cervantes, I fought back
day-reasoning without understanding
such dreams were my squire.
I returned with Sancho to Granada,
my forefathers’ home, my forbearers’ caves, banderillas in the bull’s neck of my mind.
When I was young and difficult,
Lorca’s photo near my bed,
I saw Twelfth Night, sang Mozart arias,
read history textbooks my father wrote.
Loyalist, I shot fascists, not Iroquois.
I found an old photo of Belmonte, the matador
born with deformed legs — he stood so close to the bull
the beast had to charge around him. His sword
in a cape of silence, he stood erect, motionless,
a gypsy in a suit of lights tailored by Goya. Interval.... Intermission....    
I visited a zoo of languages
on the soon-to-be-sunk Statendam,
in February touring the Mediterranean
with my parents, from the pillars of Hercules
to the Bosphorus. In Barcelona, I sided
with the brave bull who entered the ring deceived,
never having seen a man off a horse,
the bull, however noble, sure of death.  • 
I want my work to have the “taste of self”:
In the bright, silent mornings of my soul,
I refuse my royalties:
a bull’s ears, tail, and severed foot.
God does not ride a horse,
Jesus preferred donkeys.
I feed my donkeys carrots, play them operas.
A trio, they bray with joy. 
Because it’s common sense I make noise for the Lord.
He wants our kind to read, sing, speak
to each other, to rejoice and play to beat the band,
horns, drums, bawdy noisemakers.
We should give Him the time of day,
among sounds, unhearable, bang away,
weep with the uncountable suffering others.
Among the multitudes, in the swarms,
the schools, the hives, rejoice, boo, snore,
make noise for the love of noise and questioning,
praise Him on Doomsday,
He hears the noise of all the world’s blinking eyes.
I believe to live as a silent flower is worthwhile. 
I cannot speak the languages of trees
better than birds, who out of gratitude
and affection learn arboreal grammar,
accents, pronunciation, whatever the weather,
but I try because I love a good oak — 
still, I cannot better the birds    ...    
“Affection” for my neighbor is easy, “love” difficult.
Silence can be affection, silence a perfect herald.
Still there is speechless love and silent conversations
called gestures, helping hands, sometimes
only a loving telephone call.
There are equators, latitudes, and longitudes
of silence, useful compasses,
lighthouses, red and green buoys, red light
to port, green starboard, silent foghorns.
I remember silent remembrances.
Is partial light the opposite of silence?
The sun is noisy, gossips earthly languages.
Shhh. Trying to find truth. 
I’ve heard late-night laughter in Roman streets,
screeching pigs carried upside down to slaughter.
From time to time the living whisper, scream,
“Help me! Murder!” Roots tremble.
I never heard the noise and silence of mass murder. 
In Asia and Africa, there are English wildfires.
Greek and Latin are still smoldering,
flaming African syllables on every tongue.
Love, silence, reflection, and revelation
in the jungle and pine-barren ashes.
I lift my head to music I call gods,
whole notes, scales, clefs, and rests
that are saints, mullahs, rabbis, atheists, pagans.
So I will ask to collect my dead and wounded
and you will never hear from me,
the unheralded herald, anymore.


^^EOP^^

Existence trumps nonexistence every time. It has
all the colors and all the shapes and all the moves, 
it is rude in its bounty and its grotesque reach that
overcomes all before it. This bit of stick I found in 
the park was showing off because the dead can’t have it.
They can’t have any of it. It was sticky and prickled 
with a showy, dazzling presence, though it’s quietened
a little now, now that I’ve taken it home 
and have it here on the mantelpiece. It has dressed
in purple robes and carried its being like a chalice 
with such disarming mock-solemnity down and down
the pale carved steps into its candlelit depths. 
Its being rests inside it now and purrs quite inaudibly
with a sound like the most exclusive refrigerator, 
or a sound you might take for your own sovereign
wheels spinning. Little stick. Wait for me. I’m coming.


^^EOP^^

The stork arrived alone one day,
beak sharpened like a bayonet. All the love you’ve had turned bad! he sang,
eyes boring through the dingy nets.
He hopped onto the patio. Good lord! Is this a rented flat? 
                Behind the shed, albino rats
                were nuzzled on a family bed.
                He hovered over them, wings spread.
                Now this is how you do it! he said.
                He speared a worm and sucked it down.
                A rented flat, my god, he said. 
Inside, I laid my hands around
my lump, my pumpkin-up-the-jumper.
I’d swapped the wine and cigarettes
for goji berries, spent the summer
asleep or stretched in yoga pose, Utkatasana, Dhyana    ...     
                The stork came hopping round the corner
                scraped his claw across the door — 
                Hello, hello? he called, polite,
                then screamed I will not be ignored!
                He had a bloody bone to pick,
                an oozy piece of mind to share. 
                                I was eight months gone by Halloween.
                                Kids rang the rented bell in sheets
                                and slime. I tried “maternal” out
                                with chocolate limes and fizzy sweets.
                                The bird shrieked half the witchy night:
                                For god’s sake, are you stupid? Teeth! 
                I waddled off to pack my case — 
                gorillas snoozing on the onesies,
                pink booties, pads to catch the blood.
                When they tugged that baby out of me
                he came up laughing, blessed the midwife
                with a fiery arc of golden pee 
and through the skylight of the ward
I saw the stork retreat, zigzagging
up into the evening sky,
a fading squawk, the beat of wings.
Then they laid that baby on my chest
to feed, and cut the navel string — 


^^EOP^^

The swinger the swirler the swirled: stop grieving.
I drink all night but in a diminishing appetite.
The scene outside is obscene from a humbling window.
My sentiment spreads, my famine a flagpole, a grizzle.
Birds sing next year’s songs, or antique rescues.
I write but where shall I send it?
Let go — I shall go tie the flowers the leaves the whole orchard.
The outskirts are curved, shadows of countrywoman donors    ...    
You bring me a cup of fresh tea that I love,
I return you two kapok leaves — like hand waves.
 
Translated from the Chinese


^^EOP^^

Under Venus the sugared wound, the heart-strung-up, the viola d’amore. Under Venus the Pliny-prescribed, the horsehair-hanked — not plucked, tugged — the singly sung (catgut kidney-cuffs the caterwaul, a knockback to the viola bastarda). Kittenish! A scalloped flirtatious border — florid cordial pansies (candied adoration). Viola  odorata. Parfait d’Amourish.


^^EOP^^

A garland to fend off the dizzies.
A garland to keep the quinsy at bay.
March closes the seeded umbilicus.
April opens the musty secundina.
Equinox the half-melt rot.
Easter the thin asquintable light.


^^EOP^^

I might have married a painter,
Therefore his mother. A radar 
Detector, a snow-covered
Mountain, a novel 
By John Grisham not even
Out yet. No, I wed 
The cop directing my rush, Toot toot, a trainer to test 
Agility, a kettle calling
Time to steep. Yes, 
But I married this bird you must
Close your eyes to know 
At scale, to hear his trills
And fancy arpeggios 
Come-come-hithering.
His note of warning.


^^EOP^^

Family, lover, colleague. Notions, veneers, nation. Teeth of no health insurance.
 
A boom can be a microphone affixed to a pole and not an explosion.
 
Shadows, we sweep at them constantly and on the table is chocolate, newspapers, commentary, and vastly different pay stubs.
 
 
 
 
I lean in to you and wish to love you perfectly.
 
Suffer, tumble, strive, the right shoes, and vacation.
 
At the table, conference and always pretty, the fixed.
 
Shimmer of repulsion or fairy tale of cleavage.
 
 
 
 
I count pleasures like cream, sipping, speaking. I like fashion as well.
 
 
All the hymns you and I know as his headboard knocks against our wall, the slap when he coughs, our neighbor.
 
 
 
 
The most racist of all positions at the staff meeting is to tell us about your shocking talent if there is a most. A prayer dangles over this bitter.
 
 
 
 
Looping coves of sympathy. How to history.
 
 
 
 
My flat speech in variously adopted professional tones.
 
Merger of you and me and take whatever you want.
 
Her beautiful poetry face. His intellectual arms.
 
I worry about the ferocious place in you while framing it.
 
 
 
 
A person as diversion, a thing beautiful, a small green-blue egg in a spring next and now the field is gendered.
 
 
 
 
 
Have you seen the moment of last light? It means something to me.
 
 
 
 
 
Assuming my gender qualifies your hearing and therefore my speech, you overlap words with mine in what appears to be a neutral manner but your speech acts as solvent.
 
 
 
 
 
Down the hall, high heels as metronome, watched.
 
Out of our bodies comes speech as clouds, flag, windsock, bandage.
 
 
 
Dear—
You could make more money if you wanted to. Such as a day of beauty, persuasive levels of caring. For example: doing both brow and lip.
 
 
 
Are you spending or quiet?
 
 
 
 
Let’s go to lunch would mean exchanging speech and then carrying warm food in plastic bags.
 
 
 
 
Coherence as my mother sleeps after a complicated surgery.
 
And if I were, would you be generous with me as well?
 
 
 
 
 
Race ran the organization which one.
 
We socialize in this real estate of gerrymandered potlucks.
 
I think there exists silence as a legitimate response and I will say that now.
 
 
 
The caring for our souls by old black women in the narrative of a college president, passing. Excuse me for not knowing passing.
 
You remember but only after the spine is broken.
 
 
 
 
Something in chemistry called suspension equals your ghosts caught in my air.
 
 
 
 
The Bronx is horning was a line they wrote where I was educated, teaching.
 
 
 
 
Response to migration: the pullback of the form remains as a hum, a tongue.
 
 
 


^^EOP^^

and who are you now       
       in this different blue space without pain
   remarking on chemtrails and snowmelt,   misreading the “sea”
whose letters cease to arrive
 
     remain transfixed in midflight       turbulent coasts
aloft as a principle of life--
 
        count invisible clams under nameless sands
   cut apostrophes into the air     announcements
 send far-flung greetings to strangers for days 
          keep the magma enigma at bay        daily joys
    
        effaced vaporous pale generous smoke rising
 
      so cling to the dark hand inside you
  its basalt fingers, rounded
 


^^EOP^^

when i look at my life
i feel like bursting into tears
marriage
and mental illness
vintage washed
michael jackson graphic
spiritual disco grieving ritual
sell your body
to your horse-eyed past
little fictions
somebody got to sing
and somebody
got to play the squaw
last time i saw him
last time i saw my honey
buried your dead
lack of afro
exit wounds
cut off whole limbs
of generational desire
the death of cleopatra
hell or high water
get some fucking
love in your life girl
ghost chant
you’ve got to die
if you want to live
amidst and against 
the things we are 
rubbed into the cloth
wrapped around their faces
now white men
are black men too
the ways
we can’t say no
i call you queen
not as a term of endearment
but as a reminder
our histories meet
on the inside
we all be black moses
slave for the river
same river twice
sometimes
have to emphasize
the brown part
hey there beautiful brown girl
we don't usually change
until things are so painful
that we must
 


^^EOP^^

I am totally enamored of every person passing in this unseasonably warm mid-March evening near 39th and Park
 
The young women, of course, with their lives in front of them, and the young men too, just standing here as I am, checking it out, hanging out, talking
 
But everyone here, every age, every type, is beautiful, the moment, somehow, the weather, has made them all real and for this moment, before it turns to night, they're all fantastic
 
The light is such that I can see everyone and can imagine what they are imagining for the night ahead, what dreams, what fulfilled fantasies of togetherness
 
And the two guys who were here a moment ago, paused, have moved on, and the light is deepening, every moment or so, actually falling into a deeper stupor, which is night
 
But if I look south I still see the pink flush of desire there at the bottom, the southness of all our lives, and it's okay that it's darkening here, people accept it as they concoct plans for tonight, Thursday
 
Soon I'll have to go too, lose this spot, this moment, but some we've met and some experience we had somewhere else is becoming ever more important
 


^^EOP^^

What if I ate too much food     there being
Not enough money    immigranty
And save all the ketchup
                                  packets    George
Carlin record on the record player saying
how many ways you can curse and they
are all funny   (small brown bird with a black
neck and a beak full of fluff for a nest)
 
       The old joke: “How many feet
do you have?”     Instead of
“How tall are you?”
 
This looks like joy     a joke
who looked at you and laughed
 
Look at the map upside down    so that south
Is north and north is south
          it’s the other
way around because it’s the commonly agreed to
thing    (visual language of the colonizer) or
snowful awful     tearful wishful


^^EOP^^

Imaginary book
on Imaginary paper
in Imaginary hands
 
Imaginary dance
on Imaginary floor
in Imaginary lands
 
Imaginary phone
and Imaginary car
 
Imaginary raising
of Imaginary bar
 
Imaginary kid
Imaginary tree
Imaginary you
makes Imaginary three
 
Imaginary soul
Imaginary death
Imaginary line
Imaginary breath
 
Imaginary neighbors
with Imaginary friends
Imaginary road
with Imaginary bends
 
Imaginary pot
Imaginary beer
Imaginary death
Imaginary fear
 
Imaginary love
that stops you dead
Imaginary bullet
of Imaginary lead
 
Imaginary day
and Imaginary night
Imaginary wind
Imaginary kite
 
Imaginary heat
and Imaginary ice
Imaginary toppings
on Imaginary slice
 
Imaginary Emerson
meet Imaginary Poe
Imaginary poet
Imaginary crow
 
 
1-9-16 
 


^^EOP^^

Many nights while walking home 
after work, from downtown to 
an apartment below a market,  
I’d think of Alfred Espinas:
“We do not get together to die,
but to live and to improve life.” 
Sudden changes of weather and
contagious diseases nearly broke
the spirits of many friends that 
winter, but charmingly we made 
habits of dancing and sharing
meals in our cramped rooms. 
Our landlords were thieves and
our bosses were pessimists, yet
we dreamed of a new phase of 
civilization, one of kindness and
goodwill. “We need communes,”
Oscar exclaimed. Silvia argued, 
“But islands are corpses, let’s think
instead of syndicates.” Mondays 
we’d return to dirty dishes, copy 
machines, and dull knives, and 
we spent the next three centuries
doing what we were paid to do.
 


^^EOP^^

My crown.
My room.
Surrounding snow.
 
These are not my
hands, my winter shoes
carried off by uncertain music.
 
There was a meadow
behind my house
and if I should see myself there
she would tell me
there was never a meadow
 
and then walk through me
as if through a cloud
and carry on in her own
solitary direction.
 
Crows still caw
in her palace garden—
tram rails, rain,
stammering moon.
 
Once lilacs bloomed
their huge white knuckles
breaking the winter of my room—
 
it was a dream—French windows
on a Viennese street.
 
Every street I cross
angling alongside
smoggy postwar artifices
 
branches scratch
against my sleep.
 
How my body was a branch
in my sleep.
 
And when I woke
years later
I peered down upon it
leafless and stiff.
 
No roosts left, no caw.
No birds blooming
in my dream’s green crooks.
 
Afternoons alone
are labyrinthine.
I wander the city, searching
for what? Friends,
we knew where to find each other,
tapping the window of the winter room.
 
We were thinner then,
younger than the chestnut trees.
 
Everything has its seed
much later
and on the other side of time.
 


^^EOP^^

Praise the monstrous body, too enormous to describe. When the tongue is taken, how may the mouth even try.  
Praise the bitch slapped face, the hemorrhaged eyes. The cluster. The clot. We thin our blood, we run. We run, and we always look back.  
Praise the trafficked body, the one that is excised. On smartphones, with hashtags, we lament the phantom part.  
Praise the foreign object rushing to the heart. That is you, the help, the heroine. We pump our fists for you, isang bagsak!  
Praise the ever-present lens, the firing squad shoots every curse and plea. Your breath is a miracle, a lifeline, a headline.  
The old you is dead. Praise for her soul. We offer to her our last Lacrimosa. Praise the new you, the chrysalis, the secluded saint.  
Praise you. May you emerge, graced and gospeled. Unjudged, unfallen, and the color of sky.


^^EOP^^

The link between us all
is tragedy, & these so many years
later, I am thinking about him,
 
all of twenty & gay & more free
than any of us might ever be,
& this is one way of telling the story,
 
another one is aphorism or threat:
blood on my knife or blood on my dick,
which is to say that surviving that young &
 
beautiful and willing to walk every day
as if wearing sequins meant believing
that there is always something worth risking doom.
 
There is no reason for me to think of him
now, especially with the football player’s
hanging body eclipsing another prison
 
cell, except, maybe the kid whose name
I can’t remember but walk I can, had mastered
something the dead man’s singing legs could
 
never, how not to abandon the body’s
weight, & how to make the body expand,
to balloon, to keep becoming, until even
 
the danger could not swallow you.
One day I watched him, full of fear for
my own fragility & wondered how he dared
 
own so much of himself, openly. For all
I know every minute in those cells
was safe for the kid whose name
 
I cannot recall. But how can a man ever
be safe like that, when you are so
beautiful the straight ones believe it &
 
want to talk to you as if they love you
and want you to dare them to believe
some things in this world must be
 
far too lovely to ever be broken.


^^EOP^^

Pathetic bright-dark, crawling with history.
Leave it to the angels to judge me.  Gunfire
In the distance, I keep my houselights on
During the day.  No absence of memory,
 
Please, I am only just getting started.  It
Is precisely the moment to which you “adhere,”
Drawing the wounds on a faded photograph.
You say your deepest powers only come
 
Once in a lifetime, you say that we blink
Over ourselves.  The limit of anywhere is
To forgive, and the classic metaphor for
Effort stumbles at a grave.  I am looking for you
 
Always.  This is the very moment of stepping
Outside and being thrown into a glare of light.
 


^^EOP^^

Eloquent
Silence of everyone I ever loved
This cloudy Friday evening
Spring but still cold
A smattering of new buds
Who's that
Swaddled in
The uneasy atmosphere
In silence
No chatter or pleasant surprise
The lusty rush of a weekend
With the beloved
Who's that
Sprouting now out of
The cottony silence
With silky whips
Still hanging from their little chops
Who is it straining
To pop out
Of the hardwood
Rings of time
Into the cool air
Like there's another cool world
On the other side of this one
Worth pushing
Through to or maybe
We're already there
Is that
Why we shake


^^EOP^^

It wouldn't kill me
to find new frequencies
in a temper tantrum.
 
Tatamis and memory,
magnetized selves
becoming heavy.
 
Of what is a scream composed?
You may want to know.
 
You may want to know why.
 
It is to these arabesques
that the birdsong
replies.
 
Copula, disappear.
Anguish, multifoliate.
I am a brother to a wandering prayer.
 
Orb in ruined loop
fluting for a lost future.
 
I grab what is left of pistons
bouncing across a street.
 
The barricade is foolproof.
 


^^EOP^^

The night is come, but not too soon;
  And sinking silently,
All silently, the little moon
  Drops down behind the sky. 
There is no light in earth or heaven
  But the cold light of stars;
And the first watch of night is given
  To the red planet Mars.  
Is it the tender star of love?
  The star of love and dreams?
O no! from that blue tent above,
  A hero's armor gleams.  
And earnest thoughts within me rise,
  When I behold afar,
Suspended in the evening skies,
  The shield of that red star.  
O star of strength! I see thee stand
  And smile upon my pain;
Thou beckonest with thy mailèd hand,
  And I am strong again.  
Within my breast there is no light
  But the cold light of stars;
I give the first watch of the night
  To the red planet Mars.  
The star of the unconquered will,
  He rises in my breast,
Serene, and resolute, and still,
  And calm, and self-possessed.  
And thou, too, whosoe'er thou art,
  That readest this brief psalm,
As one by one thy hopes depart,
  Be resolute and calm.  
O fear not in a world like this,
  And thou shalt know erelong,
Know how sublime a thing it is
  To suffer and be strong.


^^EOP^^

Probably twilight makes blackness dangerous
Darkness. Probably all my encounters
Are existential jambalaya. Which is to say,
A nigga can survive. Something happened
In Sanford, something happened in Ferguson
And Brooklyn & Charleston, something happened
In Chicago & Cleveland & Baltimore & happens
Almost everywhere in this country every day.
Probably someone is prey in all of our encounters.
You won’t admit it. The names alive are like the names
In graves. Probably twilight makes blackness
Darkness. And a gate. Probably the dark blue skin
Of a black man matches the dark blue skin
Of his son the way one twilight matches another.


^^EOP^^

I lock you in an American sonnet that is part prison,
Part panic closet, a little room in a house set aflame.
I lock you in a form that is part music box, part meat
Grinder to separate the song of the bird from the bone.
I lock your persona in a dream-inducing sleeper hold
While your better selves watch from the bleachers.
I make you both gym & crow here. As the crow
You undergo a beautiful catharsis trapped one night
In the shadows of the gym. As the gym, the feel of crow-
Shit dropping to your floors is not unlike the stars
Falling from the pep rally posters on your walls.
I make you a box of darkness with a bird in its heart.
Voltas of acoustics, instinct & metaphor. It is not enough
To love you. It is not enough to want you destroyed.


^^EOP^^

Inside me is a black-eyed animal
Bracing in a small stall. As if a bird
Could grow without breaking its shell.
As if the clatter of a thousand black
Birds whipping in a storm could be held
In a shell. Inside me is a huge black
Bull balled small enough to fit inside
The bead of a nipple ring. I mean to leave
A record of my raptures. I was raised
By a beautiful man. I loved his grasp of time.
My mother shaped my grasp of space.
Would you rather spend the rest of eternity
With your wild wings bewildering a cage or
With your four good feet stuck in a plot of dirt?


^^EOP^^

Why are you bugging me you stank minuscule husk
Of musk, muster & deliberation crawling over reasons
And possessions I have & have not touched?
Should I fail in my insecticide, I pray for a black boy
Who lifts you to a flame with bedeviled tweezers
Until mercy rises & disappears. You are the size
Of a stuttering drop of liquid — milk, machine oil,
Semen, blood. Yes, you funky stud, you are the jewel
In the knob of an elegant butt plug, snug between
Pleasure & disgust. You are the scent of rot at the heart
Of lovemaking. The meat inside your exoskeleton
Is as tender as Jesus. Neruda wrote of “a nipple
Perfuming the earth.” Yes, you are an odor, an almost
Imperceptible ode to death, a lousy, stinking stinkbug.


^^EOP^^

electrically rowed Rousseau from a wide green meadow
                                                                                        into his brain
along with Buffon and Diderot
                                                 and the entire Enlightenment embroidered
in fractions, thus confusing
                                              poetry and mathematics. He stood back
and declared:
                        An umbrella could envelope
                                                                      a good part
of the village of Poleymieux en route to reviving the library
                                                                                             and why
did my wife die so young?
                                          Wrote out the psalms on his palm in the
electrodynamic molecules of his time
                                                           which he carried next to his heart
in a heart-shaped box
                                     obsessed
                                                   by Ørsted’s magnetized needle, leaping
full-grown and fully armed
                                           into the periodic table. Noble metals
isolated and at war
                               put each order in order
                                                                      and was the first to define
electric current as a circulation
                                                gazing out over the Mediterranean until it dies.


^^EOP^^

I sit on the couch & witness my life
projected on a screen — I am white
w/a chiseled, dimpled chin & no lips.
I’m a farmer who lives alone in a loft
& not a lowly office worker who lives
w/a roommate in an apartment where
dust balls decorate the floors & walls
& the ceiling rings w/children’s feet
running back & forth like baby bulls.
I am crazy enough to be a contestant
on a show where I’m contractually obligated
to propose to a woman who believes
in a heteronormative, patriarchal
idea of what a family should be.
At the end of every episode, I offer
roses to those I wish to make out w/more
& take out on prepackaged romantic dates
I could never afford on my bachelor budget.
For example: a date in a castle, a glass
slipper prop, a clock winding its way
down to midnight. My date & I sip
champagne, chat & eat, then we dance
to a live orchestra led by a maestro
who wishes he were dead. A giant screen appears
& plays a clip of a live-action Cinderella movie
w/Prince Charming played by an actor
I’ve seen slaughter & behead a soldier
like clipping the head off a rose.
In real life, my dates consist of dinner
at Burger King where we dine on chicken
fries & don paper crowns for a royal feel.
On another show date, I take two women into South
Dakota where we fly over the heads of white
slave owners carved into a sacred Native mountain.
At the end of the date, I offer no roses to either
woman & abandon them on a canopied bed
in the middle of the Badlands & take off
in a helicopter to provide the cameras
an aerial view of wilderness & despair.
At the end of the show, I find myself proposing
to a fertility nurse in a barn made to look
like a chapel & not the place where I raised
my first horse, fucked my first goat. Here,
I will milk the cows for our future offspring
to drink straight from the teat like I did as a kid.
The show ends & I rise from the couch
& walk into the kitchen. On bended knee,
I reach for a bottle of beer deep
in the back of the fridge, pop the top
like a question & take a swig, cold
& crisp once it hits my full lips.


^^EOP^^




Knoxville, December 27, 2016, for Marilyn Kallet’s 70th birthday.
This poem was constructed to carry any memory you want to hold close.



We
 
arrived
 
when the days
 
grew legs of night.
 
Chocolates were offered.
 
We ate latkes for hours
 
to celebrate light and friends.
 
We will keep going despite dark
 
or a madman in a white house dream.
 
Let’s talk about something else said the dog
 
who begs faithfully at the door of goodwill:
 
a biscuit will do, a voice of reason, meat sticks — 
 
I dreamed all of this I told her, you, me, and Paris — 
 
it was impossible to make it through the tragedy
 
without poetry. What are we without winds becoming words?
 
Becoming old children born to children born to sing us into
 
love. Another level of love, beyond the neighbor’s holiday light
 
display proclaiming goodwill to all men who have lost their way in the dark
 
as they tried to find the car door, the bottle hidden behind the seat, reason
 
to keep on going past all the times they failed at sharing love, love. It’s weak they think — 
 
or some romantic bullshit, a movie set propped up behind on slats, said the wizard
 
of junk understanding who pretends to be the wise all-knowing dog behind a cheap fan.
 
It’s in the plan for the new world straining to break through the floor of this one, said the Angel of
 
All-That-You-Know-and-Forgot-and-Will-Find, as she flutters the edge of your mind when you try to
 

sing the blues to the future of everything that might happen and will. All the losses come tumbling
 
down, down, down at three in the morning as do all the shouldn’t-haves or should-haves. It doesn’t matter, girl —
 
I’ll be here to pick you up, said Memory, in her red shoes, and the dress that showed off brown legs. When you met
 
him at the age you have always loved, hair perfect with a little wave, and that shine in your skin from believing what was
 
impossible was possible, you were not afraid. You stood up in love in a French story and there fell ever
 
a light rain as you crossed the Seine to meet him for café in Saint-Germain-des-Prés. You wrote a poem beneath the tender
 
skin from your ribs to your hip bone, in the slender then, and you are still writing that song to convince the sweetness of every
 
bit of straggling moonlight, star and sunlight to become words in your mouth, in your kiss — that kiss that will never die, you will all
 
ways fall in love. It doesn’t matter how old, how many days, hours, or memories, we can fall in love over and over
 
again. The Seine or Tennessee or any river with a soul knows the depths descending when it comes to seeing the sun or moon stare
 
back, without shame, remorse, or guilt. This is what I remember she told her husband when they bedded down that night in the house that would begin
 
marriage. That house was built of twenty-four doves, rugs from India, cooking recipes from seven generations of mothers and their sisters,
 
and wave upon wave of tears, and the concrete of resolution for the steps that continue all the way to the heavens, past guardian dogs, dog
 
after dog to protect. They are humble earth angels, and the rowdiest, even nasty. You try and lick yourself like that, imagine. And the Old
 
Woman laughed as she slipped off her cheap shoes and parked them under the bed that lies at the center of the garden of good and evil. She’d seen it all. Done it
 
more than once. Tonight, she just wanted a good sleep, and picked up the book of poetry by her bed, which was over a journal she kept when her mother was dying.
 
These words from May Sarton she kept in the fourth room of her heart, “Love, come upon him warily and deep / For if he startle first it were as well / to bind a fox’s
 
throat with a gold bell /As hold him when it is his will to leap.” And she considered that every line of a poem was a lead line into the spirit world to capture a
 
bit of memory, pieces of gold confetti, a kind of celebration. We all want to be remembered, even memory, even the way the light came in the kitchen
 
window, when her mother turned up the dial on that cool mist color  of a radio, when memory crossed the path of longing and took  mother’s arm and she put down her apron
 
said, “I don’t mind if I do,” and they danced, you watching, as you began your own cache of remembering. Already you had stored the taste of mother as milk, father as a labor
 
of sweat and love, and night as a lonely boat of stars that took you into who you were before you slid through the hips of the story. There are no words when you cross the
 
gate of forbidden waters, or is it a sheer scarf of the finest silk, or is it something else that causes you to forget. Nothing is ever forgotten says the god of remembering
 
who protects the heartbeat of every little cell of knowing from the Antarctic to the soft spot at the top of this planetary baby. Oh baby, come here, let me tell you the story
 
of the party you will never forget, no matter where you go, where you are, or where you will be when you cross the line and say, no more. No more greedy kings, no more disappointments, no more orphans,
 
or thefts of souls or lands, no more killing for the sport of killing. No more, no more, except more of the story so I will understand exactly what I am doing here, and why, she said to the fox
 
guardian who took her arm to help her cross the road that was given to the care of Natives who made sure the earth spirits were fed with songs, and the other things they loved to eat. They like sweets, cookies, and flowers.
 
It was getting late and the fox guardian picked up her books as she hurried through the streets of strife. But it wasn’t getting late. There was no late, only a plate of tamales on the counter waiting to be
 
or not to be. At this age, said the fox, we are closer to the not to be, which is the to be in the fields of sweet grasses. Wherever you are, enjoy the evening, how the sun walks the horizon before cross
 
sing over to be, and we then exist under the realm of the moon. There’s where fears slay us, in the dark of the howling mind. We all battle. Befriend them, the moon said as a crab skittered under her skirt, her daughter in
 
the high chair, waiting for cereal and toast. What a girl she turned out to be, a willow tree, a blessing to the winds, to her family. There she is married, and we start the story all over again, said her father
 
in a toast to the happiness of who we are and who we are becoming as Change in a new model sedan whips it down the freeway toward the generations that follow, one after another in the original
 
lands of the Mvskoke who are still here. Nobody goes anywhere though we are always leaving and returning. It’s a ceremony. Sunrise occurs everywhere, in lizard time, human time, or a fern uncurling time. We
 
instinctually reach for light food, we digest it, make love, art or  trouble of it. The sun crowns us at noon. The whole earth is a queen. Then there are always goodbyes. At sunset say goodbye to hurt, to suffering, to the pain you caused others,
 
or yourself. Goodbye, goodbye, to Carrie Fisher, the Star Wars phenomenon, and George Michael, the singer. They were planets in our emotional universe. Some of my memories are opened by the image of love on screen in an
 
imagined future, or broken open when the sax solo of “Careless Whisper” blows through the communal heart. Yes, there’s a cosmic consciousness. Jung named it but it was there long before named by Vedic and Mvskoke scientists. And, there is
 
a cosmic hearteousness — for the heart is the higher mind and nothing can be forgotten there, no ever or ever. How do I sing this so  I don’t forget? Ask the poets. Each word is a box that can be opened or closed. Then a train of words, phrases
 
garnered by music and the need for rhythm to organize chaos. Like right here, now, in this poem is the transition phase. I remembered it while giving birth, summer sun bearing down on the city melting asphalt but there we were, my daughter
 
and I, at the door between worlds. I was happier than ever before to welcome her, happiness was the path she chose to enter, and  I couldn’t push yet, not yet, and then there appeared a pool of the  bluest water. We waited there for a breath
 
to catch up, and then it did, and she took it that girl who was beautiful beyond dolphin dreaming, and we made it, we did, to the other side of suffering. This is the story our mothers tell but we couldn’t hear it in our ears stuffed with Barbie advertising,
 
with our mothers’ own loathing set in place by patriarchal scripture, the smothering rules to stop insurrection by domesticated slaves, or wives. It hurt everybody. The fathers cannot know what they are feeling in such a spiritual backwash. Worship
 
boxes set into place by the need for money and power will not beget freedom. Only warships. For freedom, freedom, oh freedom sang the slaves, the oar rhythm of the blues lifting up the spirits of peoples whose bodies were worn out, or destroyed by a man’s slash,
 
hit of greed. This is our memory too, said America. Heredity is a field of blood, celebration, and forgetfulness. Don’t take on more than you can carry, said the eagle to his twin sons, fighting each other in the sky over a fox, dangling between
 
them. It’s that time of the year, when we eat tamales and latkes. We light candles, fires to make the way for a newborn child, for fresh  understanding. Demons will try to make houses out of jealousy, anger,  pride, greed, or more destructive material. They place them in a
 
part of the body that will hold them: liver, heart, knee, or brain. So, my friend, let’s let that go, for joy, for chocolates made of ashes, mangos, grapefruit, or chili from Oaxaca, for sparkling wine from Spain, for these children who show up in our dreams and want to live at any cost because
 
we are here to feed them joy. Your soul is so finely woven the silkworms went on strike, said the mulberry tree. We all have mulberry trees in the memory yard. They hold the place for skinned knees earned by small braveries, cousins you love who are gone, a father cutting a

watermelon in the summer on the porch, and a mother so in love that her heart breaks — it will never be the same, yet all memory bends to fit. The heart has uncountable rooms. We turn to leave here, and so will the hedgehog who makes a home next to that porch. We become birds, poems.


^^EOP^^

What stays in
Doesn’t come out
Nipples hard with milk
When things are of another time
They are of that time
Not timeless
They are no longer here
Nipples hard with liquid or falsities
White and soft
I can’t get it out
No matter how hard I yank
Or pull and suck
Face watching with my own
Nipple in my mouth
Like the room she’s in
I went and I seduced
But no matter what
I couldn’t get her to leave
Aqua and in the morning, coffee
The bathroom gold and green
No matter what I said
She stayed there
She had her own fantasies to wait for
Milk that never comes out
It grows inside
Does it fold back in time
I want to say it becomes different
The man who grafted another face
What poems I wrote for him
No I want to say
That when you came at me
With the syringe
That I loved you
In gold and green
You came at me
Revision upon revision
Of your love
It wasn’t like you
To give up
I knocked and knocked
And you went back
Into your doorway
What days
The nipples rising
With future things to come
What happened to those thoughts
To those people
I loved that woman
In the building
Sunset road
The place
With the dead babies
But no matter what I did
How hard I yanked
She would never leave
I knocked and knocked
No matter what I did
Or said
I just couldn’t
Get her out of there


^^EOP^^




For Thomas Lux



                            I heard them, far-off, deep calling
from behind death’s invisible floor door. Their wallow
metronome from the after-rain mud was one giant body.
Arizona’s yellow arm’s length of light all the way
to my own body standing at the edge of their field held
me. I moved toward them and they toward me, as if to ask
for something from nothing, as memory does, each face                              dumbfounded    ...    dumb and found by
the timeframe of my own fear, surrounded at dusk.
There was a plastic grocery bag, its ghost body cornered
small against a tree, and there was a heavy smell.
Desolation is equal to contained energy now.
Their heavy bodies slow toward me, my own
slow inside their circle without kulning.                              Kulning is a Swedish song for cows, not
a pillowcase pulled over the head. Here, the mountains could be seen
from far away. There’s an abandoned physics, a floor door,
my own head-call herding me, in-hearing nothing but them.
Bone for bone’s female indicates the inside
of the mouth when singing is grief alone and is curved.                              You can’t stop shifting no matter how
slow. It sounds like confusion in one direction.
I wanted to tell you this in your absence. It sounds like the oak,
it sounds like the oak of floorboards in God’s head.


^^EOP^^




 — We seen his mama she dry and scant



By hook or by bent
I guttle the rudimental stories.  
I’m all in-scoop
suck and swallow by dint of birth. Of shape.  
— Were you hallow-nursed on riversource
upon a time (or ‘the rocky breasts forever’) I was not.  
I learned to lie in want
for succor-food; for forms; I lunged I gulped for what I got.  
Nowadays to need
to come by what comes by here comes natural and needs no bait.   Just steep dead-still as a blacksnake
creek and wait.

^^EOP^^




 — Way on back through the underwood by Bowen’s Canal



Well we’d heard it to be veiny with cottonmouths I’m not gonna lie. 
  • 
For true
the sheer (snake-electric) back-beyond of the place
put a pull on us like a magnet.  
  •  
That that rag-rope (flagged and) barred the path just egged us on.  
  •  
(To go and
skulk- and sidle-learn
to palp and tap the edge
to crack us in.)  
  •  
— What’d we feel there once we’d crossed?  
  •  
Veritable
thought-thick trunks
of swampfoot oaks.  
  •  
Something like ‘a shift in the structure of experience.’  
  •  
Here was
Johnny Pep (shrapped home from war)
branch-dragging
agglomerating discards and disjecta.  
  •  
His craving wove a plexus (more a house) from limbs and leaves.  
  •  
He knit us in:
he left us be.   He let us watch he watched us try
(to climb to ape his crisscross weave)
to pitch to plait the roof.  
  •  
Something like ‘Yall strayboys welcome to be welcome if you work.’  
  •  
Didn’t we ‘work’ — 
particular night-hoots (and near-chromatic whistle-riffs) in echo; likenesses
he whittled live from hickory showed us how.  
  •  
He’d let us
watch him strip and shave
the shagbark bark
to taste (to read) to mull the grain.  
  •  
Something like ‘root-room’ I reckon.   Something like  
  •  
‘When Johnny Pep hitched home from war                                           we took to carving (curing) scraplings into shapes.’


^^EOP^^

Blood is gushing everywhere
From the lips of the bear’s face
Out the elevators
The children’s eyes
When they are taken down by the ax
The whole hotel is overtaken with blood 
You know I’ve started to think
You really shouldn’t say
Things you don’t mean
The way you gushed into me
And then that woman
Who seems so much older, and isn’t 
Dear woman, I read your essay
That fate could have been me
Blood is gushing from between my legs
I can’t feel a thing
No really
I can’t feel a thing 
When they propped me up
They said, oh, she’s so strong
But I am not
I cry too
I cried for you
You left me, always, in the rain 
Dear love, you were so brave
The blood exploded within you
You were that whole hotel
Could have been us
I gushed
Out came the blue-green cream


^^EOP^^

I wonder if I know enough to know what it’s really like
to have been here: have I seen sights enough to give
seeing over: the clouds, I’ve waited with white
October clouds like these this afternoon often before and 
taken them in, but white clouds shade other white
ones gray, had I noticed that: and though I’ve
followed the leaves of many falls, have I spent time with
the wire vines left when frost’s red dyes strip the leaves 
away: is more missing than was never enough: I’m sure
many of love’s kinds absolve and heal, but were they passing
rapids or welling stirs: I suppose I haven’t done and seen
enough yet to go, and, anyway, it may be way on on the way 
before one picks up the track of the sufficient, the
world-round reach, spirit deep, easing and all, not just mind
answering itself but mind and things apprehended at once
as one, all giving all way, not a scrap of question holding back.


^^EOP^^


 


 


^^EOP^^

The day glared, breathless: an eye socket.
Clouds barely shifted, and the opal sky
was sheared into dry-dazzling millions.
Yet fall in, the sky, it did not.
The mail did not go undelivered,
dogs were walked; lovers fell savagely
out of and in love, and all between. 
Seven concussed days, his draft longhand
swaying like supple pillars of gray flame,
erasures; in the long nights his desk lamp
revealed the window streaked with chalk
sweated off the fen, which was England. 
Once Ribera’s Jacob, now Jerome,
Ugg-booted at the piano, “The Irishe
Dumpe” from the Fitzwilliam Virginal
hindered by the little lion kneading
his lap. Later, the papers howling
of guignol ambush would milk
his delighting spleen as the rectory
self-veiled in evensong and dusk. 
Somewhere over an inexpressive sea
of rain-sleek tiles, the contemptible
perfection of gardens, perhaps up
from the weird moonlike muteness
of the Black Country’s broken kilns
and felt absences, it came winging.
He died without dread or pain.
A sour storm rides the Levant,
rinsing the domeless yellow streets. 
On the steep road to Worms Ash
the coverts take the tincture
of foxgloves, where the shade
of Housman, deadly-formal kink
still running through him, fidgets
among the cinder-like moths.
Hill makes his way to Pisgah.


^^EOP^^

My sister woke me very early
that morning and told me
“Get up, you have to come see this
the ocean’s filled with stars”
Delighted by the revelation
I dressed quickly and thought If the ocean’s filled with stars
I must take the first flight
and collect all of the fish from the sky

^^EOP^^

Lit from within is the sole secure way
to traverse dark matter. Some life forms — 
certain mushrooms, snails, jellyfish, worms — 
glow bioluminescent, and people as well; we
emit infrared light from our most lucent selves.
Our tragedy is we can’t see it. 
We see by reflection. We need biofluorescence
to show our true colors. External illumination can
distort, though. When gravity bends light, huge galaxy
clusters can act as telescopes, elongating background
images of star systems to faint arcs — a lensing effect
like viewing distant street lamps through a glass of wine. 
A glass of wine or two now makes me weave
as if acting a drunkard’s part; as if, besotted
with unrequited love for the dynamic Turner
canvases spied out by the Hubble, I could lurch
down a city street set without provoking
every pedestrian walk-on stare. 
Stare as long as you need to. If you think about it,
walking, even standing, is illogical — such tiny things,
feet! — especially when one’s body is not al dente
anymore. Besides, creature of extremes and excess,
I’ve always thought Apollo beautiful but boring,
a bit of a dumb blonde. Dionysians don’t do balance. 
Balance, in other words, has never been
my strong point. But I digress. More
and more these days, digression
seems the most direct route through
from where I’ve lost or found myself
out of place, mind, turn, time. 
Place your foot just so, mind how you turn:
too swift a swivel can bring you down. Take your time
ushering the audience out, saying goodbye
to the actors. The ghost light
is what they call the single bulb hanging
above the bare stage in an empty theater. 
In the empty theater of such a night, waking to meet
no external radiance, this is the final struggle left to win,
this the sole beacon to beckon the darkness in and let the rest
begin, this the lens through which at last to see both Self
and Other arrayed with the bright stain of original sin:
lit from within.


^^EOP^^

I saw him
His body a very pale sea, almost green
Soaring above me in a different sphere
With gold wings
He had a blissful expression
One maybe he never had
Certainly he was always smiling, somewhere
When he died
I had just gotten betrayed by a friend
I thought was mine
I forgave him
Was more just said
You live through any of it
But what is the red shoulder we long to see
I thought that I too would reach a great canyon
My arms and legs blissed out
Instead I blossomed inside
Oh I loved his wife and children
But they were still here with me
When my father died he went straight up to heaven
When the ghost died he stayed with us for a while
I forgot to mention that the wings were gold and green
And the winds were heavy
They held his body
Afloat in air as if in the ocean
I forgot to say that when it was summer
I too measured the red bell heads
I said the hell with it
All of it
Heavy air will you hold me
Suspended in the ocean of time
Where I will never see you again
My skin gold and green
Sweet king, you left us
I know it
Dark is dark
The darkness, darnit
It surrounds
With heavy air
Arms and legs suspended
The head


^^EOP^^

The first line is a row of girls,
twenty-five of them, almost
a painting, shoulders overlapping,
angled slightly toward you.
One says: I’m myself here.
The others shudder and laugh
through the ribbon core that strings
them. They make a tone tighter
by drumming on their thighs and
opening their mouths. The girls
are cells. The girls are a fence,
a fibrous network. One by one
they describe their grievances.
Large hot malfunctioning
machines lie obediently at their sides.
Their shirts are various shades
of ease in the surrounding air,
which is littered with small cuts.
One will choose you, press you
into the ground. You may never
recover. The second-to-last line
has a fold in it. The last line is
the steady pour of their names.


^^EOP^^

How long can you speak.
Without inhaling. How long.
Can you inhale without.
Bursting apart. History is wagging.
Its ass at us. Twirling in its silver.
Cape. I want to kiss.
Your scalp. I want you to kiss.
My friends. Can you see the wet.
Azalea quivering.
On its vine. Its ripening.
Dread. If it never rained again.
I would still wear.
My coat. Still wrap.
My socks in plastic. Doing.
One thing is a way.
Of not doing everything else.
Today I answer only.
To my war name. Wise.
Salt. I can make.
A stone float off into.
The sky. I can make.
A whole family.
Disappear. I know.
So many people.
Have been awful to you.
I’ve given each one.
A number. When you’re ready.
I will ask you to draw me.
Their hands.


^^EOP^^

saw the magnet grow electric
                                               and the fixed points
become a field in rural Denmark
                                                    as the needle moved through various materials
all the while remaining parallel:
                                                 the usual: silver, zinc, lead, etc.
and then tried needles of glass
                                               needles of shellac
                                                                            with all the west above
while below, the east in winding spirals
                                                             traveling three years across Europe,
a good friend of Hans Christian Andersen
                                                                    and of aluminum, whose name points
to its invisible lights
                                within
                                            whose forces crossed and became
his galvanic opus, The Soul in Nature,
                                                          as well as various Italian newspapers — 
to eventually end up as a park in Copenhagen
                                                                       dominated by green, a lake, and shade
in which a woman dressed in green sits reading to this day.


^^EOP^^

You can’t begin just anywhere. It’s a wreck. 
                                                                                       Shrapnel and the eye 
Of a house, a row of houses. There’s a rat scrambling 
From light with fleshy trash in its mouth. A baby strapped to its mother’s back 
Cut loose.                                                                     Soldiers crawl the city,  
The river, the town, the village, 
                                      The bedroom, our kitchen. They eat everything.
Or burn it. 
They kill what they cannot take. They rape. What they cannot kill they take. 
Rumors fall like rain. 
                                     Like bombs. 
                 Like mother and father tears swallowed for restless peace.                                        Like sunset slanting toward a moonless midnight. 
Like a train blown free of its destination.         Like a seed fallen where 
There is no chance of trees                 or anyplace       for birds to live.   No, start here.                           Deer peer from the edge of the woods. 
                                                                        We used to see woodpeckers 
The size of the sun, redbirds, and were greeted 
                                          By chickadees with their good morning songs. 
We’d started to cook outside slippery with dew and laughter, ah those smoky sweet sunrises. 
We tried to pretend war wasn’t going to happen. 
Though they began building their houses all around us and demanding  more. 
They started teaching our children their god’s story, 
                                                               A story in which we’d always be slaves.  No. Not here. 
You can’t begin here. 
This is memory shredded because it is impossible to hold by words, even poetry.

^^EOP^^

Because you were born with your knees
tied together under you
you are bound to need your hands
and resent my knees. Because 
you were born with and without knees
your face remains close to the ground
to analyze all the methods
the medics use to unhook them: 
they splint your legs against planks,
numb each knee with a balm
that makes you feel you are flying
through stone. Now you crouch 
ready to doubt, blinking because
it is your body’s to blink.
You smile, invincibly obscured.
From any closer I couldn’t take you whole 
so you imagine your hands luring
my knees into both sides of your mouth
and open your smile
into a needy room — molded 
behind your teeth, a person of pity
held down in thick liquid shame.
Because you were born to be happy
you would skin and uncap 
the knee of a good giant
to make yourself a helmet
that could guard you from under
the brain, but you cannot get up off those knees.


^^EOP^^

I was so happy in the gem room.
The sun was president, I was just
dug up, all hell had shrunk
to a sulphur crystal. Something danced
on the point; it must have been me.
I had a hundred faces, and one of them
served up the ceiling in a perfect slice — 
like a twelve-year-old saint
in some countryside where they only
read Revelation. I had some small
nugget of sense, for once, I was a mind
that understood the light    ...     
Rain rained in my aquamarine.
The world’s knuckles gripped the bedstead.
I felt the red dynamiting of me in Missouri,
where all outdoors was my candy store,
where color sucked at its all-day self
and never became less sweet, less
new. “I want to put it in my mouth,”
said someone, “I almost want to eat it    ...    ” 
I had dozens of uses, but I was mostly
flat beautiful. Visitors just gasped
in the matte-black room where I freely
fluoresced. They saw me laid on a dictionary
to demonstrate my transparency,
which was complete; they could read the word everything through me.
My name meant blood, meant seawater,
meant lemon. The eye in my agate
never blinked. I was believed to be formed
of frozen moonlight. I was cut so that a star
shone back. The purest and wind-clearest
hunk of me they carved into a horse. 
When I was split to the purple and somehow still
standing, they called me a cathedral.
Yet just to the left of that
I spilled all over velvet.
The velvet is what did it —  
I wanted to be smuggled.
Wanted to ride past all the alarms,
just before that drop of sweat hit
the floor. Wanted to end up in god-
knows-whose hands, a heist.
“Obscene,” said a man behind me,
“just in piles like that    ...    obscene.”
Then I spilled another carat, laughing.
In Missouri you could pluck me 
straight up off the ground. Gumdrops,
gobstoppers, jujubes. I thought:
try to suck me down to nothing,
and find yourself up against one
million years. In piles like that.
Just out there. For anyone. Obscene.
The legs of the real thing were
opening, flash and flash and flash.
I said: go ahead and smash the glass.
Give me a break-in like a kaleidoscope.
Someone will entirely drip with me
as soon as I get out of here.


^^EOP^^

We low on daddies hereabouts
 

The fathers all but gone
 

Our lack a weight
 

a shape a drybone lake
 

By war by
 

drink by
 

gun by
 

drift  
 
The father’s all but gone.


^^EOP^^




Lines and phrases by Vladimir Nabokov, Alan Turing, and Thomas Hardy



In    ...    the whitish muslin of a wide-mouthed net,
in time of the breaking of nations,
and in elementary arithmetic, 
the lichen-gray primaries
keep in sufficiently close touch
as to impose one part of a pattern onto another. 
The vibrational halo
of the string figures
passing from flower to flower, 
border to border — 
night-moths of measureless size,
circling 
among the young, among the weak and old,
hawk-moths at dusk
hatching 
the war-adept in the mornings — 
the vibrational halo
near the great wings 
is not the judgment-hour,
only thin smoke without flame
written on terrestrial things. 
I confess I do not believe in time.
And the highest enjoyment of timelessness
is an imitation game    ...    filled with 
the mysteries of mimicry    ...    But
when a certain moth resembles a certain wasp
and a deadly cipher 
flaps its glad green leaves like wings,
what is our solution?
Peace on earth and silence in the sky? 
I think that is not
the faith and fire within us    ...    Still,
I look into the depth of 
each breeding-cage,
each floating-point form
cleft into light and shade, 
hoping it might be so.


^^EOP^^

The coarse croker-sack cloth                                         
 

she’d grown to clutch                                         
 

mesh-merged with her                                         
 

woof and pang                      
 

rose to serve                                         
 

more like organ                                         
 

than protection                                         


^^EOP^^

married a woman who was perfectly happy
                                                                     to turn half their apartment
into a laboratory
                               including the cadavers necessary to her husband’s
explorations in surgery.
                                      He also wrote articles on the ears of birds and
in Latin, an anatomist, standing motionless
                                                                     in the middle of the road
                                                              thinking
that electricity must activate the blood
                                                             while the muscles, themselves
living Leyden jars, flowered among
                                                        those who found it difficult
to believe that electricity is an animal
                                                            lost in a garden of showering towers
and, as with all living things, a certain degree
                                                                         of the domestic filtered down
between his hands to land
                                           in a dusting of involuntary silver across
the surface of every nerve.


^^EOP^^

tonight      I started walking back to you father
it was meant to be a stroll but then I started
walking faster      father      I started chanting all
the names of all the men I ever went to bed
with      father      my thighs were burning and my feet
were heavy with blood but I kept the pace and chants
of names up      father      listed them to fence posts
and the trees and didn’t stop and started getting
younger      father      and walked all night till I was home
just a spark in your groin again and told you not
to bring me back to life      told you I repented
every name and had freed them of me      father


^^EOP^^

She took the words for a stroll
and the words bit the children
and the children told their parents
and the parents loaded their guns
and the words wailed, howled
slowly licked their blind wounds
until they fell flat on their faces
onto the bloody earth
and death came then
dressed in its Sunday best
to stop by the poet’s house
and call to him with desperate cries
and the poet opened the door
not knowing what had happened
and he saw death hanging from its shadow
and sobbing
it told him, “Come with me
today we’re in mourning”
“Who died,” asked the poet
“Well, you,” replied death
and death extended its arms to him
to offer condolences
 
Translated from the Spanish


^^EOP^^

His mother                                        
 

came (she said) from salt                                        
   

so fed him salt.                                        
  
 
Raised to wolf                                        
   

white roots and dirt                                        
   

she fed him dirt.                                        
 


^^EOP^^

When the mink ran across the meadow in bunched
black parabolas, I thought
sine and cosine, but no — 
the movement never dips
below the line. The creature vanished
into barberries. Absolute
predator who cracks a rabbit’s spine
in one bite. And my mind 
leapt along a track to a summer field
where I walked years ago
to a stony spit out into the North Atlantic
with a young man I hardly knew, and his sister.
He was bald, dying
of a brain tumor. I ignored
his illness and we spoke of history.
He was gentle, scholarly. Why 
do I remember him
when it was his sister I painted seated in tall grass,
her forehead wide, brown hair framing her face,
ocean a cobalt swatch behind?
Islands humped in little arcs across the bay.
That canvas is stacked in a closet.
But it’s the dead boy
I’ve stored inside me all these years, 
scared of the otherworldly light
around his eyes. Scared and ashamed
of what I didn’t know. Ashamed of my fear
that made his death, when it came,
unspeakable. So history bounds
into the present, glitter-eyed, with musky anal glands
and daggering eyeteeth. Because that boy
wasn’t dead: he must be killed again.


^^EOP^^

I have some explaining to do — 5 o’clock
meant I would speculate
about artichokes (Greek) and the unfarmed mackerel.
Anyway, the men would present us with a bed of carrot
and potatoes + 1 cup of broth.
Our husbandry in sharp mustard
suit, laden with trial pieces for the fondue. I would prefer
not to. I had such friends — 
a long time faring all through the West
with my filth and a bouquet of cutlery
where I had put it: by me. 
And yet expansive, the things made by the things
I made. And a supervisor hovering behind me. The heaviness
of being.  I am the Name, Jehovah called from the bush. I had visions
of pigeons. And I replied:  Here I am to be called Ishmael and beget.


^^EOP^^

            Yes, your face like asphalt dust on my tongue
whenever it rains. I’ll say it’s the last time I call,             tomorrow. In your arms it won’t be the same,
each step farther from the border. Gin and tonics.             Tequila grapefruits. I threw that black mug
at your face after gin, after tequila, I didn’t know             Enrique’s Journey would trigger me,
I’m sorry. I drank too much. I drink too much,             yes, I know. It wasn’t me who threw it,
I said, but it was. It’s me who needs to learn             how to face grandpa’s bullet shells,
bottles, broken chairs, doors he woke us up with.             I was four. I saw Mom between his gun
and Grandma. I was four. I need to forgive             the coins he placed in my hands
to buy him vodka. Grandpa chased every single             one of his daughters with his machete
in the middle of the day, in the middle of the night,             I didn’t know what to do except climb
the water tower across the street with Red Power Ranger.             He’s chased us to this country
that trained him to stay quiet when “his boss”             put prisoners in black bags, then pushed them
out the truck, “for everyone to see what happens             to bad people here.” Gin, straight up.
Tequila shots. I’ve picked up the shards in our apartment,             wiped the black smudge next to our bed,
promised never to do it again, that I’ll seek help,             but I don’t. I make an excuse. No one understands
why Abuelita never left him. It’s mid-June,             Venus and Mars the closest they’ve been
in 2,000 years, but I’ve never seen grandparents hug,             or hold hands. I make an excuse.
You kept rubbing your hands. When I turned six             grandpa quit drinking. He stayed at home
at night but never talked to us. He didn’t like gin.             Didn’t like writers. Didn’t like leftists.
Everyone gone except one aunt. You’re not here.             Tomorrow, tampoco. These walls snore
like grandpa’s slurred shouts. I thought the border             would take him. All my aunts,
my mom, thought so too. We’re all running             from the sun on his machete.
The moon on his gun.


^^EOP^^

Is worth any number of old ladies.
A grandmother hung from a cliff
like a tense moment in an action
movie and the Ode, speaking itself
with its hand on one heart, steadfastly
refused to save her, in fact it did that thing
where it ground each finger out with
a motorcycle boot and then ate
its cigarette for emphasis, whooping; 
some old-ass bitch was in pussy church
when the Öde, now spelling itself
with an umlaut, swung its urn
at the back of her head, really clocking her; 
till the violets in her church hat grew
from the floor and won a third-place
prize for consciousness; 
the Ode is pushing nanas off bridges,
detonating them with dynamite,
tying them to railroad tracks with
squeaky young rope, pouring big glugs
into them out of the skull-and-crossbones
bottle, the Ode is checking
its pocketwatch, which points always
to death-to-old-ladies o’clock,
it is shrieking ugh you’re like one hundred and your breath smells exactly like horse medicine ho, the Ode is blasting holes in them,
is laying them out in the potpourri
aisle, is stabbing them with those icicles
they always said were dangerous,
the Ode means ill to all
of them, the Ode is worth any number    ...     
and the worst is I believe it. The worst is I will
become one, without having written anything like
the Ode on a Grecian Urn, and sit in long rows
along with my kind, till there the Ode comes striding
toward me, my necessary death at the ready,
my pulse like black grapes at its fingertips,
saying, “Fear not, it will be fast, the forgetting
of great poems will fly through you in bullets”; 
beauty is truth, and truth    ...    
but already I am losing it,
all I know is that the world is falling away,
and you won’t believe what it is wearing,
the ridiculous pantsuit of me, a old lady,
crumpled hopelessly at the crotch,
a flower valiant in its little butthole
— all the vital syllables are being erased — 
its space-age fabric now seen for what it is:
an embarrassment, my name is turning
into Edna, Myrtle, Dorcas, my descendants
find my peppermints disgusting, 
the urn is approaching to scatter me
over a landscape that is heaven on earth,
and in the feet of the poem I am running
— in mad pursuit, and struggle to escape — 
chased as if I am worth one million,
Pearl, Opal, Ruby, Coral,
until I am caught by the feeble arm, 
and because it is true I am telling
the Ode: you stood in me like a spine,
put poppies behind my eyes,
just the fact of you, that he took
one raw spring to set you down
instead of going out to tip heifers,
tweak noses, or sexually harass
huge curvy vases, you were for me
too, though they would trade me
in all my Beulahs, have lined me up
to enter that land in my turn, you let me
memorize your most satiny parts
and repeat them in hospital waiting rooms,
first to myself, and then almost out loud,
mine, mine, the world’s, all mine,
something to say in the face of tall sickness
as I quietly try to unwrap hard candies,
as I tug down tissues from my sleeve,
because it is true I am telling you, Ode,
that I had a throat and you boiled in it, 
and the Ode is murmuring almost gently,
“But do you like my ending?
Some people don’t like my ending,”
I don’t, I never did, I thought it was
so overwrought,
though now that I’m here myself why not
if it has to be this way
then better
put a bright red cough on all that white


^^EOP^^

A lexicon of words that were not
said in childhood, and all of those
that were, were said beside
an upturned boat, lapped
planking of the creosoted shed,
were said into the wind on
tussocky ground, by farm-rust vehicles. 
The buildings I could not complete
without my father’s help, the wind
in which I was at sea. Rain blooming
in August that moved the land
and over land toward the autumn,
sliding through the gates of summer,
feeling for the bone inside the wrist.


^^EOP^^

We watched her grow up.
She was the urgent chirper,
Fledgling flier.
And when spring rolled
Out its green
She’d grown
Into the most noticeable
Bird-girl.
Long-legged and just
The right amount of blush
Tipping her wings, crest
And tail, and
She knew it
In the bird parade.
We watched her strut.
She owned her stuff.
The males perked their armor, greased their wings,
And flew sky-loop missions
To show off
For her.
In the end
There was only one.
Isn’t that how it is for all of us?
There’s that one you circle back to — for home.
This morning
The young couple scavenges seeds
On the patio.
She is thickening with eggs.
Their minds are busy with sticks the perfect size, tufts of fluff
Like dandelion, and other pieces of soft.
He steps aside for her, so she can eat.
Then we watch him fill his beak
Walk tenderly to her and kiss her with seed.
The sacred world lifts up its head
To notice — 
We are double-, triple-blessed.


^^EOP^^

Sankt Georg, what was it, questionable, doubtful, shady, twilit,
a something area, something  Jan said, and he was born in Hamburg,
and went to school here, so he would know. 
A little isthmus between the Alster with its freshwater sailors
and the railway station, always a reliable drag on things anywhere in Europe
(the transients, the drugs, the preset collisions between the foolish young 
and the unscrupulous old), though this one piped classical music —  not anymore — 
to the forecourt, where taxi drivers got out
and walked their Mercs around in neutral 
because they were hours without a fare and were saving diesel
(which was all very well in summer),
and the immediate, somehow always slightly grubby or compromised view 
of three theatres, two museums, and le Carré’s bunker hotel,
but, hey, it was classy while it lasted,
and you could get to Milan or Moscow if you had to. 
Then the Polizeibezirk of underage Puppenstrich about the time
B. came here from the country,
still often the only girl not on the game, among whores 
and winos and people “with an immigration background”
looking grim and wearing subfusc and doing the messages, as we once said. Then gays — 
is there a pink euro, like a pink pound, and the Pink Pistols and gray wolves? —  
intrepid advance guard of gentrification.
So up the rents, send in the heavies, firebomb the buildings, locals out,
make improvements, and up the rents again, same everywhere. 
A natty pellucid pissoir in the Hanser Platz that it would take Paris to pull off,
drunks round the monument (“reel around the fountain”), hardy trees and hardier women,
little roosters, little rosters in the apartment block for cleaning the common parts, 
little brass squares set in the ground for individual fascist outrages,
with the victims’ names, the massy church at the end of the street — 
St. George’s, the AIDS church, the rainbow flag, 
the incendiary community paper called the Dragon.
Sudden sad flurries of flowers, the curt pairs of dates,
a grown-out bleached person with one leg. 
The main drag changed utterly,
meaning as usual stylistic diktat from elsewhere
and the birth of an interchangeably frippish hideousness. Three hat shops, 
an empty tea bar (tax write-off? money laundry?) boasting sixteen varieties of macaroons,
endless places to stop (if you even wanted to stop) on the narrow pavement
between the heedless cars and the nosy passersby, 
expensive ready-cooked food shops with names like Mom’s, gone
the hardware store that stocked everything and was staffed by people
who advised you where to find it for even less, out of business, 
or moved away to less promising parts.
The photo shops, the record store, bookshop. All gone.
And behind that, the Steindamm, our belly and balls, 
twinned with Kabul, or Mombasa, or Abuja.
Telephone shops if you wanted to call anywhere with a red, green, and black flag
(launch pad of Ali Ağca and his crew of martyrs), casinos, 
thorny or hairy vegetables, fetish stores, Alphonso mangoes from Pakistan,
video brothels, limitless mint and parsley and cilantro, hourly hotels,
cracked olives and fresh cheese, old girls with three words of German, newly baked flatbread. 
The birds strike up between three and four (it’s the Northern light),
while at lit intersections they never stop.
Twilit, doubtful, shady, something. Questionable.


^^EOP^^




After the 2010 San Fernando massacre
Para Luis



You novelize a route with flesh dumped at the ranch, can’t backtrack
the courage of miles we traversed in the dark, on a sighing speedboat, 
through jungles that spat only shoes, calzones, bodies twisted
as guitarras when there’s no grito left in them to pluck. Back home, 
we priested our mornings with sun-dried sombreros, communed
with our ghosts & had no wish to sacrifice our bellies, our terneros, 
our Consuelos. With wings from acero, we’d crash latitudinal  objections,
mystify Bengay on the mouths of our map-torn feet, pay no heed 
to grief’s ambidextrous strophes. If we choked on our own blood
we harpooned optimism. But when the vans deadlocked our  pilgrimage 
we knew our shadows had crumbed the anesthetic vultures.
They pressed their loaded beaks upon our backs until our knees bent 
sour orange. One asked if we served the enemy, but we took enemy
to mean a seed that sits quietly underfoot, abashed to vestibule 
the grating sun. Blindfolded, we faced the gloom volcanoes
of their mothers. How those mothers might’ve screamed like ours 
in their tortured independence: bloody thunder in the brown-starched
symphonies, a wind that howled & shoved its thumbs through feral lands 
probing for judgment or commiseration. Chingado god that copycatted
these legs from monotony. Chingado god that hewed our wrists, 
a pair of stems to strap behind our wrested boots & jeans. Whoever
supplied a plea to that deviant afternoon’s rationed blessings 
neglected to add chile, sazón, a nosegay of tortillas to the long road.
Mothers who’ve come to reclaim our tongues in the dirt: remind us 
of the braids in the phrasings of our dreams before we vanished. Pat
the ground for the bodkinned orchids. Wasn’t it yesterday we were 
siphoning forecasts with our fingers roving on the table? Or caught
your chests pain-leavened & stilled them with the rumpus of our hopes?


^^EOP^^




From a story of how the tobacco plant came to our people, told to me by my cousin George Coser Jr.



It was way back, before there was a way back
When time threaded earth and sky.
Children were conceived, were born, grew, and walked tall
In what we now call a day.
There must have been two suns, a bright moon, somehow
We had more light than now, sheen
Of falling in love playing about Earth’s body
In a wild flicker which lit
Us up. We who were this planet and yearned for touch.
Every planted thought grew plant
Ladders to the stars, way back, before there was
No way back, Miss Mary Mack.
We used to sing along the buttons of her
Dress. Our babies are always
Our babies. Even back then when time waved through
The corn. We knew our plants like
Relatives. Their stories were our stories, there
Were songs for everything — I
Should say “are” songs for every transformation
They link between way back and
Now, the forever now, a time when a young
Mvskoke man and woman
Walked through the shimmer of the early evening.
They had become as one song.
They lay down when it was dark. I can hear their
Intimate low-voice talking.
How they tease one another with such gut love.
Earth makes a bed, with pillow
Mounds. And it is there as the night insects sing
They conceived their first child. They
Will look back as they walk East toward the sunrise.
The raw stalks of beginning
Will drink the light, root deeply dark into earth.
In the tracks of their loving
The plant-child emerges, first the seed head, then
Leafy, long male body and the white female
Flowers of tobacco, or Hece, as the people called it when it called
To them. Come here. We were brought
To you from those who love you. We will help you.

^^EOP^^

All transparent things need                thunder shirts. The little
ghost hanging from an eave,                on Underwood
Street, a piece of                lavender-tinted
netting stretched onto                a metal frame. The Boston
terriers and Chihuahuas patiently                wait out storms
with their eyes bulging                in their special
wraparound shirts. My                family used to
laugh at me                sleeping under
two down quilts, wearing a wool                hat in summer,
when I said                I was afraid
otherwise I would                fly up to the ceiling. 
Once on a sidewalk                beside Erie Street
around the corner                from Underwood
where the pointless                obsolete
tracks run to a dead end                on the other side,
I found a black                and silver rosary,
with shining                onyx beads, like
the ones                that you see
hanging                from the belts of
nuns in their habits or priests                in their chasubles.
I kept it                carefully until either
I lost it or it got buried                in the bottom of a purse
abandoned under                my bed or in the
closet. Clutter keeps                me bound to
this earth.                       I told Patti last night                that the God-sized
hole in me was                so big and vacant,
voracious and spacious,                it was like I was
running some kind                of desperate toddler’s
shape-sorter game, trying to find                something that fit
to plug into it. I’d stuff anything                in there, regardless
of whether the shape                coincided with
the opening. It was                like I could look
at the sky and attract                space junk, broken
satellites, spent rocket                stages,
micrometeoroids, to                plug the
gap.                 The wind is its own
kind of chaos,                sometimes like a sheet
of itself tangled                or flowing
on a celestial                clothesline. It needs
a weighted blanket.                Little red flags
on the maple                at the corner of
Underwood and Erie                near the switching yard.
Slow-moving locomotives                that might be driven by
nobody. Flags                hold the tree down,
mark it, make it know                it’s real.
Flapping on the flaming maple                or falling.


^^EOP^^




National Pigeon Association, England, 1940



Notch.
Web.
And then,
down the shaft,
lesser wing coverts
and marginal coverts, and soft,
greater underwing coverts — although never as great
as greater under-primary
coverts, gray-coated
and down-plumped,
trailing
what
might
reveal
a pattern
just over the down
that might support a secrecy.
Launched from double-decker buses, or attic windows,
or the dark roofs at Bletchley Park,
the lesser pigeons,
always first
to find
the
fray,
sport black
metallic
canisters strapped to
matted lapel feathers. And tucked
inside, like Russian dolls, a cipher’s hollow chambers — 
down and down, a Fibonacci
spiral, a paper
nautilus
of words
and
codes
and keys
that shift with
each decipherment. The bard is in the wand — read space
as shape, read a as i — the key takes subterfuge,
that doubling, double agency
when tomfoolery
is crossed with
rage. But
these
are
simply
carriers,
word-burdened, instinct-
tossed, searching for the perch within
a blasted atmosphere. Find forms, the message says, and
everything will fall in line. The bird is in the
wind

^^EOP^^

A working river, a working valley,
The gray-green Rhône
Lined with workings, heaps of dust, gravel, cement,
And log jams waiting for transport,
Like the island exporting itself to its neighbors one barge at a time. 
The river, the road, and the railway,
A plait, a tangle, a place of through.
The river not navigable, the boggy valley floor not walkable,
The locals came down from the mountains a little way
To site castles on moraine and regulate trade. 
Hannibal marched his elephants through here, dynamited rocks with vinegar.
Poplars were planted en passant by Napoleon’s Grande Armée
Two-hundred-some years ago.
Goethe came to visit.
The shade endures. 
Rilke was reminded of Spain.
He lived among apricots at Muzot,
Just the other side of the language barrier,
And fixed to be buried with a view of France.
No one knows who I am, were his dying words. 
Smells of hay and dung, the murmurs of subtle conversation
Next door are tax-efficient sheep
The underground chicken palace like CERN
Or a discreet gun emplacement.
The lights come on when we appear, and go off after we’re gone. 
Larchwood and rye bread, chocolate and slate,
Dried beef and stone
All one striated substance,
The staff of life breaking explosively, crumblingly,
If it breaks at all, 
A stash of daunting verticals,
A washing machine delivered by helicopter
Winched down into the Renaissance casbah.
Time was a man had to carry his donkey across his shoulders up a cliff;
Now everything is tunnel fodder. 
Electricity and water come piped through the mountains,
The vineyards get a sousing under great rainbow arcs,
Who wouldn’t want to die in a thirteenth-century tower
With light sensors and cold running water
Off the hills and a chill in the sunny air of the contemporary archaic.


^^EOP^^




In Shia Islam, the Twelfth Imam is said to have disappeared in the ninth century. It’s believed his return at the end of the world will deliver order from the chaos.



no one ever brings up the wages
of virtue        the cost of avoiding 
that which you were built
to do        some men actually love 
their enemies        remind me to tell you
about them when you arrive and 
when will that be again?        I’ve already
spiced the duck and hidden 
the sherry        even grain has
genes that say drink this or bend  there so much like our
own        I am rubbing yogurt 
through my hair getting ready
for your return        I read old 
mail from my bababazorg
the Farsi like tea leaves 
or exotic blades        years
ago he melted into the tautness 
of earth like a pad of butter on
turtle meat        the birch 
curled its tongue        I was full of
credible fears        today I’m full 
of olives and smoke        sucking
a fat red cigar and ashing on 
the good lace        I’m comfy
as a snake sleeping in 
a silk shoe though my glasses
are foggy or maybe I just got 
perfume in my eye        either
way I’ll recognize you 
by your heartbeat you’ll
recognize me by the green 
bird in my shirt pocket        if you
hurry I’ll let you hold 
her        her flightlessness
will mean nothing in fact 
my whole house has been
cleansed entirely of 
symbols        a strange
call came from the west 
and I understood it in
this new language        I burnt 
away my candles and woke the
sleeping spider resting his fangs 
against my hand        there will be
nothing here to distract you 
from your work        just
some old pears 
browning in the kitchen
and a glass vase 
of pink roses
humming their little songs


^^EOP^^




After a Nick Cave “Soundsuit” made from buttons and found vintage abacus



When George Washington became president in
1789 he had only one tooth in his head, a single
premolar poking up from his gums. His dent-
ures were fashioned from lead, gold wire springs,
brass screws, the teeth of humans and cows, ele-
phant ivory, and hippopotamus bone. It is a myth
that he had false teeth made of wood. A mis-
perception put forth by those misled by the hair-
line fractures that ivory and bone possess. Just as
cherry wine will stain cloth with a rust-hued vein,
Washington’s fondness for dark wine blemished
his teeth. The fractures eventually darkening, un-
til resembling the grain in a piece of wood.
The darkening of fractures is rather curious.
The makeup of the flesh, the constitution of
origin, the trackers of bloodlines thrown off
the trail. It is difficult to determine what discolor-
ations have tunneled their way through the body.
Spider veins climbing the back of my legs like a
winding river mapping the trauma. An unspoken
collective of ephemeral bits and bytes, suffering
most eloquently preserved in the mouth. The skin
of one’s teeth decides many a fate. A black woman’s
incisor settling down inside a white man’s maw.
Overall, a quizzical look, an off-color joke about
progress, the very blood a trick of the eye, an ocean
blue on the outside of the skin, a blushing
red if viewed just beneath the sheath.  • 
A tooth is made up of the crown and the root,
all the King’s Men destined to revolt. There are
many ways to worm your way inside, many open-
ings in the body of an animal. Some orifices gated
with white entryways. A wooden portcullis, a pick-
et fence, a laced corset secured tightly by a maid,
a pointed geode just waiting to be pulled, the cavern
wall glittering in the dark. Sharp crystals ornament
the cave’s jawbone. Cave canem, quite naturally speak-
ing. A hooded hole a place for some to hide or go
seek. A toothless whistle the signal for the slave
hunting bloodhounds, with canines fanged like
water moccasins. The swamp mud gushing like
the suppertime mush sloshing between the gums
of a Confederate soldier. The terror of limbs at
odds with the self. In World War I, trench foot
meant frequent amputations, the blade sliding
like floss between each toe. Some diseases attack
the foot or mouth, gums left inflamed in the
cross fire. A grieving mother wears dog tags
around her neck. Her son’s baby shoes and teeth
cast in bronze. The pulp at the center is how the
tooth receives nourishment, how it transmits
signals to the brain. The forgetting makes the
present tense possible. Memory is the gravity
of the mind. All the icebergs have started to
melt, milky objects left hanging by a
string, the doorknobs means to an end.  • 
The keyboard’s toothy smile splayed wide,
the flatlined cursor blinks impatiently on the
screen, my fingers struggle to tap into word
processing. I monitor all of the track changes.
Even the computer is a slave to death. Its in-
nards already bygone, its body obsolete upon
year of purchase. I am a librarian, swimming the
digital divide, my predecessor’s paddles — 
a mass of floppy disks in an office closet.
They pile up like the teeth of slaves waiting
for sale. An affluent businessman at the door,
his hands panning the saliva for white gold.
His fingers parting the cavity, pursed lips cooing, I need something of yours to call my own. The desire
to chew and smile at will. My grandmother lost
her mind before her teeth, lost the memories be-
fore the enamel gave way to rot. My face has my
mother’s abacus features. We are, in fact, diphyo-
dont. In one lifetime we develop two sets of teeth.
The missing space filled with air, a hollow exile
before the native tongue. I pray my unborn child
will have a gap. What the French call “dents du
bonheur” or lucky teeth. The womb’s peephole is
rather impressionable. I will fasten the buttons of
time. I will take the baby’s body in my own,
whisper a plea in its discriminating ear: Try to keep your wits about you, my love.
Memory is about the future, not the past.

^^EOP^^

For the earth has spoken,
to you, her magma Creole. 
Full-throated syllables, up-
rising from deep down, 
an honest elocution —
rudimentary sound: guttural 
nouns, forthright, strong,
the rumbled conviction of verbs 
unfettered by reticence
as the first poetry of creation. 
A secret has passed between you
so wonderfully terrible, 
it laid your cities prostrate,
raptured your citizenry. 
Now, we look to your remnant
courtesy cable TV 
and garble theories thinking
ourselves saved. 
Only the wise among us pin
our ears to the ground, 
listening in hope of catching
even a half syllable 
of the language forming
like a new world on your tongue.


^^EOP^^

I'd search for Philippines in History class.
The index named one page, moved on to Pierce. The Making of America marched past
my enigmatic father's place of birth.
The week he died some man we didn't know
called up. This is his brother, one more shock, phoning for him. "He died three days ago."
The leaden black receiver did not talk.
My uncle never gave his name or town,
we never heard from him. Was it a dream?
The earpiece roar dissolved to crackling sounds,
a dial tone erased the Philippines.
And yet my world grows huge with maps, crisscrossed,
my History alive with all I've lost.


^^EOP^^

Not, in the saying of you, are you
said. Baffled and like a root
stopped by a stone you turn back questioning
the tree you feed. But what the leaves hear
is not what the roots ask. Inexhaustibly,
being at one time what was to be said
and at another time what has been said
the saying of you remains the living of you
never to be said. But, enduring,
you change with the change that changes
and yet are not of the changing of any of you.
Ever yourself, you are always about
to be yourself in something else ever with me.


^^EOP^^

The cat has the chance to make the sunlight
Beautiful, to stop it and turn it immediately
Into black fur and motion, to take it
As shifting branch and brown feather
Into the back of the brain forever. 
The cardinal has flown the sun in red
Through the oak forest to the lawn.
The finch has caught it in yellow
And taken it among the thorns. By the spider
It has been bound tightly and tied
In an eight-stringed knot. 
The sun has been intercepted in its one
Basic state and changed to a million varieties
Of green stick and tassel. It has been broken
Into pieces by glass rings, by mist
Over the river. Its heat
Has been given the board fence for body,
The desert rock for fact. On winter hills
It has been laid down in white like a martyr. 
This afternoon we could spread gold scarves
Clear across the field and say in truth,
"Sun you are silk." 
Imagine the sun totally isolated,
Its brightness shot in continuous streaks straight out
Into the black, never arrested,
Never once being made light. 
Someone should take note
Of how the earth has saved the sun from oblivion.


^^EOP^^

You will leave your home:
nothing will hold you.
You will wear dresses of gold; skins
of silver, copper, and bronze.
The sky above you will shift in meaning
each time you think you understand.
You will spend a lifetime chipping away layers
of flesh. The shadow of your scales
will always remain. You will be marked
by sulphur and salt.
You will bathe endlessly in clear streams and fail
to rid yourself of that scent.
Your feet will never be your own.
Stone will be your path.
Storms will follow in your wake,
destroying all those who take you in.
You will desert your children
kill your lovers and devour their flesh.
You will love no one
but the wind and ache of your bones.
Neither will love you in return.
With age, your hair will grow matted and dull,
your skin will gape and hang in long folds,
your eyes will cease to shine.
But nothing will be enough.
The sea will never take you back.


^^EOP^^

All day we packed boxes.
We read birth and death certificates.
The yellowed telegrams that announced
our births, the cards of congratulations
and condolences, the deeds and debts,
love letters, valentines with a heart
ripped out, the obituaries.
We opened the divorce decree,
a terrible document of division and subtraction.
We leafed through scrapbooks:
corsages, matchbooks, programs to the ballet,
racetrack, theatre—joy and frivolity
parceled in one volume—
painstakingly arranged, preserved
and pasted with crusted glue.
We sat in the room in which the beloved
had departed. We remembered her yellow hair
and her mind free of paradox.
We sat together side by side
on the empty floor and did not speak.
There were no words
between us other than the essence
of the words from the correspondences,
our inheritance—plain speak,
bereft of poetry.


^^EOP^^

At the high school football game, the boys
stroke their new muscles, the girls sweeten their lips
with gloss that smells of bubblegum, candy cane,
or cinnamon. In pleated cheerleader skirts
they walk home with each other, practicing yells,
their long bare legs forming in the dark.
Under the arched field lights a girl
in a velvet prom dress stands near the chainlink,
a cone of roses held between her breasts.
Her lanky father, in a corduroy suit, leans
against the fence. While they talk, she slips a foot
in and out of a new white pump, fingers the weave
of her French braid, the glittering earrings.
They could be a couple on their first date, she,
a little shy, he, trying to impress her
with his casual stance. This is the moment
when she learns what she will love: a warm night,
the feel of nylon between her thighs, the fine hairs
on her arms lifting when a breeze
sifts in through the bleachers, cars
igniting their engines, a man bending over her,
smelling the flowers pressed against her neck.


^^EOP^^

Of course now children take it for granted but once
we watched boxes on a conveyor belt, sliding by,
magically filled and closed, packed and wrapped.
We couldn't get enough of it, running alongside the machine.
In kindergarten Miss Haynes walked our class down
Stuyvesant Avenue, then up Prospect Street
to the hot dog factory. Only the girls got to go
as the boys were too wild.
We stood in line, wiggling with excitement as the man
talked about how they made hot dogs, then he handed us
one, and Jan dropped hers, so I broke mine in half.
This was the happiest day of our lives,
children whose mothers didn't drive, and had nowhere
to go but school and home, to be taken to that street
to watch the glittering steel and shining rubber belts moving,
moving meats, readymade.  I wish I could talk with Jan,
recalling the miracle and thrill of the hot dog factory,
when she was alive, before it all stopped—
bright lights, glistening motors, spinning wheels.
 


^^EOP^^

The fence was down. Out among humid smells
and shrill cicadas we walked, the lichened trunks
moon-blue, our faces blue and our hands.
 
Led by their bellwether bellies, the sheep
had toddled astray. The neighbor farmer's woods
or coyotes might have got them, or the far road.
 
I remember the night, the moon-colored grass
we waded through to look for them, the oaks
tangled and dark, like starting a story midway.
 
We gazed over seed heads to the barn
toppled in the homestead orchard. Then we saw
the weather of white wool, a cloud in the blue
 
moving without sound as if charmed
by the moon beholding them out of bounds.
Time has not tightened the wire or righted the barn.
 
The unpruned orchard rots in its meadow
and the story unravels, the sunlight creeping back
like a song with nobody left to hear it.


^^EOP^^

We take our last walk.
Walls stripped of portraits,
 
warped mirrors, dressing tables,
and the grandfather clock
 
with its stoic face
and elaborate gentle fingers.
 
For years we struggled to break
free of the closeness of rooms,
 
the obligation of birth order,
the metaphysics that bind
 
one element to the other,
as if we were still wild girls
 
playing wild rover in the garden,
breaking through a chain of linked hands.


^^EOP^^

          I was born drunk & paisley, vestige
                       from the womb. My face laughed into itself—
eyes sank into earlobe & nostrils warped into seahorse.
          I was vanilla bean & Mexican vanilla & amniotic
                       dessert, & my mother did everything she could not to devour me.
 
          I became comino & ajo & hibiscus—
all good for grinding. Mocajete, fist, & knuckle decomposing mass
                       & matter, baby & mother. When she tried to stillbear me it hurt
      until she cried diamonds while my father was swapping spit
                       with the agave.


^^EOP^^

Cabbage—the first word put down
with his new pen, a trophy pen,
like a trophy wife, not cheap,
absurd to use a ballpoint pen
 
for a task like this, a challenge,
for which he’d also bought a new,
but antique, rolltop desk recently
restored, with matching chair,
 
also not cheap, and for which
he’d renovated the attic room with
pine-paneled walls, bookshelves,
and a good light for his new office
 
or weekend office, a place planned
for many years, even before college,
back in high school in fact, a resolve
rare in his life, but about which
 
he’d dreamed in free moments
at work, and which kept him
sane during those tedious years
of doing the taxes for strangers,
 
but now at last begun, excitingly
begun, as he leaned forward with
pen raised to put down on paper
the first word of his first novel.


^^EOP^^

The mouse hangs by its tail, & kitchen chairs stand still on their beaks. I left the eggs boiling on the stove, the iron hot. Everything is going up in flames. I don’t mind. I watch the children float like leaves while the plastic car sinks to the bottom of the tub. A steady beat within my diaphragm predicts the  next earthquake, records its rhythm in blood vessels until the walls collapse. I was once a boiled egg before I was this: chewed cuticles & orchids, ponytails & rapes. Somewhere in Texas, a crowd predicts my death. They say it will sound like the scream of a tuba being born.


^^EOP^^

Just because there is music
piped into the most false of revolutions
 
it cannot clean these senses
of slow wireless death crawling
from a slick mirror
1/8th it’s normal size . . .
 
Marty was found dead by the man literally
blue 12 hours after falling out
at the foot of the Cloisters
with its millions in rare tapestry
and its clear view of the Hudson
 
and even testing your blue pills
over and over to reverse
my slow situations
I wind up stretched across the couch
still nodding with Sherlock Holmes
examining our crushed veins
 
Richard Brautigan,
I don’t care who you are fucking
in your clean California air
 
I just don’t care
 
though mine are more beautiful anyway
               (though more complex perhaps)
 
and we have white flowers too
right over our window on 10th St.
like hands that mark tiny x’s
across infinity day by day
 
but even this crumb of life
I eventually surface toward
continues to nod as if I see you all
thoughtlessly
through a carefully inverted piece
of tainted glass
 
shattered in heaven
and found on these streets
 


^^EOP^^

Not having as yet learned how to live—
indecision skittering like a dust devil
across appetite’s parking lot—the time
has come to learn how to die. First
 
I’ll put away my clothes, return my books
to their shelves; then I’ll raise the blinds,
to see what’s happening on the street
and which birds are forming their flocks,
 
since I think it will be fall with the trees
nearly bare, except for clusters of leaves
clinging to the oaks. Does it matter that
I’ve never learned to sleep on my back?
 
Soon I’ll have plenty of time to practice.
Like people standing in line waiting for a train,
I’ll check my watch against a clock on the wall,
touch the ticket tucked in my breast pocket.
 
Don’t accuse me of morbidity. Actuarial tables
have quickened their work against me. Oh,
it’s no simple thing to practice for death
and I’ve yet to reach the subject of goodbyes.
 
Will I have time to speak to the people I love,
to press hand or stroke a cheek? Then each
might need to make some remark, maybe even
an ironic gesture, nothing too somber as could
 
complicate a rational occasion. Better, I think,
to slip out across the driveway to where a car
is waiting, its motor making the softest hum.
As often occurs the cat will escort me part way
 
and I’ll bend to scratch his ears, as he stretches
to let me scratch his neck as well. I don’t know
what birds will be left, I don’t know if it will be
sunny or dark. Pausing, I’ll pat my pockets to see
 
if I’ve got my keys, and then smile at my mistake.
No time now for whatever remains undone, no
time for regrets or good thoughts, not time perhaps—
and this is hard to imagine—even to shut my eyes.
 
Yes, this practicing for death is no simple thing—
look at how I open my hand and once or twice
flick my wrist so a bit of fluff or loose thread
stuck to my fingers can at last float away.


^^EOP^^

Nihilism, but not in a negative
sense—such was his thought,
what else to call it? Like snow
inside a novelty snow globe,
 
vague possibility descended
from probability, descended
from likelihood and certainty.
Now not even air. Those great
 
words discussed in college—
truth, beauty, justice, which
had come to embarrass him,
like teasing bare-breasted
 
girls in postcards sent from
Polynesian islands that each
year he had found less likely;
absolutes faded like old shirts,
 
as still he tried to create from
stray thoughts as if out of wood-
chips and mud, the old certainties
he once loved, the believable lie.
 


^^EOP^^

The day I learned my wife was dying
I told myself if anyone said, Well, she had
a good life, I’d punch him in the nose.
How much life represents a good life?
 
Maybe a hundred years, which would
give us nearly forty more to visit Oslo
and take the train to Vladivostok,
learn German to read Thomas Mann
 
in the original. Even more baseball games,
more days at the beach and the baking
of more walnut cakes for family birthdays.
How much time is enough time? How much
 
is needed for all these unspent kisses,
those slow walks along cobbled streets?
 


^^EOP^^




She don’t believe in shootin’ stars,
but she believe in shoes and cars . . .
    —Kanye West, “Flashing Lights”



Always growing out my bangs, childhood,
that strange small.
The place written for me
invites me to hoarder and not mother,
so I’m living in this mirrored chest of drawers
called the body—my brother is hidden
in there, next to all of 1996. I have predictions
for my cancer—colon or breast—
a tattoo artist exacting areolas above the dark
canals of my heart.
Yes . . . I spend too much money,
I cheat on everyone I love,
I know what it’s like to desire everything
& nothing at all, the air inside a potato chip bag.
I count the sweaty,
greasy envelopes on my nightstand,
each a letter for every person I’ve wanted & never had.
I don’t trust the guiding powers
of stars, but I do believe
in the Magic 8 Ball of the city, night
the shaken blue inkiness of Signs Point to Yes,  Reply Hazy, Try Again, or Outlook Not So Good.
My happiness
I can point to on a map—
New Orleans, legs swinging, red stilettos poking
their noses out the window
of Big Daddy’s in the French Quarter, gone
now, torn down. The strippers’
legs perpetually
swinging, each dark fold keeping time.


^^EOP^^

with relation to lives as women do now on screen in swimsuits or lacking (spread) cuts
explanatory meta sequence to explain
despite however obvious development
 
at times as women may choose to take on new life
subtracts interactions with circumstances unscripted:
saussure’s course in linguistics (1916) emma goldman arrested for lecturing on birth control (1916) margaret sanger opens first U.S. birth control clinic (1916)
 
the grocery store with relation to nielsen family air time
women who say “I want” to that man
with relation to hugh grant, middle-america and anything exotic
 
episodes that develop character still rely upon episodic sequence
films contain characters with real names bearing in mind demographic trends
as like patterns of speech endorse seemingly radical character
 
britain initiates daylight savings time (1916)
watching the late show there are women who present answers to questions
absurdly wrong
 
what can be true
when asked not to act like oneself


^^EOP^^

Walking across a field we are focused on at this time now, Judd.
 
We are focusing on the act of walking across a field.
 
We will focus our attention on this gesture of walking.
 
We will act in the manner of moving our legs forward.
 
We will press our heels to the grass while we are in the process of movement and we will extend our toes forward.
 
We will bend our knees as the soles of our feet press against the grass.
 
As our knees bend we will lift our opposite foot at the heel and we will push our bent leg forward across space.
 
Our opposite leg will exist in space, bent at a ninety-degree angle, until it drops and our heel touches the grass first followed by the soles of our feet and lastly followed by our toes.
 
At which point the heel of our opposite foot will lift and it will shift our point of balance.
 
We will lift that heel and bend our legs.
 
As we lift our opposite leg at a ninety-degree angle so that the top surfaces of our thighs are parallel to both the sky and the ground, we will shift our point of balance from the vertical and closer to a horizontal.
 
We will shift our point of balance forward until our feet become pressed to the ground.
 
At which point we will lift the heel of our opposite leg and draw our knee upward.
 
We will focus our attention on neither where we are walking from, or to, at this time, but on the act of walking.
 
There are many features to this.
 
However we are focused on walking across a field at this time.
 
We will focus our attention on this manner of walking.
 
On neither speed nor duration, but on this gesture of walking across a field.
 
Especially on this day with clouds.
 
Whether we are walking in unison, it does not matter.
 
And we will focus our attention on neither how long we have been walking nor how long it will continue, but on continuing this gesture in the manner of walking.
 
We will focus on the way that it feels to be somewhat grounded despite walking steadily forward.
 
We will focus on the way in which we are walking steadily forward.
 
We will focus on the position of walking forward and its implications.
 
We will focus on this position while we are walking.
 
Whether we are walking in unison, it does not matter.
 
We are focusing on walking across a field at this time now.
 
We will focus on the manner in which we turn our heads periodically from side to side in discussion.
 
We will focus our attention on the manner in which we have been speaking and the variations as to this.
 
As to the manner, it does not matter, but rather its presence while we are focused on the act of walking across a field.
 
In the manner of walking across a field now, we are walking in a direction forward while turning our heads at times toward each other.
 
We will focus on this walking gesture and the expanse that surrounds our movement.
 
We will focus on its many qualities.
 
We will focus on its many qualities while walking across a field.
 
We will focus on relation within this gesture of walking across a field.
 
We will focus on this movement forward as we are walking across a field in relation.
 
Whether we are walking in unison, it does not matter.
 
With relation to fields, it is the movement that is most important.


^^EOP^^

The biography of the bee
is written in honey
and is drawing
to a close.
 
Soon the buzzing
plainchant of summer
will be silenced
for good;
 
the flowers, unkindled
will blaze
one last time
and go out.
 
And the boy nursing
his stung ankle this morning
will look back
at his brief tears
 
with something
like regret,
remembering the amber
taste of honey.


^^EOP^^

The sun climbed the rigging of a mackerel sky,
with me and my daughter following west,
 
and then the sudden, thick lashed, chestnut eye
of that poor deer, flashed as we collided.
 
Busted bumper, her bounding toward the pines—
clean-limbed, light, and sapling-sound, she vanished.
 
Stopping on the shoulder, I dreaded what damage
my own poor dear and her thick-lashed, chestnut eyes
 
had suffered, struck by their shared innocence
and that awful force; but her beaming face,
 
sunflower-broad, was filled by this thrill,
with her eager as the deer that the day
 
might move along, and the sun—without
looking down—should keep to its climbing.


^^EOP^^

Walk through the edges,
circumvent the center.
(Circle the square, so to speak).
 
Having parted ways with the crossroad,
take each path offered, and unite into
a thousand thousand fragments.
 
Stutter in the tongues of men and angels.
Spit out the honorific truth:
rave stark as a mad woman.
 
Destitute, discover the ancestral home
and sit down to fast sumptuously
at the high table.
 
Comforted, stare into the mirror
that divided all these years,
the mirror that melts in the mouth.
 
Now, speak clearly.
 


^^EOP^^

It is not like going to the bank.
 
There are no hard candies in a basket made in China,
and no Kleenexes on the counter.
There is no refund if someone forgets to wish you a good day.
 
There are no chairs for the aged,
no toys for two-year-olds with earaches,
no supervisor to speak to in case of the
Absurd.
 
There are no meal vouchers if it takes all day,
no list of local hotels with a negotiated rate.
No one wants to know if you are a doctor.
 
Plastic is not magic. Seals are not signs.
Your cousin-brother’s wedding is not relevant.
Hell, there is no such thing as a cousin-brother.
 
And it is always your fault: not enough planning,
the wrong color passport, the misplaced stress
in a word.
 


^^EOP^^

It is so goddamn hot in our country that blooms
                                        —jacarandas, bougainvilleas, flamboyants—
erupt in a shock of fuchsia from pipes laced with rust. Hokoyo! Step too close and your skin will crisp up like a chicken in hot Olivine.
                                        Everyone will see the fat sizzling from your innards.
It is so hot that locusts
drop in pools around your feet,
their musical legs all melted.
 
 
 
In our nation a waterfall is a cauldron of steaming falsehoods.
 
                             S m o k e    t h u n d e r s …
 
Maize simply withers in
the miserly shade of thorns.
Men quiver at cock’s crow and
hang their cattle out to dry.
 
          Pumpkins turn to gourds.
          Midnight flushes out hunger.
          Ngozi dart in disregard
          across the oozing tar.
  Ach man, spare us your sermons
concerning our weeknight brews:
the problem we are facing now
is the drunkard who drains
his own water pot, leaving
the mother of his children
with one thing only:
                            pure grit.
 
                                                  Rhinos are shrinking
                                                  Filthy crawfish bloat.
                                                  Our grandmother is just seated
                                                  as if death were a bus running late.
 
 
 
We have now reached the stage
where lackeys are openly trafficking
dragon fruit, smuggling them through
customs as if they were Marange diamonds.
Meanwhile, at the small house,
their scrawny young girlfriends
are just hassling the houseboys.
 
Our eyes run
all through October,
slash-and-burnt
like rhizomes.
 
We hear the drum’s skin
crackling as it curls.
We smell the coming rain.
Archangel, your time draws near.


^^EOP^^

Aunt.
 
Don’t ask
me how
I come to address my mother thus.
 
Long
complex, complicated stories:
heart-warmingly familial and
sadly colonial.
 
You know how
utterly, wonderfully
insensitive the young can be?
 
Oh no. We are not here talking adults
who should know better
but never do.
 
Aunt,
I thank you for
being alive today, alert, crisp.
 
Since we don’t know tomorrow,
see me touching wood,
clutching at timbers, hugging forests:
 
So I can enter young,
age, infirmities
defied.
 
Hear my offspring chirping:
“Mummy, touch plastic,
it lasts longer!”
 
O, she knows her mama well.
The queen of plastics a tropical Bedouin,
she must travel light.
 
Check out the wood,
feel its weight, its warmth
check out the beauty of its lines, and perfumed shavings.
 
Back to you, My Dear Mother,
I can hear the hailing chorus
at the drop of your name.
And don’t I love to drop it
here, there, and everywhere?
Not missing out by time of day,
 
not only when some chance provides,
but pulled and dragged into talks
private and public.
 
Listen to the “is-your-mother-still-alive” greeting,
eyes popping out,
mouth agape and trembling:
 
That here,
in narrow spaces and
not-much-time,
who was I to live?
Then she who bore me?
  Me da ase.  Ye de ase.


^^EOP^^

Tete sits me down and tells me the story of our ankestors. She says it with a hard K. I squelch my sass, and listen.
 
Our ankestors were hunters, of the zebra totem.
There were two brothers and a very beautiful sister,
as sweet as a sugar bean. So they called her VaNyemba.
 
They came all the way from Mozambique to this place,
tracking wild game. When the chief saw VaNyemba’s beauty,
he granted her brothers leave to hunt on his land.
 
They set out to hunt early, leaving VaNyemba to tend the fire.
She was very beautiful.              The chief surprised her.
She screamed, but her brothers were far, far.
 
He was a heavy man, and as he thrust himself inside her
he found her penis. Our VaNyemba hanged her busted bare
body. When the chief saw it, he was afraid. He stripped
 
off his regalia and fled, leaving the land to her brothers.
That is the land they buried her in. And that is how
we came to live in Chihota, the land of sweet potatoes.
  I am sitting next to Tete, wondering if  I will ever eat a sweet potato again. 


^^EOP^^




Where the Bead Speaks



My uncle was the prophetic one,
throwing his beads this way and that,
diving, foretelling,
warnings galore, sweet promising.
One eye on the past, four to the future,
half a dozen or more for now.
He was good if the news was good;
for evil news we blamed the beads.
 
Made from bones
or fashioned glass,
cut out from stones
or beaten brass
 
It’s the many human hours, Sister,
it’s the sweat and blood, Brother,
which makes the bead a thing apart
from precious diamonds, opals, and gold.
 
Turn them this way, shake them that way,
see how they shine incandescent,
see how they glow
in a million hues.
 
Elegant and enchanting bead,
flowered flawed, folded, or fielded,
you are the true frame of our feasts,
your festivals, fetes, and fiestas.
 
Give me a bead that’s wrapped in joy;
find me a bead to carry my grief.
We sing of beads, and sing with beads;
just see how well they show on us.
 
Beads are the zeze of our joyous trails,
the ziz of life when all else fails.
Beads are zany, zesty, zingy,
the greatest zaiku, a grief zapper.
 
Speak to me of beads, Grandma,
speak to me.
Talk to me of beads, Nana,
talk to me.
 
She brightened up immediately,
she looked at me with a welcome smile.
Grandma pulled up a stool and sat,
she listened well to me and asked:
 
“You want a tale on beads, do you?
You want a tale or two?
I’ll tell a tale or two to you.
But to speak to you of every bead,
 
in words that sing and dance like them,
you and I shall surely need
more than my life in hours and days,
more than your life in weeks and years.
 
A million lifetimes is not much
if beads are the theme, the thought, the thing.
We dive for beads, we swim, we float,
we mine for beads, we comb the woods.
 
Koli beads for the infant
on his wrist and on her waist,
cascades of white beads for the mother,
a very fitting celebrant.
 
There are beads that are tame
like what welcomed baby here;
there are beads that are wild,
lion’s teeth, lightning struck.
And there are beads around my waist,
For only my and my dot-dot’s eyes!!
 
Have you seen my love tonight?
Asked the ardent warrior youth.
Light of step, curved like a bow,
her eyes were wonders to behold.
 
She was oiled and very clean,
she was powdered like a queen,
she wore a sarong of the purest silk,
her toes were nestled in their thongs.
 
Have you seen my love tonight?
She who wore gold beads in her hair?
Then the pretty maiden asked,
who has seen my love tonight?
 
Who has seen my warrior brave?
he had said no more to war,
he had buried his arrowhead.
His girdle was free of blood and sweat.
 
He was adorned in his very best,
he was oiled like a king,
with beads of silver in his hair.
Who has seen my love tonight?
 
They welcome us here in the palest white
and bid us farewell in black,
sometimes blue, and brown, and red,
metallic green, or indigo.
 
There are beads, by far the most,
that are polished, tarred, and feathered.
There are beads, worked over and under,
elegant hued, thin and narrow.
 
Beads are the zaffered, the zingiest,
the zenith of all great times.
 
Cool, calm, and forever collected,
clawed, clayed, or colored,
constantly changing, bead
you are the best, you are the greatest.
 
So don’t talk to me of the chevron.
Don’t ever talk of it.
Don’t break my ears on the chevron.
Don’t break my ears!!!
 
As barter for my life and yours,
no gem on earth could fit the bill.
Not gold, and if not even gold,
then what on earth is chevron?
 
I dread the chevron.
It was a weapon
of oppression,
and not at all . . . a bead.
 
Seven whole humans for one bead?
And what kind of trade was that?
A layer each of sand and mud
for the lives of our kinsmen?
 
So what if it was one and not seven?
One soul for a shiny piece of bead?
This sounds like the greatest greed,
this sounds like utter foolishness!
 
Don’t talk to me of the chevron,
don’t even mention it.
Don’t break my ears on the chevron,
don’t break my ears.
 
They say that cheap beads prattle,
rattle, and tattle,
but great beads never talk.
 
Yet if a string of beads is fine,
it sings,
it dances,
it jumps,
and sizzles.
 
If a string of beads is truly fine,
it can speak in a million tongues.
It will have something for all,
and say the most amazing things.
 
And every now and every then
every bead laughs out aloud.
 There are beads that are smaller
than the hopes of a mean mind.
 
Though called bodom, as in a dog,
poochy pug, puggy pooch,
bodom beads, they are so big,
they are the elephants of the pack.
They lead the way
and announce the day.
 
The nature of beads is a mystery,
the how of it, the feel, the glow
of earthly gems: the least and most,
our first and true try to create, to beautify our human selves.
 
The best of doors to human hearts,
our spirit’s window to the world,
beads clothe our woes in vivid color.
Beads like angels plead for us.
 
Beads can lift the heaviest heart.
And like tea and precious brews,
beads can warm us when we are cold,
and cool us when we are hot.
 
Blessed are the beads
that bring us peace.
Spare us, O Lord, in this lifetime,
beads of war, chaos, and strife.
 
No beaded strings of calamities,
earthquakes, floods, and famine.
No veritable tsunamis of woe.
Keep us cool and keep us warm.
 
For each color in the rainbow,
there is a bead, somewhere on earth:
a million years old, if a day,
or shy in its newsness, and done this dawn.
 
Blue beads, green beads,
yellow beads and grey,
black beads, white beads,
red beads and brown.
 
Your rise from heaps of your own ash
with more of you than ever were.
You, bead, are an awesome one,
you are the phoenix of the years.
 
Their making uses endless hours,
the how, the when, the what of it.
The wearing is by a billion souls
whichever way, however much, and everywhere . . .
 
Mined and molten
man-made wonder,
raw organic, or cooked, and dried,
forever treasured, forever prized.
 
Bettered and bartered,
broken and beaten,
burnt or badgered,
bruised and bloodied
 
you are the never-left-behind,
oldest, ordered, owned invention.
Pure and precious, polished pearl,
still safe, sacred, scraped, or scratched;
 
Traded, treated, tough in trouble,
unique, unmatched, unbreakable.
Verdant velvet, virginal as rain,
beads are virile, vestal, vain.
 
Gilded and golden,
there can be no palanquin.
If you are not sitting with the king,
you are the queen,
the soul, and spirit within.
 
Beads are deserving,
beads are worthy,
wash me some beads to warm my skin,
a token of love, a gift for my kin.
 
Hollowed and hallowed,
jingled, jangled, juggled,
you are our life’s companion,
the closest friend until the end.
 
Don’t tell me if there were no beads
something else could meet our needs.
Something what? Something where?
Please keep it there, even if it’s rare.
 


^^EOP^^




—in memoriam Cheikh Anta Diop, and for John Henrik Clarke, Ivan van Sertima, Adotey Bing, Aida Brako, Vincent Odamtten, and by special request, Esi Doughan and Kinna Likimani.



Who was it said
the reason why
you never see
Black Folks properly
e-v-e-r on film or TV
is ’cause White Folks
“find them threatening”?
 
Whopei! Abae-o-o-o!
 
We always thought
our beautiful black skin
               was
the Problem.
 
So
Afia and Ola
Eye-leen, Lola, and Tapu
bleached and blotched
their skins ugly
to please our masters and our masters’ servants.
 
Now
don’t come telling me
flat noses,
thick lips, and
small ears 
must also disappear
to put the world at ease?
 
That must explain
why the Princess Nefertiti
and the youthful King Tut
were dragged to
Michael Jackson’s beauty doctor
long before
Young Michael was born,
 
and also why
the Sphinx
who looked like
Great Ancestor King Khafre
is being redone!
 
We should have known
we were in trouble
 
the day we heard
a Corsican general traveled to Giza
by way of Paris and a crown
to shoot
the Sphinx’s nose off
for not-at-all-looking like
his.
 
Enfin! Helas!! Mon Dieu!!!
  Ebusuafo,
for years
the Sphinx stood
massive eternal
 
riddled with wisdom and all
very thick-lipped
very flat-nosed.
 
We never saw him photographed head-on.
 
But in the year 2020
the New Sphinx will be unveiled
full visage on view
straight nose raised
thin lips tight
and even, maybe, blue-eyed:
 
a perfect image of the men
who vested so much interest
in his changing face.
 
You see, Wekumei,
when folks figure
you are their slave
your past belongs to them.
 
And mind you, the Man will try
                             to grab our future too.
 
Shall we let him?


^^EOP^^

Come near, come round,
My dear sisters
My dear brothers.
Come take a peek, and
Have a glance
Someone is claiming to be dead
And she looks like Juliana!
 
Here we are, straw on straw,
clutching at each one in the dark,
wondering if it’s true, and if it’s a fact
which is the ugliest in this news.
If what has been is what now is,
Then darkness is here and may never leave.
 
The pot is broken for the clan
The house is shaken, its fires long dead.
Hear the screaming tornado,
The boastful roaring hurricane:
at the workplace
in the market,
here by the hearth at home.
 
Esi Boah Bediako Dwemoh
Our beautiful singular Juliana
It’s true we shall all die one day,
Did you have to leave this soon?
                        
Dear All-consuming Mother Earth,
Voracious, indiscriminate,
Carnivorous cannibal,
 
We wish this meat you would spit out,
Offer us back our Juliana:
Beautiful
Winsome
Joyous.
 
Kind and thoughtful Mrs. Dwemoh
Please listen, and listen good:
 
If you dreamt
You could skip town
Sneak out of our lives
And disappear,
Happy you’d finished
Your allotted tasks,
Then Mighty Mama, think again.
For us your task if not yet done.
 
Trainer of trainers
The teachers’ teacher
We know why
This noon in the tropics
Schoolrooms are silent
The children abandoned.
 
The wisest counselor
Accomplished crafter
Sower of hope and joy and peace
You cloaked us in love and habiliments.
 
Good Mother Juliana
Are you sure you want to leave?
 
Come near, come round,
My dear sisters
 
My dear brothers.
Come take a peek, and
Have a glance
Someone is claiming to be dead
And she looks like Juliana!


^^EOP^^

Oyehe heeeeeeeh. MotherPoet!
Your fatha taught you to be bold.
If something is true, keep doing it.
Ah, you, Doctor Patricia Jabbeh Wesley!
You are the mother of four children.
Mama Wesley, you have raised
four black human beings in this thicket called
America. You, Grebo woman. You
have
done
well.
You have raised four human beings
in this thicket of words
and wordless slights.
 
Ah, who can say you are timid?
Who can say you do not know how to throw your voice into the air?
And who would have pushed that air aside, if not for you?
Who has come to the door asking for Liberian womanspeak poetry?
Hehnnnn, they want to know, who is listening-o?
 
Ayi! Patricia Jabbeh Wesley, we are standing
on your shadow. Forgive us, mother.
We have been crowing like johnny-come-latelies: Maonaka? Ndasvika panyika iyi nemakumbo angu, ndega.
What! We are saying what?
That
we
have
arrived?
Is it?
 


^^EOP^^

They had asked me—
 
a worthy friend and
a loving brother—
 
to “stop shouldering
the world’s troubles,”
—one meaning Africa,
the other women—
 
                                           “learn to
                                            laugh and
                                            live!”
 
I grow hot:
 
thinking that
laughing?
 
That’s easy:
it’s all we do instead of
crying.
 
And since there’s
so much to cry about
we laugh and
laugh and
laugh.
 
                                            But
                                            living?
 
You could tell them
that’s not easy.
 
In a real life
in a real world
perhaps.
 
But here
where
on a bare belly
for less than a cedi,
 
you gathered
in single pieces and
carried
ten bushels of
solid stones
your four-month-old baby
straddled on
your back,
 
slipped,
fell
broke your
arm—?
 
Laughing we do for
fear of
crying.
 
Living
we don’t discuss
here.


^^EOP^^

My mother and I sit on the back porch,
bare feet in summer grass
as we take the upright down to pieces,
breeze humming through its strings.
 
I extract each melodic tooth and sort them
in octaves for rinsing, tidy enclosure in boxes,
remembering in each how my young fingers
rioted over them searching for sound
 
and the way it grows like its own
unruly animal. The old piano
lies open to Sunday morning sun,
swallowing blossoms that drift over like stars
 
from the apple tree I climbed as a girl.
My mother and I sit here in a quiet
usually reserved for churches,
hands moving slowly over what we gather
 
—piles of soft hammers, odd coils of wire.
We take up wet rags and wash each wooden key
down its surface, wet music
pooling onto our skin.


^^EOP^^

Plant twelve date palms in a ring around the tarmac. Make them
tall, slight towers, leaning into the wind as princes do. Fear that
the sweetness of dates will churn your stomach. Plant them anyways.
 
Plant the pudge of his fuzzless face in the arrested time of a school portrait.
Plant his exotic name—found in a book that spelled dreams
of eminence and hope for an uncertain coupling—in your ear.
 
Know that whether it leaches into the soil or not, this ground
was watered with his blood. This tarmac turned a rioting red. Strike that.
There was a screech of brakes, and sirens howling like a cliché, then
 
a volley of pops that might have been a game if only
what came next was not such utter silence.
The tarmac was red. There was no riot.
 
Build a circle of palms and something to keep them safe.
Build a greenhouse around the twelve palms.
Yes, a green house. This land is not our land.
 
Dig up the tarmac, the dark heavy loam of this side of town.
Be sure to wear gloves as you dig through the brownfield’s
mystification. Once the Cuyahoga River was a wall of fire.
 
God knows how rain melts metal.
Dig into that earth and build
a foundation. Quarry it.
 
Let the little boys and little girls of Shaker Heights and Orange
bring a Game Boy or cellphone, or other toy made our of coltan that,
chances are, a little boy or little girl dug up by hand in the DRC.
 
Let the children lay their shiny toys in the foundation.
Seal up ground with molten lead. Die-cast its melted weight.
Yes, make a typecaster’s mold, and leave it a dull grey, like flint.
 
Stamp out a broadside, only set it in the foundation’s floor.
Let us read the letter that says this officer was unfit.
Let us go over it step by step, every time we walk toward the green
 
house of imaging what this boy’s boyhood should have been,
the fulfilling of his name, his promise.
Plant an oasis here. How is not my problem.
 
*
 
Let someone who remember how cook de rice.
Let she cook de rice with palm oil ’til is yellow an sticky.
Of course dem have palm oil in Cleveland. Dis no Third World we livin in.
 
Let she cook she rice an peas. Let she say
how she know to do it from a film she seen. In de film, dem people from
de sea island gone to Sierra Leone and dema find dey people,
 
dey people dat sing de same song with de same words. Come to
find out dem words is not jes playplay words, dem words for weeping. So dema
sit down together, an weep together, dey South Carolina an Sierra Leone family.
 
Dey weep over de war, an de water, an de fresh and de forgotten,
an dey cook dat rice ’til is yellow and sticky. Dey nyam it with dey hand,
outta banana leaf and de old, old man, him say,
 
you never forget the language you cry in.
 
Let all dem little girls from Shaker Heights skip the gymnastics meet.
Let dem come and eat rice and eat rice ’til they don’t want to eat rice no more
an let dem still have rice to eat. Let them lose their innocence.
 
Let horizons settle low.
Let dates and raisin and apples and nuts seem a strange mockery
of the new, the sweet, the hoped for. Let us share the matter.
 
Let us sit here under these date palms,
and haggle over whose fault it is. Let the rage that says tear this shit down
tear this shit down.
 
Let us start with the glass walls of the greenhouse, as a demonstration.
Let the rage that says I cannot speak not speak.
Let it suck speech into its terrible maw and leave us shuddering in silence.
 
Let the rage that says, black lives matter matter.
Let that other rage that says all lives matter be torn down. Let the matter with how
we don’t all matter in the same way churn up a monumental penitence.
 
Let the date palm offer us shade.
Let us ask why we are still here.
Let us lower eyes as we face his mother, his father, his sister.


^^EOP^^

Here
in this truly
no man’s land,
 
all is fair as understood not in terms of
Penelope’s false blondness but
that which is right and healthy.
 
Where
we throw
our big
hairy legs and
bottoms that make any Levi’s cry for air.
 
Hairy too are the faces
we acknowledge
—some were born that way—or
as signs of:
the pills we took in,
the wombs we threw out, and
plain
normal
aging.
 
Yet
 
ancient graces
walk elegantly tall or
charmingly petite
in celebration pinks and royal indigos . . .
as though the earth itself was
newly found,
the air a discovery.
 
We were not afraid of ideas.
Not our own.
Not those of others.
 
Along those corridors and
in those easy days’ assemblies,
apologizing for our being was
not on.
 
We were
Nobody’s wives or mistresses.
 
No one called us
“Mother”:
and when some daughters present did,
it was with the clearest mandate that
they picked the fight where we brought it.
 
We were
only ourselves:
each alone as when we were born, and
shall be, when
we died.
 
But
living and together,
a true power thing that
searches
researches
solving
resolving . . .
 
And as always
sweetly hopeful as
only women can be.
 


^^EOP^^

She said she had always wanted to do it;
throw away dirty dishes rather than wash them 
and she did, after breakfast, toss the blue, green,
orange, and yellow Fiestaware into the trash. 
Transferring from New York to Germany
with her husband and children, 
the movers coming that day, she chucked the dishes
in among the banana peels, egg shells, coffee grounds, 
bits of bacon, paper towels and called it good.
What she could not know is that a young mother 
in that very town received a much needed set
of tableware when her husband returned 
home from work that evening. Bright dishes
that showed up chipped and grubby 
like old friends with egg on their faces.


^^EOP^^

With a flick
of her wrist, she broke
the chicken's neck
and set it on her lap
where my sister's head
had just been. Over
her bare knees dangled
waxy yellow bird feet,
while the white feathers
she began to pluck
fell all around us.


^^EOP^^

Here in the electric dusk your naked lover
tips the glass high and the ice cubes fall against her teeth.
It's beautiful Susan, her hair sticky with gin,
Our Lady of Wet Glass-Rings on the Album Cover,
streaming with hatred in the heat
as the record falls and the snake-band chords begin
to break like terrible news from the Rolling Stones,
and such a last light—full of spheres and zones.
August,
              you're just an erotic hallucination,
just so much feverishly produced kazoo music,
are you serious?—this large oven impersonating night,
this exhaustion mutilated to resemble passion,
the bogus moon of tenderness and magic
you hold out to each prisoner like a cup of light?


^^EOP^^

The world will burst like an intestine in the sun,
the dark turn to granite and the granite to a name,
but there will always be somebody riding the bus
through these intersections strewn with broken glass
among speechless women beating their little ones,
always a slow alphabet of rain
speaking of drifting and perishing to the air,
always these definite jails of light in the sky
at the wedding of this clarity and this storm
and a woman's turning—her languid flight of hair
traveling through frame after frame of memory
where the past turns, its face sparking like emery,
to open its grace and incredible harm
over my life, and I will never die.
 


^^EOP^^

Close by the jerkwater rancheros tonight, the round
gloom longs, a window in the gloom, an attitude in the window, a pleading
in the attitude, an unwitnessed
ravishment in the pleading. A man stands there in the window
thinking about how naked the water looks,
thinking the water looks like emptiness, it looks
like nothing. His heart
aches to think how many gamblers have broke down
 
on this highway? How many princesses of ice?
I know I'm suburban, I've got a shitty whiskey in my hand,
I work a job like eating a knife . . .
Everyone's sperm all over my life,
the sad waiting. Here's to the simple and endless
desperate person lifting this glass.
 
•  •  • 
If you imagine you're at the base of a cross coming out of your chest,
that its vertical beam is a café
and its crossbeam a bar of inebriates running along the rear of the café,
that you're in a soft booth in the vertical beam of the cross
facing a blonde over whose shoulder you happen to glance
at the instant the TV above the bar
broadcasts the unmistakable image of fate,
the Vietnamese man getting a bullet shot into his ear,
then you understand that I had to stop
eating my squid stew. I started to cry.
Susan tried to make
some gesture, baby
playing in front of the cobra's den,
and it was enough: I was lodged in the moment, we were the treasure.
 
•  •  • 
Sweet heat each breath of air,
sugar of fire, and yet
Dark said she was my date.
She told me Don't be late.
I guess it is our fate
here in the mental hospital
of passion and forgetting
to scream inside the dream,
put back the suicide,
stand upon the corner
starkly lit by the beam
of memory from the face
of a friend amid the glass
of a toast, and wait that wait.
 
•  •  • 
But I always come back to the corner of feelings and the sponge of vinegar.
What is made with the hands rises up to seize us
and press every word to its service
so that I can never look at anything that hasn't
been talked about a thousand times already,
but I saw him screw his face up like a child in suspense
of some mischief, and they blew his brains out.
Your homework is more important than Cub Scouts.
His head jerks.
There's a blue-and-white menu by Susan's left hand.
He collapses as if full of sand.
You'd better settle down and eat.
At the next table before his mother
the boy in the Cub Scout uniform settles down and eats.
 
 


^^EOP^^

When the tide lay under the clouds
of an afternoon and gave them back to themselves
oilier a little and filled with anonymous boats,
I used to sit and drink at the very edge of it,
where light passed through the liquids in the glasses
and threw itself on the white drapes
of the tables, resting there like clarity
itself, you might think,
right where you could put a hand to it.
As drink gave way to drink, the slow
unfathomable voices of luncheon made
a window of ultraviolet light in the mind,
through which one at last saw the skeleton
of everything, stripped of any sense or consequence,
freed of geography and absolutely devoid
of charm; and in this originating
brightness you might see
somebody putting a napkin against his lips
or placing a blazing credit card on a plastic tray
and you'd know. You would know goddamn it. And never be able to say.


^^EOP^^

The towels rot and disgust me on this damp
peninsula where they invented mist
and drug abuse and taught the light to fade,
where my top-quality and rock-bottom heart
cried because I'll never get to kiss
your famous knees again in a room made
vague by throwing a scarf over a lamp.
Things get pretty radical in the dark:
the sailboats on the inlet sail away;
the provinces of actuality
crawl on the sea; the dusk now tenderly
ministers to the fallen parking lots—
the sunset instananeous on the fenders,
memory and peace . . . the grip of chaos . . .


^^EOP^^

the woman whose face has just finished breaking
with a joy so infinite 
and heavy that it might be grief has won
a car on a giveaway show, for her family, 
for an expanse of souls that washes from a million
picture tubes onto the blank reaches 
of the air. meanwhile, the screams are packing
the air to a hardness: in the studio 
the audience will no longer move, will be caught
slowly, like ancient, staring mammals, figuring 
out the double-cross within the terrible progress
of a glacier. here, i am suddenly towering 
with loneliness, repeating to this woman's
only face, this time, again, i have not won.


^^EOP^^

Encounter with a friend, acquaintance
or just someone in a bar
is merely a pretext to display
your theory of what you are.
 
Absorbed in your own performance
you applaud or criticise,
and only to watch your reflection
do you look into his eyes.
 
Or, if a contrast’s noticed,
it’s to serve as a backcloth
useful for the setting
and to show your costume off.
 
He thought you concentrating
when you were running through
your lines rehearsing gestures
while waiting for your cue.
 
Still soliloquising you said goodbye,
went on, and never knew
that the stranger, the other
had been speaking to you.


^^EOP^^




I wonder if I’ve really scrutinized this experience like you’re supposed to have if you can type
          —Frank O’Hara, “For the Chinese New Year & for Bill Berkson”



I was born in Tennessee.
I was raised on ideas.
Now I fall down
as a person
in bodily emulsion.
But spiritually speaking?
I’m not suffering.
I’m looking at nine pictures on a light blue wall
in black frames with white matting.
In one the Secretary of Defense walks through Iraq
in a suit and boots,
surrounded by a thick white line.
If it wasn’t like this I wouldn’t care,
which is not to say I wouldn’t mind.
Some find this layering of thoughts
within the ever-diminishing moment
to be a complete defense to the charge of privilege,
but surely more is expected, and there is no defense;
we commit crimes
and show ourselves and each other
unbelievable mercy.
To be meticulous is to give up in a way still marked by effort,
which for many is the one, true art.
What did the New Critics think about plagiarism?
Repetition as a form of time travel?
Conservatives prefer repetition in service
of an incantatory mourning for a lost world,
but one plagiarizes the self
in the commission of boredom.
Maybe it’s the difference between new meanings
and a complex weave of old ones,
or those who hold no new meanings are possible.
Or maybe all that’s possible
is a new ordering of priorities within experiences.
A sensibility and its chosen course are what matter most to me.
The present calcifies into interlocking crystals,
leaving so much gratuitous precedent
to be lined up in the narrow hallway of one’s attention
that a trajectory could be plotted to anywhere.
You go through each room and remove a single wall,
but only in your mind,
and still the house collapses. It wasn’t built to last.
What kind of imposition would that have been anyway?
Words on a page
and a bare molecule of intentionality
coming through this pinhole of sensation and time.
My face, lit by screens
and angled penitently towards coffee,
withers like a democracy
under its loudest features.
Sometimes it’s hard to watch,
I know. Not at all like yours, or yours,
presences to which my life
is a distracted vigil,
having found no higher calling.
Certainly not this,
which could happen or not
and all that's at stake
is whether I’ve told you.
You drive us through the rain in Virginia
after taking me to see
my 93-year-old grandfather in Nashville.
My dad and I went to his hospital room at night,
where he told me about the Korean man
he’d met at the church he built in Nagoya
who had to hide from police
after becoming a suspect in the kidnapping of a local teenager.
He hadn’t kidnapped her.
Years later they learned
she’d run away in the middle of the night
to avoid an arranged marriage.
But prejudice against Koreans
ran high in late forties Japan,
so my grandfather’s friend became the target
of an investigation whose misguidedness
ensured its longevity.
I forgot to ask my grandfather, whose name is Ernest,
what Nagoya was like in the late forties,
after a quarter of the city was incinerated
by American firebombing
that Robert McNamara, who also lived to see 93,
later conceded was a war crime.
A few weeks after the Korean man disappeared
he called Ernest and asked to meet
at a popular restaurant in town.
Ernest arrived at the appointed time
and found the restaurant packed with people.
A hostess, upon learning whom Ernest was meeting,
directed him to the restaurant's second floor,
which he found completely empty
except for his friend
who sat alone at a table at the far end
and waved Ernest over
as soon as he came up the stairs.
They talked for a couple of hours,
during which time the man explained
that he was innocent,
but, given the conditions in Nagoya,
he would have to remain out of sight,
at least for now.
He thanked Ernest for his friendship
and went on to explain
that he owned the restaurant they were sitting in,
as well as a couple of nearby hotels,
and he was actually quite wealthy.
A few years later,
Ernest’s job as a missionary
was moving him to Tokyo,
and apparently his friend learned he was leaving
because he called Ernest again
and asked to meet at ten the next night,
this time at an address my grandfather recognized
as being in the industrial section of town,
mainly warehouses and the like,
with few stores or restaurants
and probably no people around so late.
With some trepidation,
Ernest went to the address at ten
and waited. The streets were empty
except, after fifteen or twenty minutes,
a yakimo man whom Ernest heard a couple of blocks away.
Yakimo men drive carts around at night
selling sweet potatoes—yakimo—that are roasted over charcoal
on the cart itself. You can hear them at night bellowing out,
"Yaaakiiiiiiiiiiiimooooooo!" Eventually the yakimo man
came right up next to Ernest, then stopped his cart
and said, in Japanese, “It’s me.”
It was his friend,
who explained that this was one
of several disguises
his circumstances unfortunately required.
He said he’d heard Ernest would soon be moving,
and he just wanted to see him again
to thank him for his friendship.
They spoke briefly,
and then my grandfather's friend rolled his cart away,
occasionally calling out, "Yaaakiiiiiiiiiiiimooooooo!"
And now you and I
are driving through Virginia again,
the sky a further gray.
I woke up this morning with you
in Roanoke, thirty-five years old
for the first time, in love
and astonished. I jogged three miles
while listening to “The Weight” seven times in a row
and thought the song
could be a pacifist anthem:
you righteous people
go on and kill each other;
all us sinners will be here,
living in peace and mutual assistance.
The feeling vanished, or perhaps deepened
past visibility, when I heard about the acquittal. Bastille Day.
A wary sun bided its time
in the drowsy grad school of an overcast sky,
and then, finding its moment,
delivered a bleaching intensity
to the reading glasses
resting on the dashboard
of our financed Acura
under a dewy windshield,
casting bleary water shadows
through the double lens
of windshield and glasses
across the car’s front seat,
the deep blue fabric of which
was brushed into dark and light patches
working crossways from the sun
cast complexly through fat leaves
of the adjoining yard’s many hardwoods.
A single leaf shadow
bobbled over the plastic lid
of a day-old coffee cup
sitting in the center console
next to the gear shift,
white and blue-gray
mixing over the still black hole of the spout,
a small, circular cinema.
Doubled, tiny threads of dust on the rearview
glowed in a stripe of light
reflected from the trunk forward,
trembling minutely
as the air inside the Acura
warmed, circulated, and gained humidity,
seashells of fog
developing from the bottom of the windshield
at the defroster’s vents.
Spots of dew on the roof
shrank as they dried,
leaving concentric trails of pollen and air dirt
in a yellow-brown haze
against the car’s light blue exterior,
sediment at the level of microns
building glacially over weeks
of quickly warming summer mornings.
Seatbelts and downward seams in the upholstery
lent no sense of vertical logic to the interior.
The passenger side buckle rested papally
on a pile of folders and papers in the seat.
The silver tip of the buckle
breached the edge of a pie chart
printed on the piece of paper
at the top of the pile.
The chart was in grayscale
and demonstrated striking productivity.
Before the dewdrops on the windshield dried,
the bumpy shadows of four of them
fell evenly along the rounded edge
of the chart’s largest triangle,
giving the edge’s black line
the appearance of growing darker
as it travelled through the dewdrop shadows.
Up very close, the paper itself
was a thicket of rough fibers,
a cotton ball flattened,
and the black line of the chart’s edge
was a dense, black dust
resting on the thicket,
containing to one side
a far less concentrated
swarm of black particles.
 
 


^^EOP^^

To those who kiss in fear that they shall never kiss again 
To those that love with fear that they shall never love again 
To such I dedicate this rhyme and what it may contain. 
None of us will ever take the transiberian train 
Which makes a very satisfactory refrain 
Especially as I can repeat it over and over again 
Which is the main use of the refrain.
  
I with no middle flight intend the truth to speak out plain
Of honour truth and love gone by that has come back again
The fact is one grows weary of the love that comes again.
I may not know much about gods but I know that
Eros is a strong purple god.
And that there is a point where incest becomes
Tradition. I don’t mean that literally;
I don’t love my brother or he me.
We have been mutually avoiding each other
For years and will continue to do so.
Even I know about cross words—
Something. The word you want is Dante.
He said he loved Beatrice. Whatever he did
He didn’t love Beatrice. At least the
Beatrice Portinari whom history gives.
He knew her and the point about all these
Florentines is that they all were
Killing each other or dying of rapid
Consumption. Beatrice died; Rossetti painted her
Cutting Dante in the street. Botticelli
Painted the rest: Simonetta Vespucci
Died of a rapid consumption (age 23)
Giuliano dei Medici murdered by the altar rail (age 19)
Guido Cavalcanti died in exile (age 35)
Dante dei Aligeri died in exile (age 90)
Lorenzo dei Medici who lives for ever
Since he stayed there and commissioned
The paintings, and poems and statues
And if he also commissioned the deaths
I don’t blame him. He didn’t feel
Very magnificent when his brother
Was murdered in sanctuary.
Do you realise whoever did that
Would be excommunicated if, that is, if
He hadn’t also murdered the papal legate,
His best friend.
I have lived long enough having seen one thing;
That term has an end.
It was getting dark on the platform of nowhere
When I who was anxious and sad came to you
Out of the rain. Out of the sound of the cold
Wind that blows time before and time after
Even Provence knows.
And as for this line I stole it from T.S. Eliot
And Ezra Pound and A.C. Swinburne. All very good
Poets to steal from since they are all three dead.
The love that is must always just contain
The glory of the love that was whatever be the pain.
We played at mates and mating and stopped up the drain.
Hear me. O Mister Poster I know
You have burnt me too brown you must boil me again
You simply have no notion how delightful it will
Be when they pick us up and throw us with the lobsters out to sea.
It is the lark, my love, and not the nightingale.
None of us will ever take the trans-siberian train.
She wanted to and was collecting people who did
I thought I did but now I know I don’t.
It is the lark, my love, and not the nightingale.
In fact I’ve never heard either bird
But people say they sound very similar.
And what the devil were Romeo and Juliet
About wasting their last moments
Listening to birds. Hah.
I like kicking up larks or
Larking up kicks. So do most poets
Including J.H. Prynne, the memorable poet
Who is happy to say that the U.L.
Has got his middle name wrong.
He claims it stands for Hah
But there is a limit. I know it all.
Riddle me riddle randy ree
Round and round in the snotgreen sea
When they pick us up and throw us
With the Joyces out to sea.
Tell us tale of Troy’s downfall
We all would have liked to have been there.
The infernal Odyssos. He it was whose bile
Stirred up by envy and revenge destroyed
The mother of womankind. And Swinburne
Got a kick out of pain but I don’t
I just get kicked.
I wish I didn’t keep sounding like Richard the Third
Except that if I don't I tend to sound
Like Richard the Second. And who wants that.
I suppose I must sound like Richard the First.
What did he do?
Nothing I take it
I get a kick out of larking up nightingales.
Prynne says that if I don’t come back
Safe from Sicily by the thirtieth April
They will send a posse.
March is the cruellest station
Taking on bullying men
And were you really afraid they would rape you?
No. I thought there would be grave difficulties.
Not just that I was actively opposed
And so was every other man, woman and child
On that there train.
I was afraid they would kill me.
I may look stupid but I’m not
So simple as to think your name
Is Elizabeth Brown. Well. All right
My name is Veronica Forrest-Thomson.
Agamemnon was King of the Achaians at the time,
Priam, of the Trojans, Theseus, of the Athenians.
And like all Good Kings, they are dead.
In my day it was the done thing to side
With the Trojans for no better reason
Than that they lost. But me I back
Winners every time.
Mary Shelley may go to hell
As she thought she was going to anyway
And take Frankinsense with her.
I want her husband, alive and well.
Who, of course, also got killed.
Hardly surprising if he made a habit
Of reading Aiscylos while sailing.
He wasn’t reading Aiscylos when he drowned.
Got cremated like a pagan king.
Not Agamemnon who, as I said, was king at the time
And lost, murderer of his daughter
Killed by his wife and (other) daughter.
Killed by his death killing his life.
Stabbed in the back in his bath.
I think of it every time I have a bath.
Though I have no sympathy at all
For that daughter and son.
I think it is unfair that Helen
Had everything, immortal beauty,
Lovers, cities destroyed and battles
Fought about her. And she just came home
And calmly went around being Menelaus' wife
While her twin sister, Clytemnestra
Was murdered by her son and daughter.
And the Athenians acquitted them.
They would do, a nation of sophists.
Always betraying their allies and torturing
Women and children and enslaving people.
They even killed Socrates, their one good man,
Then Plato tried to be a philosopher king.
And got enslaved for his pains.
I wish they had kept him enslaved.
He escaped, of course, and wrote books
About how he would do it better
If he was in charge. All poets do that.
They are just as incompetent as the rest
If they try to organise things.
As witness my own efforts in that direction
Or those of my avatar, Agamemnon,
Who, as I say came home and was killed in his bath
Killing his wife and his daughter.
And if you don’t know about this you ought to.
Read it in the Iliad, read it in the Odyssey,
Do not read it in Freud who is always wrong
Although even Freud didn’t deserve a son like Lacan.
But first and last read me, the beloved
Who was killed in the general slaughter.
But rise again like John Donne
(read him too) I, Helen, I Iseult, I Guenevere,
I Clytemnestra and many more to come.
I did it, I myself, killing the King my father
Killing the King my mother, joining the King my brother.
It is the kick, my love, and not the nightingale
I like larking up kicks myself
But not kicking.
They that have power to hurt and do so
Should not be blamed by Shakespeare or anyone else
For hurting though such is the race of poets
That they will blame them anyway.
However it is a pretty productive process
Especially if one may be plumber as well as poet
And thus unstop the drain as well as writing Poetic Artifice “Pain stopped play” and
Several other books and poems including 1974 and All That (seriously though)
I, Veronica did it, truth-finding, truth-seeking
Muck-raking, bringing victory.
It was a horse, of course, in which the warriors hid
Pretending to bring peace
And they wouldn’t speak to me, crouching in the dark
Like a lot of fools, hearing the voice of the goddess
In an alien city, I speak your tongue in my own city:
Cambridge or Camelot and you won’t listen to me
Advised, of course, by Odyssos, solicitor, betrayer.
And when they had killed all the men, raped all the women etc.
Agamemnon came home and, as I said, was stabbed by his wife
In his bath. Anyway it is the lark, my love,
And not the nightingale. I follow the sacred footsteps of
Hippolyta, the blest, the best
That has been said or spoken well in any tongue
Read John Donne—the memorable dun.
Don’t read Matthew Arnold; he’s a fool
I am not Prince Thomas Aquinas F.H. Eliot
I am not an attendant lord either.
I am the king who lives.
Spring surprised us, running through the market square
And we stopped in Prynne’s rooms in a shower of pain
And went on in sunlight into the University Library
And ate yogurt and talked for an hour.
You, You, grab the reins.
Drink as much as you can and love as much as you can
And work as much as you can
For you can’t do anything when you are dead.
 
The motto of this poem heed
And do you it employ:
Waste not and want not while you’re here
The possibles of joy.
 


^^EOP^^

in the stream [1]
look, the duck-rabbits swim between.
The Mill Race
at Granta Place
tosses them from form to form,
dissolving bodies in the spume.
 
Given A and see [2]
find be [3]
(look at you, don’t look at me) [4]
Given B, see A and C.
that’s what metaphor [5]
is for.
 
Date and place
in the expression of a face [6]
provide the frame
for an instinct to rename, [7]
to try to hold apart
Gestalt and Art.
 
 [1] Of consciousness [2] The expression of a change of aspect is the expression of a new perception. [3] And at the same time of the perception’s being unchanged. [4] Do not ask yourself “How does it work with me?” Ask “What do I know about someone else?” [5] Here it is useful to introduce the idea of a picture-object. [6] A child can talk to picture-men or picture-animals. It can treat them as it treats dolls. [7] Hence the flashing of an aspect on us seems half visual experience, half thought. 


^^EOP^^

It was the year we decided not
to get divorced. The poem
said something like clouds
moving quickly across the sun
while the rest of us talked about faith
and how my personal level of intensity
in faking it is one way to measure
the depth of the drop I’d have to make
before I could turn over in bed
toward a window open to the night
and spotty rain dotting leaves
with light caught from porch lamps
and know that what I’d imagined
to be time drained of sound
was the purest sound,
one person turning away from another
into a cone formed by his turning.
We sat on the porch while the kids napped
and watched light rise and fall
through clouds moving quickly across the sun
like distractions from a vital and complex truth
that requires too many pages of exegesis
for people with days like ours,
time’s version of an optical illusion,
both too long and too short
for anything like actual thinking.
I remember one of the many unsolicited
pieces of advice we got when Elmer
was coming along—don’t make any major
decisions until he’s one, you’ll be too
tired to get it right. So naturally
we changed jobs and moved across the country.
I can’t even remember who gave us that advice.
They’re probably out of our lives now.
And what’s in them, these six and something
years out of your forty and my almost
that we’ve been spinning through together,
watching our obligations mount
around sensations that folded out of us
from zones of our beings we hadn’t
seen before, like a third arm you’d
somehow failed to notice, an us
both alien and uncannily us,
children, a marriage, an unexpected love—
these things have taken over,
brushed aside whatever
was there before
like an anxious developer.
This force is of
our own making but comically
has no regard for us, like that arm
is a whole body, two bodies,
tugging us along wherever they feel like going,
the most dangerous places they can find.
I was writing that line on my phone
while following fifteen-month-old Harlan
doing his duck walk down a wheelchair ramp.
He leaned way over the side of it
to look at some smooth rocks on the ground
and, as I got to the word “dangerous,”
toppled down into them.
So much for art, some might say,
but not me, I just learned
how many people have put videos online
with the words “spectacular sunset” in their titles,
there’s one after another.
I’d made one myself, a video I mean,
because the sun had ducked
behind an unmoving cloud
at the horizon, and I knew from the internet
how long it would take the sun to reappear
in the gap between the bottom edge of the cloud
and the top edge of the earth,
a sun-sized gap dotted with its own
minor cloud variants
there to complicate the image,
a sun moving slowly behind clouds,
and I felt a low note being struck within,
something I’ve learned is not sadness
but gratitude in unknowing,
a feeling that is hard but porous,
that dissipates like short rain
steaming off its first idea of the ground.
Dark pink reformatting the blue,
dark pink lights of our forever car,
dark pink of hippies, dark pink life tassels,
dark pink “to fly,” as you put it,
“by the night of our pants.”
I don’t know where the night goes,
but I know we’ll be awake,
and why, this long year of nights
when people standing right next to us
broke in half and spilled everywhere
just because they paid attention.
We don’t have an exact date
for when we got engaged,
there was no moment, no single question
but instead weeks of them
while an idea changed from something we could do
into something we would, it was gestational,
like this year has been, a year I hope is over.
I’m glad you’re turning forty. I wish I were, too.
I need a number for what we’ve come through,
our second engagement, longer than the first,
permanent, in fact, the questions of questions
and the answer we give—
give, deny, and give again.
 
 


^^EOP^^




           For the centenary of Girton College



i hyphen (Gk. together, in one)
a short dash or line used to connect
two words together as a compound
1869-
1969
to connect Chapel Wing and Library.
But also: to divide
for etymological or other purpose.
A gap in stone makes actual
the paradox of a centenary.
“It was a hyphen connecting different races.”
and to the library
“a bridge for migrations”.
In search of an etymology
                                             for compound lives,
this architecture,
                              an exercise in paleography
(Victorian Gothic)
                                asserts the same intention.
Portraits busts and books
                                             the “context in which we occur”
that teaches us our meaning,
                                                  ignore the lacunae
of a century
                      in their state-
ment of our need to hyphenate.


^^EOP^^

I remember them saying,
these poems, their something
for someone at sometime
for me too, at one time.
 
That got in the way;
so I sent them away
back into history—
just temporarily.
 
They won’t come back now.
I can’t remember how
the words spoke, or what
they said,
except:
We are all dead


^^EOP^^




                         homage to William Empson



It is the sense, it is the sense, controls,
Landing every poem like a fish.
Unhuman forms must not assert their roles.
 
Glittering scales require the deadly tolls
Of net and knife. Scales fall to relish.
It is the sense, it is the sense, controls.
 
Yet languages are apt to miss on souls
If reason only guts them. Applying the wish,
Unhuman forms must not assert their roles,
 
Ignores the fact that poems have two poles
That must be opposite. Hard then to finish
It is the sense, it is the sense, controls,
 
Without a sense of lining up for doles
From other kitchens that give us the garnish:
Unhuman forms must not assert their roles.
 
And this (forgive me) is like carrying coals
To Sheffield. Irrelevance betrays a formal anguish.
It is the sense, it is the sense, controls,
“Unhuman forms must not assert their roles”.


^^EOP^^

Mirror, mirror on the wall
show me in succession all
my faces, that I may view
and choose which I would like as true.
 
Teach me skill to disguise
what’s not pleasing to the eyes,
with faith, that life obeys the rules,
in man or God or football pools.
 
Always keep me well content
to decorate attitude and event
so that somehow behind the scene
I may believe my actions mean;
 
that one can exercise control
in playing out a chosen role;
rub clouded glass and then,
at will, write self on it again.
 
But if, in some unlucky glance,
I should glimpse naked circumstance
in all its nowhere-going-to,
may you crack before I do.


^^EOP^^

We loved them.
We got up early
to toast their bagels.
Wrapped them in foil.
We filled their water bottles
and canteens. We washed
and bleached their uniforms,
the mud and dirt
and blood washed clean
of brutality. We marveled
at their bodies,
thighs thick as the trunk
of a spindle pine,
shoulders broad and able,
the way their arms filled out.
The milk they drank.
At the plate we could make out
their particular stance, though each
wore the same uniform as if they were
cadets training for war.
If by chance one looked up at us
and gave us a rise with his chin,
or lifted a hand, we beamed.
We had grown used to their grunts,
mumbles, and refusal to form a full sentence.
We made their beds and rifled through their pockets
and smelled their shirts to see if they were clean.
How else would we know them?
We tried to not ask too many questions
and not to overpraise.
Sometimes they were ashamed of us;
if we laughed too loud,
if one of us talked too long to their friend,
of our faces that had grown coarser. Can’t you put on lipstick?
We let them roll their eyes,
curse, and grumble at us
after a game if they’d missed a play
or lost. We knew to keep quiet;
the car silent the entire ride home.
What they were to us was inexplicable.
Late at night, after they were home in their beds,
we sat by the window and wondered
when they would leave us
and who they would become
when they left the cocoon of our instruction.
What kind of girl they liked.
We sat in a group and drank our coffee
and prayed that they’d get a hit.
If they fumbled a ball or struck out
we felt sour in the pit of our stomach.
We paced. We couldn’t sit still or talk.
Throughout summer we watched
the trees behind the field grow fuller
and more vibrant and each fall
slowly lose their foliage—
it was as if we wanted to hold on
to every and each leaf.


^^EOP^^

Even now, after twice her lifetime of grief
and anger in the very place, whoever comes
to climb these narrow stairs, discovers how
the bookcase slides aside, then walks through
shadow into sunlit room, can never help
 
but break her secrecy again. Just listening
is a kind of guilt: the Westerkirk repeats
itself outside, as if all time worked round
towards her fear, and made each stroke
die down on guarded streets. Imagine it—
 
four years of whispering, and loneliness,
and plotting, day by day, the Allied line
in Europe with a yellow chalk. What hope
she had for ordinary love and interest
survives her here, displayed above the bed
 
as pictures of her family; some actors;
fashions chosen by Princess Elizabeth.
And those who stoop to see them find
not only patience missing its reward,
but one enduring wish for chances
 
like my own: to leave as simply
as I do, and walk at ease
up dusty tree-lined avenues, or watch
a silent barge come clear of bridges
settling their reflections in the blue canal.
 


^^EOP^^

Near the end of my searching
               I came to a door.
 
Entering, I found the story
               of her life, laid out like a cake
 
on an ebony table, as if waiting there
               for the lost bride—pages flat
 
and placid, blank as a lake
               asleep in winter. Hoping
 
for answers, some knowledge of her,
               perhaps—I’m not sure what—
 
I placed my palm upon the surface.
 
It sank through and disappeared
               beneath a cloud of snowy powder. 
 


^^EOP^^

Near dusk I find her in a newly mown field, lying still
and face down in the coarse stubble. Her arms
 
are splayed out on either side of her body, palms open
and turned upward like two lilies, the slender fingers
 
gently curling, as if holding onto something. Her legs
are drawn up underneath her, as if she fell asleep there
 
on her knees, perhaps while praying, perhaps intoxicated
by the sweet liquid odor of sheared grass.
 
Her small ankles, white and unscarred, are crossed
one on top of the other, as if arranged so in ritual fashion.
 
Her feet are bare. I cannot see her face, turned
toward the ground as it is,
 
but her long black hair is lovelier than I remember it,
spilling across her back and down onto the felled stalks
 
like a pour of glossy tar. Her flesh is smooth
and cool, slightly resistant to my touch.
 
I begin to look around me for something with which
to carry her back—carry her back, I hear myself say,
 
as if the words spoken aloud, even in a dream,
will somehow make it possible.
 
I am alone in a field, at dusk, the light leaving
the way it has to, leaking away the way it has to
 
behind a ridge of swiftly blackening hills. I lie down
on the ground beside my mother under falling darkness
 
and draw my coat over our bodies. We sleep there like that. 
 


^^EOP^^

This morning I was walking upstairs
from the kitchen, carrying your
beautiful flowers, the flowers you
 
brought me last night, calla lilies
and something else, I am not
sure what to call them, white flowers,
 
of course you had no way of knowing
it has been years since I bought
white flowers—but now you have
 
and here they are again. I was carrying
your flowers and a coffee cup
and a soft yellow handbag and a book
 
of poems by a Chinese poet, in
which I had just read the words “come
or go but don’t just stand there
 
in the doorway,” as usual I was
carrying too many things, you
would have laughed if you saw me.
 
It seemed especially important
not to spill the coffee as I usually
do, as I turned up the stairs,
 
inside the whorl of the house as if
I were walking up inside the lilies.
I do not know how to hold all
 
the beauty and sorrow of my life.


^^EOP^^

The goldfish in my bowl
turns into a carp each night.
Swimming in circles in the day,
regal, admired by emperors,
but each night, while I sleep,
it turns into silver, a dagger
cold and sharp, couched at one spot,
enough to frighten cats.
 
The rest of the furniture
squats in the cold and dark,
complains of being a lone man’s
furnishings, and plots a revolt.
I can hear myself snore, but not
their infidelity. Sometimes I wake
with a start; silently they move back
into their places.
 
I have been unpopular with myself,
pacing in my small, square room.
But my uncle said, “Even in a palace,
you can but sleep in one room.”
With this I become humble as a simple
preacher, saying, “I have no powers;
they emanate from God.”
With this I sleep soundly,
 
Fish or no fish, dagger or no dagger.
When I wake, my fish is gold,
it pleases me with a trail of bubbles.
My furniture has been loyal all night,
waiting to provide me comfort.
There was no conspiracy against a poor man.
With this I consider myself king.


^^EOP^^

Measure two handfuls for a prosperous man.
Place in pot and wash by rubbing palms together
as if you can’t quite get yourself to pray, or
by squeezing it in one fist. Wash
several times to get rid of the cloudy water;
when you are too high in Heaven, looking down
at the clouds, you can’t see what’s precious below.
Rinse with cold water and keep enough so that
it will barely cover your hand placed on the rice.
Don’t use hot water, there are metallic diseases
colliding in it. This method of measuring water will work
regardless of the size of the pot; if the pot is large,
use both hands palms down as if to pat your own belly.
Now place on high heat without cover and cook
until the water has been boiled away except in craters
resembling those of the moon, important
in ancient times for growing rice. Now place lid on top
and reduce heat to medium, go read your newspaper
until you get to the comics, then come back and turn it down to low.
The heat has been gradually traveling from the outside
to the inside of the rice, giving it texture;
a similar thing happens with people, I suppose.
 
Go back to your newspaper, finish the comics, and read
the financial page. Now the rice is done, but before
you eat, consider the peasant who arcs in leech-infested
paddies and who carefully plants the rice seedlings
one by one; on this night, you are eating better than he.
If you still don’t know how to cook rice, buy a Japanese
automatic rice cooker; it makes perfect rice every time!


^^EOP^^

In my little room, the emperor removes
his robe and we chat
about the mechanics of winning
an election.
“I came, I saw, I conquered,” he says.
When the moon comes out above the
dilapidated warehouse, he asks me
the profundity of going to the moon
and back again to the same ghetto room.
 
If it pleases your majesty, I say,
the gods make the ghettos.
“I am King,” says the emperor, “I shall
have no gods.”
And he shakes, nearly spilling his oolong tea.
When he has calmed down enough, I
drop two lumps of sugar into his cup.
He marvels at my calculus book and integration
theory and digital watch.
“Had I one of those,” he says, “I would have timed
my crossing of the Rubicon at eighteen,
and what barbarian woman would not have given herself
for that!”
 
He yawns imperially over
my utensils, books, and cot
and asks me to cross the Rubicon with him.
And I nod while doing tax equations for his majesty
because the hour is late.
He is delighted with the hot chocolate
that I make on a hot plate
and, after making a rough estimate of the roaches
on the wall, he sleeps on my cot
as any sovereign would.
 
I rattle my typewriter like a machine-
gun all night, partly because it is my
habit, and partly to protect my friend,
the emperor. For though he has crossed
the Rubicon with the bravest of men,
he has yet to sleep a single night
in the ghetto.


^^EOP^^




“A fine Sunday in Bath empties every house of its inhabitants, and all the world appears on such an occasion to walk about and tell their acquaintance what a charming day it is.” —northanger abbey



I awoke from the tunnel
to the fields of yellow rape,
seventeenth-century buildings, and cobbled
streets as she would have seen them.
It was rainy; the rain came and went,
came and went so that you could not escape
its dampness. I understood the need for tea
and the luxury of cremes and pastries
and why the ladies longed for a strong shoulder
to see them through the winter.
The seagulls cried overhead,
though there was no sea, only a muddy river
from Bath to Bristol. The scavengers
lived on the rooftops and if desperate
enough would swoop down and take
a sandwich from your hand.
I secured my room at the Royal Bath Hotel.
It was a hovel, really, with a carpet
as old as the early century.
Walking through the hotel,
I sensed something lurid
in the air, every eye upon me as if they knew
I was a foreigner in a strange land.
Over the bed, a burgundy bedspread
dusty and faded as vintage wine,
made me long for the bright color of red.
In the next room, sleepless, I heard
through thin walls the sounds
of an un-tender coupling.
I looked in the warped mirror
and found myself ugly
and when I turned from it,
could not escape the vision.
It lingered. The rain came and went,
came and went. I took an umbrella
and began my walk, hoping to come upon
her quarters. I passed the Roman Baths,
the statues not beautiful,
but puckered and fossilled
and the Pump Room where her protagonist,
other self, doppelgänger,
good, strong, loyal Catherine,
longing for companionship, fell
under the seduction of Isabella
and her reprehensible brother.
Even then her coming out
seemed less magisterial,
and Bath a representation of the emptiness
and evils of society where a woman’s dowry
might confine her forever,
than a reprieve from country life.
I gave up my search.
Images were everywhere.
And my mind had been made up.
I perceived no romance
in the wind, no comfort in the hard
glances of strangers, girls with chipped nail polish,
lads unkempt as if there were no hope of glory.
The next morning I boarded the train
to the modern world and it wasn’t until a sheet
of blue slipped out like a love letter
from its envelope of dark gray sky
that I knew the journey had ended
and, like Catherine, I was finally safe.


^^EOP^^

Between the bent boughs
of the splayed sumac the silver
owl rests his head.
 
The perimeter
left by your absence is long
to walk in one day.
 
The angel in her
credenza of extreme beauty
dogs swim the river
 
I look for my heart
by the lamp where the light is
skitter in the wet black leaves


^^EOP^^

I don’t recall when I first understood
why you stiffen at the roar of low flying jets—
 
Did you tell me, Mother, or did I just know?
When you refused to show me the caves like eyes
in the hills behind Bah-chan’s house—
 
Did I only dream it, how when the sirens began the trains stopped
dead in their tracks, unleashing a stream of thousands to rush
blind and headlong toward those sheltering hills—
 
The damp press of strange bodies in darkness
rank with the stench of war’s leavings,
only imagine a young girl’s cries drowned in the tumult,
urgent groping of unseen hands—
 
the bombs raining d0wn on Yokohama Harbor all through
the night, hothouse blooms crackling in a seething sky,
then hissing into a boiling sea—
 
Was it a millennium that passed before the sirens ceased their wailing,
only to be taken up again by the dogs and the dying?
 
But you talk of none of this today. We walk slowly,
saying little, as if less said will keep the heat at bay.
The air is wet, heavy with summer smells
carried aloft on the hypnotic drone of cicadas.
 
You show me where as a girl you played in other summers,
catching kabuto beetles and dragonflies in bamboo cages.
 
What must go through you when we pass them
at a distance, those black maws yawning out of the hillside,
exhaling the unspeakable?


^^EOP^^

I am downstairs early
looking for something to do
 
when I find my father on his knees
at the fireplace in the sitting-room
sweeping ash
from around and beneath the grate
with the soft brown hand-brush
he keeps especially for this.
 
Has he been here all night
waiting to catch me out?
So far as I can tell
I have done nothing wrong.
 
I think so again
when he calls my name
without turning round;
 
he must have seen me
with the eyes in the back of his head.
 
‘What’s the matter old boy?
Couldn’t sleep?’
 
His voice is kinder than I expect,
as though he knows
we have in common a sadness
I do not feel yet.
 
I skate towards him in my grey socks
over the polished boards of the sitting-room,
 
negotiating the rugs
with their patterns of almost-dragons.
 
He still does not turn round.
 
He is concentrating now
on arranging a stack of kindling
on crumpled newspaper in the fire basket,
 
pressing small lumps of coal
carefully between the sticks
as though he is decorating a cake.
 
Then he spurts a match,
and chucks it on any old how,
 
before spreading a fresh sheet of newspaper
over the whole mouth of the fireplace
to make the flames take hold.
 
Why this fresh sheet
does not also catch alight
I cannot think.
 
The flames are very close.
 
I can see them
and hear them raging
through yesterday’s cartoon of President Kennedy
 
and President Khrushchev
racing towards each other in their motorcars
both shouting
I’m sure he’s going to stop first!
 
But there’s no need to worry.
Everything
is just as my father wants it to be,
and in due time,
when the fire is burning nicely,
he whisks the newspaper clear,
 
folds it under his arm,
 
and picks up the dustpan
with the debris of the night before.
 
Has he just spoken to me again?
I do not think so. I
do not know.
I was thinking how neat he is.
I was asking myself:
will I be like this? How will I manage?
 
After that he chooses a log
from the wicker wood-basket
to balance on the coals,
and admires his handiwork.
 
When the time comes to follow him,
glide, glide over the polished floor,
he leads the way to the dustbins.
 
A breath of ash
pours continuously over his shoulder
from the pan he carries before him
like a man bearing a gift
in a picture of a man bearing a gift.


^^EOP^^

Let them sleep and dream the dream of lobsters;
I am likewise at peace in my little cottage
trying to become Mr. Five Willows.
 
I figure a crabapple is useful to no one but itself,
but my safety depends on having no place where death can enter
and not acting on every rustling of the smallest branch.
 
My abode is at the bank of a river, a river that comes
out of the marsh where the river merchant’s wife
has pined for her departed husband for the last 300 years.
 
Beetles fight on a dung heap; that’s the essence of war.
With axes and arrows, a superior force approaches my door;
let them knock lightly, so as not to disturb the
 
bird in the cage, which I am coaxing to sing,
while the candle burns to illumine the midnight lore
whose frayed texts drive me to the brink of insanity.
 
Let them all sleep and dream that the God of War
has brought them riches in the shape of gold nuggets
only to find in the morning
an empty store.
 
You can be in my dreams
if I can be in yours. In any case,
let the Chinese mafia sleep tonight
so I can be at peace
 
and in the morning, open wide my door.


^^EOP^^

General Petraeus, when the death-count of American troops
in Iraq was close to 3,800, said ‘The truth is you never do get
used to losses. There is a kind of bad news vessel with holes,
 
and sometimes it drains, then it fills up, then it empties again’—
leaving, in this particular case, the residue of a long story
involving one soldier who, in the course of his street patrol,
 
tweaked the antenna on the TV in a bar hoping for baseball,
but found instead the snowy picture of men in a circle talking,
all apparently angry and perhaps Jihadists. They turned out to be
 
reciting poetry. ‘My life’, said the interpreter, ‘is like a bag of flour
thrown through wind into empty thorn bushes’. Then ‘No, no’, he said,
correcting himself. ‘Like dust in the wind. Like a hopeless man.’


^^EOP^^

Our labor realized in the crowns
of marigolds, blue eyes of the hydrangeas,
smell of lavender and late bloom of the hosta’s
erect purple flower with its marvel of thick
green leaves. In our twilight
every year we trimmed back and the garden grew
more lustrous and untamable as if the eternal woods
and animals asleep at night in its beds were claiming it back.
The water in the pool shimmered an icy Tuscan blue.
 
When we arrived we swam
until the stress from the grueling
life in the city released our bodies. Later
we sat under the umbrella and watched a garter snake
slip into the water, careful not to startle
its flight-or-fight response. Its barbed-wire
coil. Comet of danger, serpent of the water,
how long we had thwarted the venom of its secret
lures and seductions.
It swam by arching then releasing
its slithery mercurial form.
Through the lanky trees
we heard the excited cries
of the neighbor’s children—ours, the boy in our late youth,
of our happiness and our struggles, the boy who made us whole
and broken, was in his room perhaps dreaming
of a girl and sleeping the long, tangled sleep of a teenager.
 
It was a miracle, our ignorance. It was grace
incarnate, how we never knew.


^^EOP^^

The ampalaya, no matter how bitter,
Is sweet to those who like it.
The hardest person to awaken
Is a lover feigning sleep.
 
The basketball held underwater
Wants violently to come up.
Easily split asunder is that
Which never was united.
 
The water is cold at first, for it
Takes time to heat the pipe.
The kids run away from home, only to
Sit through endless classes.
 
You take the battery out of a watch,
You turn it into a liar.
You strip the sheet off a drinking straw
And stab it into the scalp.
 
The basketball held underwater
Wants violently to come up.
The one who reads the sutra is not
The one who knows what is said.
 
My life is as unchanging
As the surface of the moon.
And I give you the same reason:
I have no atmosphere.
 
El hacha ya está puesta
A la raíz de los árboles,
Y todo árbol que no produzca buen fruto
Is hewn down and cast into the fire.
 
You take a rose by the throat.
How much blood comes out your hand
Is how recklessly you took hold,
Is how shamelessly.
 
Who wants to be great or holy
Has no lust for peace.
For peace is a thread only spools on a thing
That’s good for nothing else.
 


^^EOP^^

Has it coming, the pest. Gets irritated, the stuck up. Gets approval, the dimpled. Gets cold, the talk.
 
The sidewalk separates from the curb. Frogs peek out there. There are passages there, channels.
 
Gardens, orderly, get respect; no one hurts them. Only animals, insects, beings without comprehension.
 
A house on a corner lot, good to look up at from the corner, compels. Branches of live oak reach across the way. There must be acorns, black, green, green with earth yellow.
 
The wind cools the walker. There is nothing to stop the wind up. It finds every walker in its path, cools him, cools her.
 
Director must direct and make decisions. Buildings on the edges of developments look out over edges. The other world never nearer.
 
Between towns, roads are lonely. Lonely, too, who cannot bear being lied to. The angry become less intelligent. Do and undo, the day is long enough.
 
Liars do not think they are lying; that’s how they do it. The nut gives way to the teeth; the teeth crush it.
 
Smashed frog in the parking lot turns colors, becomes flat, extends its fingers, does not come back to life when it rains, yet disappears.
 
Wonderfully, beliefs antedate evidence. Wonderfully, people seldom believe a thing unless they already wanted it.
 
Many cry when signaled, not pursuant to cognition. What is offered as proof is suspect.
 
Summer makes strategic. Strategy is a pleasure. Whatever people say, to obey, of itself, does not hurt.
 
Stray feline must lie in shade, under tree, distrust her well-wisher first. Grackle must shelter under car, direct its thirsty attention to the water there.
 
Cut of meat must lose its color on the fire, exchange it, be seasoned. To be accused, rightly or wrongly, feels the same.
 
Old man must speak against his own best interests, for he cannot swallow his complaints, not all of them. Glassware touching glassware gets chipped, broken into triangles, in the move.
 
Vital sheet of paper must sometimes be lost. Papers are many. The thing learned at length, the memorized rigmarole, must fade from memory, in time.
 
The kind word given unexpectedly is good. The hearer must be relieved. The thought that nothing can ever go right again must depart for a time.
 
The light must change. The waiting person wait longer. The walker must step out of the summer heat wet to the hair roots, the shirt wet.
 
The sky is the same but seems grander where no buildings are. Colored clouds are remarked; white ones less.
 
One’s looks, one’s skin color matter less if money has its feet in it. The hated one, the cheated many, are the poor.
 
Lean grackle must stalk a branch, mouth open like scissors. Striped raptors, wings in fixed positions, must kite, must circle.
 
Beautiful Soul wants a world in which he or she has no place. Godspeed, sweet intent. Love will creep where it cannot go.
 
Stick-figure reptiles, black, must cross the sidewalk by the pool, dartingly. They weigh one paperclip.
 
Beauty enslaves on contact. Better have it than hear of it. Sweet and cunningly seldom meet.
 
In dragging a bamboo tree, one must snatch it by the eyebrows. The rusty sword and the empty purse plead performance of covenants.
 
Even Graceful must sometimes, in putting on her coat, sweep everything off the table and into the floor. If many strike on an anvil, they must in meter.
 
He, only, pursues honesty honestly, who has destroyed any possibility of good repute. Whether you boil snow or pound it, you can only have water out of it.
 
Cities must have boulevards, vast channels not possible or dangerous to cross. There must be holes in the decomposing concrete, paint invisible at sunrise and sunset, guardrails, median strips, shrines.
 
The student must wait to do the assignment, wait beyond the advisable point, stay up against a deadline. Must turn in a paper never read, not by the writer, not by the friend.
 
Must muster, thunder, one or two times in a life, a sound to frighten the unfrightenable. Must pour, from the sky, rarely, chips and balls and coins and smooth clusters of partly white, partly clear ice.
 
Some believe, helplessly. Others, less. Some count, tabulate, helplessly. They check calendars. They can’t shake it.
 
Winter travels, hides, shelters. It pursues the lightly dressed into buildings during summer. It lies in wait in restaurants, miscalculates.
 
The pill and its coating, obnoxious to the child, are welcome enough to the grown swallower. First deserve and then desire. Blow first and sip afterwards.
 
The wise let it go a great deal. Sorrow is wondrously clinging; clouds glide. The friend who comes apologizing and promising must be received. He is sorry and not sorry and sorry.
 
Courage comes up. Sacrifice, oftener. The disintegrating parking lot is witness to the exchange. Drugs are traded, caresses.
 
The dog in its heavy coat must lie, half dead, on the porch. Eyes like a bear, tongue like a lion, lethargy.
 
One must consciously retire. Comes off a train none but was on it. The heirloom ring, wrong-gendered, trash, gets rescued.
 
When the spirit of praising is upon him, a man will judge linen by candlelight. Burr oaks yield fewer fruit, but bigger, shag-capped.
 
One must consciously retire. A helve must fit its ax head. Most laugh before understanding. Fame is best.
 


^^EOP^^




28 June 1914



Although an assassin has tried
and failed to blow him to pieces earlier this morning,
Archduke Ferdinand has let it be known
he will very soon complete his journey
as planned along the quay in Sarajevo.
 
For a moment, however,
he has paused to recover his composure
at the window of a private room in the Town Hall,
after finding the blood of his aide-de-camp
spattered over the manuscript of the speech
he was previously unable to complete.
 
And indeed,
the prospect of an Austrian brewery in the distance
is reassuring,
likewise the handsome bulk of the barracks
filled with several thousand soldiers of the fatherland.
 
This is how those who survive today will remember him:
 
a man thinking his thoughts
until his wife has finished her duties—
the Countess Chotek, with her pinched yet puddingy features,
to whom he will whisper shortly,
‘Sophie, live for our children’,
although she will not hear.
 
As for his own memories:
 
the Head of the local Tourist Bureau has now arrived
and taken it upon himself to suggest
the Archduke might be happy to recall the fact
that only last week he bagged his three thousandth stag.
 
Was this, the Head dares to enquire,
with the double-barrelled Mannlicher
made for him especially—
the same weapon he used to dispatch
two thousand one hundred and fifty game birds
in a single day,
and sixty boars in a hunt led by the Kaiser?
 
These are remarkable achievements
the Head continues,
on the same level as the improvement
the Archduke has suggested in the hunting of hare,
by which the beaters,
forming themselves into a wedge-shape,
squeeze those notoriously elusive creatures
towards a particular spot
where he can exceed the tally of every other gun.
 
In the silence that follows
it is not obvious whether the Archduke
has heard the question.
 
He has heard it.
 
He is more interested, however,
in what these questions bring to mind:
 
an almost infinite number of woodcock,
pigeon, quail, pheasant and partridge,
wild boars bristling flank to flank,
mallard and teal and geese
dangling from the antlers of stags,
layer and layer of rabbits
and other creatures that are mere vermin—
 
a haul that he predicts will increase
once the business of today has been completed.


^^EOP^^

By noon your breathing had changed from normal
to shallow and panicky. That’s when the nurse said Nearly there now, in the gentle voice of a parent
comforting a child used to failure, slipping her arms
beneath your shoulders to hoist you up the pillows,
then pressing a startling gauze pad under your jaw.
 
Nearly there now. The whole world seemed to agree—
as the late April sky deepened through the afternoon
into high August blue, the vapour trails of two planes
converged to sketch a cross on the brow of heaven.
My brother Kit and I kept our backs turned to that
except now and again. It was the room I wanted to see,
 
because it contained your last example of everything:
the broken metal window-catch that meant no fresh air;
your toothbrush standing to attention in its plastic mug;
the neutral pink walls flushed into definite pale red
by sunlight rejoicing in the flowering cherry outside;
your dressing-gown like a stranger within the wardrobe
 
eavesdropping. That should have been a sign to warn us,
but unhappiness made us brave, or do I mean cowardly,
and Kit and I talked as if we were already quite certain
you could no longer hear us, saying how easy you were
to love, but how difficult always to satisfy and relax—
how impossible to talk to, in fact, how expert with silence.
 
You breathed more easily by the time we were done,
although the thought you might have heard us after all,
and our words be settling into your soft brain like stones
onto the bed of a stream—that made our own breathing
tighter. Then the nurse looked in: Nothing will change here for a while boys, and we ducked out like criminals.
 
I was ordering two large gins in the pub half a mile off
when my mobile rang. It was the hospital. You had died.
I put my drink down, then thought again and finished it.
Five minutes later we were back at the door of your room
wondering whether to knock. Would everything we said
be written on your face, like the white cross on the heavens?
 
Of course not. It was written in us, where no one could find it
except ourselves. Your own face was wiped entirely clean—
and so, with your particular worries solved, and your sadness,
I could see more clearly than ever how like mine it was,
and therefore how my head will eventually look on the pillow
when the wall opens behind me, and I depart with my failings.
 


^^EOP^^

When Emperor Hirohito announced
Japan’s defeat over national radio,
his divinity was broken, fell away
and settled in fine gold dust at his feet.
 
His people understood the gravity
of the occasion—a god does not speak
over the airwaves with a human voice,
ordinary and flecked with static. A god
does not speak in the common voice
of the earthbound, thick with shame.
 
At the station, my mother, a schoolgirl,
looked on as men in uniform lurched
from the platform into the path
of incoming trains, their slack bodies
landing on the tracks without sound.


^^EOP^^

Stepping crow. Moon at half mast.
Dawn horse, horse, blanket and mule.
The fool knows something you don’t.
 
Stepping crow. Both feet in the boat.
Books stacked up, and nowhere to store ’em.
Decorum is spontaneous order.
 
Stepping crow. Gone north of the Border.
Magic in motion and magic at rest.
Only divest, no need to announce it.
 
Stepping crow. Locked in from the outset.
Feet in the boat and we’re already rowing.
I don’t like thinking, I like already knowing.
 
Stepping crow. Take hammer to coin.
Anvil to anvil, and figure to ground.
Hateful, the sound of recriminations.
 
Stepping crow. Uncountable Haitians.
Hospital, barracks; Harvard and prison.
Give the rhythm what it wants. And the people.
 
Stepping crow. Horace primeval.
Wrist-deep in sheep’s guts, breaking the set.
But memory is the better poet.
 
Stepping crow. Clogged is the conduit.
Explain and explain, you try and get on with it:
You just give ’em something to fight with.
 
Stepping crow. Christian Enlightenment.
A bubble, sluggish, in a carpenter’s level.
But bad’s not the Devil.  Bad can be good.
 
Stepping crow. They misunderstood.
Nobody rightly prefers a surprise.
The wise like looking forward.
 
Stepping crow. Don’t try to ignore it:
The strain in the closet and school letting out.
I doubt it’ll ever be casual.
 
Stepping crow. I just happen to know.
I don’t happen to trust the self I’m serving.
This pleasure’s a lie, unless it’s permanent.
 
Stepping crow. And thirteenth tercet.
The place where the Wall tunnels into the sea.
It’s not not me you’re aiming at.
 
Stepping crow. Gotta add and subtract.
I see now we have no choice but to leave
The brutal honesty to the brutes.
 
Stepping crow. I know it’s no use.
The Sport of Kings and the Book of Love.
They’re not above irregular perquisites.
 
Stepping crow. Can never be sure of it.
Blood orange, orange; persimmon and onion;
And women are young men too …
 
Stepping crow. Oh, say it ain’t so.
A fist full of leaves and another of arrows:
I’m setting the trap where the passage narrows.


^^EOP^^




for Max Ritvo



I
 
Three weeks until summer and then—what?
Midsummer’s gravity makes our heads spin
each hour a gilt thread spool, winding through
the second hand, gossamer fin de semaine, fin de siècle, fin slicing the water
of the too-cold-to-breathe bay, molten silver,
then receding as if we hadn’t seen it,
sultan of so long, see you tomorrow.
               Dead man’s fingers, lady’s slippers, a seal
who swims too close—too close for what? The needle
swerves. Our element chooses us. Water
fire, air, earth—the rosebush, Lazarus,
hot to the touch, gold reticulate, is love’s
bull’s-eye, attar rising from the rafters.
 
 
II
 
If I could make it stop I would. Was it
the crocodile Hook feared, or was it time?
The hour’s arrow never misses, the gnomon,
glinting, cuts the Day-Glo sun to pieces.
In the ultraviolet palace of the Mermaid King
his girls wear scallop shells, one for each year
on their turquoise tails. Even they have birthdays,
why not you? Death, hold your ponies with one
hand, and stay awhile. On my desk, the lion’s
paw lamps scavenged from the winter beach,
its poppy-colored shells like the lit scales
of an enormous Trojan fish … teeth chattering,
its metronome time bomb tsk tsk—
when is giving up not giving in?
 
 
III (child’s pose)
 
When Alice pulled the stopper, did she get
smaller, or did the world get larger? In
the bath, your nose bleeds a bouquet of tissue
roses, white stained red—adolescence
is to overdo it, but really? Thirty
stories up, our birds’-eye view is
the hummingbird tattoo on your bare head,
wings beating, too tiny and too big to see,
your wire-thin profile drawn upright, bones
               daring the air, marionette running on
the brain’s dark marrow, tungsten for the fireflies’
freeze tag. Due south, the Chrysler Building’s gauntlet
holds a lit syringe. We do and do not change.
Let me go from here to anywhere.
 
 
IV
 
That’s it for now. And so we turn the page
your poems standing in for you, or—that’s
not it, what’s left of you, mediating
between what you’d call mind and body
and I, by now biting my lip, call grief,
               the lines netting the enormous air
like silver threads, the tails of Mr. Edwards’s
spiders with which they sail from ledge to branch
“as when the soul feels jarred by nervous thoughts
and catch on air.” Pace. Your trousers worn
to mouse fur dragging on the stoop, your hip
prongs barely holding them aloft, the past
a phaeton, its sunlit reins bucking
at before and after, but there is no after.
 
 
V
 
Or is there? For once, when you rock back
on the chair I don’t say don’t do that,
forelegs lifting, hooves pawing the air—
Every departure’s an elopement,
the shy cat fiddling while Rome sizzles,
spoon mirror flipping us upside down.
               Son of Helios, rainbow fairy lights
blazing, when one light goes out they all
go out. At the top of the dune, the thorny
crowns of buried trees, their teeter-totter
branches a candelabra for the spiders’
silvery halo of threads. What a terrible
business it is, saying what you mean.
               Speak, sky, the horizon scored by talons.


^^EOP^^

Let it finally be Friday, let me drive
downtown before five, park in the one
space left open in front and feed the meter
the exact change it needs. Let me go into the office,
sit and nod, unfold my check on the table
and sign. Let the line not be dotted, let it
be solid. Let it be my name.
Let it be final.
 
Let me pull into the driveway while
it is still light. It’s well past five and well
into October and they are just about
to change the time. Saturday night
on the local news they’ll remind
us all to Fall Back, but I make it in
under the wire. There is still light.
There is still time.
 
I am up the back porch steps, under
the awning, my hand on the back door lock
the realtor left on. Let me remember rightly
the numbers he gave me. Let this not be the dream
of the high school locker with the Master Lock
whose combination you forgot or fumbled, turning
too fast, going too far, everything you’d locked up
irretrievable, lost.
Let the lock fall open, let me leave it
on the steps for the realtor to pick up.
Let him pull up the flimsy stakes
of the sign in the yard that says I can be bought,
let him drive away. Let no Master
enter through my door.
 
Let the house be a disaster, I don’t care.
Let the smoke-framed blanks where another
woman’s pictures marked the wall be the story
of how my edges caught fire and the ash at last
let me see where I stood. Let the cracked
kitchen floor make a map to teach me
where not to step, how not to fall through
and break my very own back.
Let the broken window be a way out,
the broken door a way in. Let me go
to the hardware store and buy the tools
to take the chain off the bedroom door,
let me paint the bathroom pink without asking,
walk naked and unafraid through all my rooms.
 
Let me pick up a broom and sweep
nothing under the rug. Let me sweep it all
into the light. Let me do it. Let there be time.
Let there be light.
 


^^EOP^^

we floated asleep, as the house beams were carved
with birds & waves through the night
 
not knowing how to walk through sand dunes
not knowing the sand blue color of your veins
 
it is tiring to wake each day to the frost
your out breath melancholy, smooth


^^EOP^^

There was a bucket, there was a wall,
there was a woman and a man.
 
The woman carried the bucket
and the man was the wall.
There was no place else to go.
 
It was a long, long time
for there was much to carry
and there was much to wall.
 
There was a path ran straight
from the well to the hole in the wall.
There was a path ran crooked
from the well to the wood.
 
There was something in the wood
bigger than the bucket.
 
Woe to the man, woe to the wall.
Woe to the bucket at the edge
of the wood.
 


^^EOP^^

We shouldn’t raise mixed babies in the South, Kay says as I drive up the crest
of another hill on our way into Kentucky.
 
The South, where humidity leaves
a sweat mustache, where a truck
with a Confederate flag painted
 
on the back windshield skitters in front
of us. In its bed, avoiding our eyes,
a boy with blond hair
 
split down the middle like a Bible
left open to the Book of Psalms.
His shirtless, sun-licked skin drapes,
 
a thin coat for his bones, his clavicles sharp.
I want to know who’s driving this raggedy truck.
I want the boy to look at us. I want
 
to spray paint a black fist over that flag.
I want the truck to find its way
into the ravine. I want to—
 
Stepping on the gas, I pass the truck,
Kay and I turn our heads. The boy smiles
and waves. The man driving doesn’t
 
turn his head, keeps his eyes on the road. Kay
turns red as she draws her fingers
into fists. I stare at the whites of her eyes.
 


^^EOP^^

She cannot imagine it otherwise.
She wakes in the morning and twists her ring,
loves how every night in their bed he lies
 
breathing warm in the dark and never shies
away. He lets her talk, he lets her sing.
She cannot imagine it otherwise.
 
One night she’s surprised how gently he tries
to move her arm when he thinks she’s sleeping.
In the night, in their bed, she sees he lies
 
watching the ceiling long before sunrise.
Too much coffee, too many late nights working.
She cannot imagine it otherwise.
 
He quiets. The more she worries and pries
the less he tells her about anything.
She’s sure every night in their bed he lies
 
wanting a room beyond reach of her eyes.
He sighs—she cries so much, Over nothing.
She cannot imagine it otherwise:
Every night in their bed, he lies.


^^EOP^^

doesn’t come with feathers.
It lives in flip-flops and, in cold weather,
a hooded sweatshirt, like a heavyweight
in training, or a monk who has taken
a half-hearted vow of perseverance.
It only has half a heart, the hope I know.
The other half it flings to every stalking hurt.
It wears a poker face, quietly reciting
the laws of probability, and gladly
takes a back seat to faith and love,
it’s that many times removed
from when it had youth on its side
and beauty. Half the world wishes
to stay as it is, half to become
whatever it can dream,
while the hope I know struggles
to keep its eyes open and its mind
from combing an unpeopled beach.
Congregations sway and croon,
constituents vote across their party line,
rescue parties wait for a break
in the weather. And who goes to sleep
with a prayer on the lips or half a smile
knows some kind of hope.
Though not the hope I know,
which slinks from dream to dream
without ID or ally, traveling best at night,
keeping to the back roads and the shadows,
approaching the radiant city
without ever quite arriving.
 


^^EOP^^

Soon as the sun forsook the eastern main
The pealing thunder shook the heav'nly plain;
Majestic grandeur! From the zephyr's wing,
Exhales the incense of the blooming spring.
Soft purl the streams, the birds renew their notes,
And through the air their mingled music floats.
Through all the heav'ns what beauteous dies are spread!
But the west glories in the deepest red:
So may our breasts with ev'ry virtue glow,
The living temples of our God below!
Fill'd with the praise of him who gives the light,
And draws the sable curtains of the night,
Let placid slumbers sooth each weary mind,
At morn to wake more heav'nly, more refin'd;
So shall the labours of the day begin
More pure, more guarded from the snares of sin.
Night's leaden sceptre seals my drowsy eyes,
Then cease, my song, till fair Aurora rise.


^^EOP^^

                                                                         ^ 
now you have to go back through Ohio just to manage a few sweaters because
it’s getting cold out there
 
 
 
                              pack two grey-green duffels / most of your clothes are torn
                              what else                    do you have to show for yourself
                    stay in motels     drink bourbon & cut your fingertips on
                                        the zippers of your jeans / throw the oranges at the hero
                                                                                ships on the walls                     forget her
  
                                                                         ^
 
          her touch—nearly seven hundred days away / the desk littered with candles &
                              letters / last night folk music & a light bulb     swinging     humming
 
 
          sink backed up & the water flooded the dirty blue tiles—you just ducked out
 
 
     in another town you can imagine fresh basil in the kitchen window    orange peels
     ground down to dust          bicycles          farmland          the peripheral at peace with
                                                                                                                                    the eventual 
                                                                         ^
 
          you could show up at someone’s door          unannounced by the wind 
                                                                         ^ 
                                                                      collect weeds as though they are scarce
sleep next to the man who takes care of the trees          the edge is close
                    between two bodies          smokestacks line the sky 
 
                                                                         ^
 
troubled by your body, you’re trembling at the gas station
 
                                                  stay in a poorly insulated farmhouse north of the city
                                                    wake to a lack of rain, an unbroken sky
  
                                                   remember the moon from last night
                                                   that seemed to drift
  
                                                   if god were uneasy
                                                   you would not know
 


^^EOP^^

You better rap, my brother
says—he can
b-box his ass off.
Got DJ scratches and spins,
 
will drop it on the two
and four, the three and four.
Whatever you need.
 
Me posing my bars: My flows are second to none, come here, son. See how it’s done.
 
Wanted to be a rapper? Check.
Thought I was going to the NBA? Check.
Father went to prison? Check.
Brother too? Check.
Mother died when I was eight? Check.
Hung pictures of Luke Perry
on my bedroom wall?
  What?
 
Yep, give me a bit, and I’ll sprinkle
some subjectivity on it.
 
I loved that dude, his whisper-voice, his lean.
Auntie worried on the phone: Girl, he got photos of some white boy all over his walls. Me rocking out
to Tom Petty’s “You Don’t Know How It Feels.”
 
Silent head nods do more
than throw shade.
  All black people are fluent
  in silence. Mangled Baldwin quote?
Let’s keep wrenching. Everybody’s
 
fluent in silence.
 
You know what
a switchblade glare means. No need
to read the look she gave me
 
as I sang, Let me run  with you tonight.


^^EOP^^

The god in me does not honor
the god in you. The god in you
murdered me once, and once
was more than enough.
So the god in me, adept
at keeping my nature warm
and inspired to love the benign,
now prefers the chilly air
of indifference, something picked up
like a virus from the most vicious
of mortals. The god in me
regards the god in you
as suspect, though sad
to say, it wasn’t always so.
There were the generous days
in the beginning, when every word
was made flesh. In the beginning
the gods in us were content
to let us go on
behaving like perfect mortals,
which is to say imperfectly,
which is to say with our tenderness
fully intact: the good kind
that let us gladly undress
our trepidations, and pleasure
our solitude into a blissful
oblivion; and the bad kind—
invisible woundings
no compliment or hot kiss,
no confession of the amorous
could soothe for long.
And then, when the mortals we were
had done enough to remind us
that to be mortal is to be susceptible
to the secret agenda, the cruel caprice,
the soft but eviscerating voice—
“at the mercy of a nuance”—
the god in you decided it was time
to act. A dark god, in need
of a human sacrifice, smoothly turning your back
on the earnest and their pathetic pleas.
So the god in me, no stranger to the aberrant
and the abhorrent, now has no choice
but to respond in kind. A pity, really,
since it has been the dream
of so many gods to find themselves
in some quiet room, the burden of power
slipped off and scattered
like clothes across the floor, the light
of late afternoon a kind of benediction,
and everywhere the gratitude
for the privilege of feeling
almost human.


^^EOP^^

I swear on the melody of trumpet vines,
ants feasting through animal crackers, Burt’s Bees,
Tyler Perry movies, my daddy’s .38 slug, footie-socks
inside high-top Jordans, disidentification, drag
queens, blond dreadlocks, headstones
salt-and-peppering the grass, vanilla wafers
in banana pudding, Zeus-swan chasing,
blunt-guts, sharp thumbnails, keloid scars,
cash-only bars, R&B songs, on what the pot
called the kettle. I put that on my mama’s good
hair, on playing solitaire with a phantom
limb, the white woman I go home to,
my auntie’s face when she says: You know he always loved them pink toes. I put that on
everything, on the signifiers I gobble up,
candlesticks blown out by whistling lips.
I put that on dervishing records scratched
on down-beats, empty beehives,
fresh-fade head-slaps, hand claps, bamboo shoots,
liminality, mestizos, the purple-black crook
of my arm, split sternums, on You can’t save him now. I put that on skinny jeans, get rich
quick schemes—Gotta get that C.R.E.A.M. Know what I mean?—freckled black faces, leafless trees
throwing up gang signs, phlegm hocked
onto streets. I swear I catch more stones
than catfish. I lose more collard greens than sleep. I think
nothing is here but us darkies, high yellows, red bones,
cocoa butters. Someone, no, everyone has jungle fever. Don’t touch my forehead. Blond
as moonshine, mute trombone choking.
I put that on Instagram. Post me to the endless chain
of signifiers. Strawberry gashes on kneecaps, Let me get some dap, Newports, Kool’s, and folding
chairs instead of barstools, that white drool
caked on your face. Mommy please wipe away the veil. I thought I was passing into the eye of the streetlamp. I swear. I promise on frondless
palm trees, long pinkie nails, sixteen years, serve eight,
and Miss Addie’s red beans and rice, Ol’ Dirty Bastard
and the brother on the Cream of Wheat box. It don’t mean a thing if it don’t buckle your knees. Open your hands.
I’ll give you a song, give you the Holy Ghost
from a preacher’s greasy palm—When he hit me, I didn’t
fall, felt eyes jabbing me, tagging me. Oh no he didn’t!—
give you the om from the small of her back.
I put that on double consciousness, multiple jeopardy,
and performativity. Please make sure my fetters and manacles are tight. Yea baby, I like bottomless bullet chambers. I swear on the creation of Uncle Tom—
some white woman's gospel. She got blue eyes? I love me some—on Josiah Henson, the real Uncle Tom, on us still
believing in Uncle Tom. Lord, have mercy!
Put that on the black man standing on my shoulders holding
his balls. Put that on the black man I am—I am not—on
the black man I wish I was.
 


^^EOP^^




Bitaug, Siquijor, Philippines



Three women dragged the spiky, bulky mass
onto a bamboo table on the side of an island 
road. A raised hunting knife glinted in sunlight,
then plunged with a breathless gasp, slicing into 
the unseen. To a passerby they were a curious
wall, a swarm of onlookers, barrio children 
and younger women, buzzing with a rising
gleeful cadence as a mother busied herself 
with the butchering. Surprisingly, a citrusy,
sugary scent sweetened the stranger’s face 
when offered the yellow flesh like thickened
petals, licorice to the touch, he stood awed 
at the monstrous jackfruit, bloodless armadillo
halved, quartered, sectioned off for feasting. 
His tongue tingled ripely. This country’s foreign
to me

^^EOP^^

As you may have inferred, Ka Pow is not a spicy chicken dish
Meanwhile, you are an accident waiting to repurpose yourself 
Who are you to mix up languages? This is not a smorgasbord
You have to remember that you are a cylinder, a form of fodder 
Meanwhile, you are an accident waiting to repurpose yourself
Why do you need an expensive phone? It won’t help you in the future 
You have to remember that you are a cylinder, a form of fodder
Our company motto: other than you, no waste shall go to waste 
Why do you need an expensive phone? It won’t help you in the future
Have you ever thought of joining the circus? You might find a home there 
Our company motto: other than you, no waste shall go to waste
Choosing suitable punishments is an unavoidable necessity 
Have you ever thought of joining the circus? You might find a home there.
If you are speaking about my place in the universe, that’s not right 
Choosing suitable punishments is an unavoidable necessity
Hasn’t the sky repeatedly proven to be the most excellent manager 
If you are speaking about my place in the universe, that’s not right
Memories are iridescent insects infiltrating your dreams 
Hasn’t the sky repeatedly proven to be the most excellent manager
Little sphinxes, I have instructed you to the best of my ability 
Memories are iridescent insects infiltrating your dreams
As you may have inferred, Ka Pow is not a spicy chicken dish 
Little sphinxes, I have instructed you to the best of my ability
Who are you to mix up languages? This is not a smorgasbord


^^EOP^^

From a recessed hollow
Rumble, I unearth as a creature 
Conceived to be relentless.
Depend on me to hunt you 
Until you find yourself
Counting all the uncorked 
Nightmares you digested.
I will let you know the burning 
Endorsed by the effort of
Matches. And you will claw 
Yourself inward, toward a
Conference of heat as the steam 
Within you surrenders, caves
You into a cardboard scar. 
Even what will wreck you
Are your mother’s chapped lips. 
Even to drip your confession
Of empty rooms. I know about 
Your recipe of rain, your apiary
Ways. Trust me to be painful.


^^EOP^^

This is a poem on my other’s body,
I mean, my mother’s body, I mean the one 
who saved her braid of blue-black hair
in a drawer when I was little. 
Meaning one I could lean against — 
against not in resistance. Fuzzy dress 
of wuzzy one. Red lipstick one.
Kitchen one. Her one to me,  bad-ger bad-ger —  
or so I heard. The one body I write on 
like Daddy’s blank studio wall
with my colored pencils. 
About seeing her skin 
as she bathed in the afternoon — 
was I five? It was summer. 
Then today’s winter where again
I call that bath to mind. 
I cannot leave her body alone. 
Which is how I found Mother in the bath
escaping the heat of a 1950s house, 
Father on a ladder with blowtorch
to scrape the paint off the outside.  •  badger badger  • 
The sun in the suburbs
simmered the tar roof over our rooms 
in the town where only wasps lived
inside paper cells beneath eaves and roots. 
And they hurt very much, the wasps.  • 
Now I am sixty. Sweet as dried papaya. 
My hair, a bit tarnished,
my inmost, null. 
Memory is failing away
as if an image shattered to shards then 
recollected for a kaleidoscope: 
I click the pieces into sharp arrangements —  grouse, crow, craven
 — no, now, my own daughter turns sovereign


^^EOP^^

    
habitation, wooden crate in a nameless territory     
dented objects for gathering water 
plastic footwear two sizes too small, how the cracked heels hang over          
the vine suggests sweet potato but notice the cradle of thorns            
skiff ferry            militarized      
eradication’s resourcefulness speaking in a high prestige language       
jaundice shade of bombardment
singed skin grapheme       
between ribs     what might be shale       
the mother who isn’t
the father who isn’t       
ramshackle peony
meridian bit in the mouth


^^EOP^^

let’s start there. let’s start there.   (3 /9 
new oddcouple friendship
raised many eyebrows one thing he doesn’t want 
               “I come in peace
and basketball
some hungover blue blue 
a doe-eyed girl, I was
trying to tell you a simple story
did you want me back 
on Celebrity Apprentice
yes yes yes yes
a real human being 
who let his guard down             ((he’s not his dad
I’m sleeping in your bed 
while you sleep smothered
in stars, a foreign city
not the dirtbag 
you fight to shrug off inside he says that
he don’t want war

^^EOP^^

Because the birds sculpted
the air with their song —  
I sent that flash across the sea.
Candle in a paper lantern, 
the flame rose and dipped.
 
• 
I’ve been hiding
from my father. 
Fog-damp pall over the city.
I ink this bruise onto paper. 
Years ago, in Highland Park,
we’d picnic in the backyard. 
We slept in the living room.
I clung to my beautiful mother. 
Flipped the pillow and pressed
against its coolness. 
I held grudges like tiny fists of sand,
then, let go. 
I kissed the fog and sky
and the ocean’s cobalt hue. 
You. I hadn’t yet met you.
 
• 
Murky alphabet —  
I falter the letter, I elide the gaps.
If the opalescent dew meant anything, 
it meant that one day
I’d be lifted above my feelings. 
You’d become less than a feeling,
the way every lover I’ve known 
no longer hurts me.
Those old charges detonated.
 
• 
Here and now, I make room for joy.
Birds ribbon the air with their singing. 
Bird voices riot up. The planes
with their hulking engines —  
they fly too. The jags of each cliff head — 
Your lips — I uninterrupt. 
I charley horse and miracle ride
your absence. The whipped froth of the ocean. 
Puddle of salt water, shivering wound.
Seaweed, we sing of losses. 
Cold under this blanket, I wait
for my alarm to sing.
 
• 
I’ve polished this anger and now it’s a knife.
I’m hardened as a hunter ornamenting his cave 
with the bones of the dead. I’m so sick
of history dragging behind me. 
Today, I don’t want to be sad. But my father
has retreated into silence and the lashes 
across his back have not healed,
and my mother tells me he could have killed 
himself that night and we’d be blamed. Call the police, she said. 
We stood barefoot on the street, listening
to him throw things 
against the garage walls, detonations
of only what we could imagine. 
I hurl stones into the ether.
I wash my hands in ink. 
The lost in the fog body borne of matter,
history-less, untethered. 
Better to be alive and bewildered.
At least I can name the thing. 
To love my father
is to love his wounds. 
In times like these, we present our hurts
like old toys we polish up 
to show each other
who we used to be.


^^EOP^^

The name itself is dismal. Stumbling
Into adulthood, I spent a year there,
On a narrow, much interrupted street.
My austere block had a single, sick tree.
Tim Fender and I rented a row house
For only 50 bucks a month. Basically,
It was a shell, bought by this gay man
Who thought he would fix it up, but
Grays Ferry made him so depressed,
He just had to bolt. Being Catholic Irish,
This hood couldn’t have been congenial
To someone gay, unless he’s a priest.
Still, I seriously doubt the neighbors did
Or said anything. They certainly didn’t
Show hostility to Tim or I, two art fags.
Everyone suffered in Grays Ferry, and
In 1986, it literally stank, for there were two
Huge lots filled with garbage, thanks to a
Twenty-day strike by Philly’s garbage men. 
I had left art school without a degree,
For why borrow money to learn painting
From all these failed artists? Why not just
Slink somewhere and paint? Though I never
Amounted to crap as a painter, I’ve taught
Myself to write, sort of, instead of hocking
My life to a bank, just so I could be misled
And muddled by stunted or puffed up typists. 
That year, I manned up and mainlined Celine’s Death on the Installment Plan and his Journey
To the End of the Night

^^EOP^^




For Rom Srinivasan



1 
The persimmon tree
and my neighbor’s son — fronted
by acne — winter’s diet. Meanwhile,
caves and rocks are named in the future tense.
Stupefied gargoyles have had better luck
in history books; the nation’s monuments
are made of enduring stuff. We are obstinate
ink stain, memory, an animal whose similes lose
scale. If story is a wavelength, we could pick
a beginning, follow intention to the border,
then let custom reign. When we build a nation,
we are permanently old and always new.
Mother died a refugee, she thought the status
was a promise of return. She had a version
of nation under the bed. Never mind that her village
took a new name; the jar of water
from her childhood’s river, ten stones and five
twigs were clues that home was transitive.   2 
The invasion on body holds only the heart hostage.
Armies of the past unfurl the flag of love at dawn,
there are no takers but the part of self
that privileges misery. Soon, you will fall. As the fruits
swell, the branches sag with orange sweetness. I miss you,
orange much. I want time to return to the moment before you
got off the bus and walked toward the beginning of the story
(this is a we tragedies are made of). If you’d been ten minutes late,
if geography was inconsequential to the struggle of belonging,
there would be no reason to allude to the mood of patriarchy.
Bring a different set of ears, or measuring system, something
that communicates the loss that all the words along the border
are fiction. Bring a heart that barters; that is not afraid to split.   3 
Heart muscles begin their dirge during a heart attack. Oxidation
is linked to regeneration, which is also to say words build
their own web within a system. She said, All disease starts in the colon.
She knows where oxygen is stored in the building.
She knows who needs it most, sometimes it is given
to the one who will heal quickest. In time, new tissue granulates
the wound: pattern of tiny cells visible on the sun’s surface
through a telescope, or cumulus clouds, or dandelion clocks.
The edges of a wound shrink over time around a scar,
that, like maps, tell an incomplete story.   4 
Drizzle morning, a color-shy palette against
which trees, brought to the forefront, are not
themselves. Elsewhere, the heater rumbles, abiding
to mechanical intuition, turning on and off. I stay cold,
I am warm. I know nothing about conduction or the secret
of a lie. The street, wearied by leaves pressing as far as stone
allows for sinking, is mottled from impositions. A crow hovers
over a chimney, buoyed by who knows what. Intimations of life
push upward in hot air. An ordinary day on an ordinary street,
where the only proof of people are lights on the porch, timid
in the brume, and images of refugees on television screens.   5 
A sadness is thickening
the stomach’s heart,
it must, it cannot collapse
into self-ashes.
Fresh flowers for gods
at a discount; today no discount
for happiness. Today,
the sun hisses, eyes
date us. Split in two,
asphalt day. The heart can return
to its normal size in four months.
Things in space are produced
out of discord. The time it takes to turn
to time. We were sitting in a room fused
of desire, not for the other but for the one
from the past whose lashings
we scratch in our dreams, as salve.
This side of the river, after the pass,
we learn about boundaries when we shut
the front door. Fields of bodies on the verge
of drinking from the river. Lips opened
to freeze: that is one memory of the old country
forgotton by books in school. Mothers remember
the bodies they buried. Life after death, and death
in every breath. Belonging: a verb and
a strip of hope I fed with orchids on sale and recipes
brought from a country I now hover over in virtual maps.
I twist time as a child tightens the cap of a bottle, the right
direction a consequence of loss, the left the vocabulary
of departure. I am walking backwards hoping to reverse,
to unsee what I cannot forget. To leave something else
as trails to find a way forward.


^^EOP^^

Of this room remember heat. A fight with my father and
glass evil eyes. The television sparking like a glamorous fish. 
We’ve turned off every lightbulb, fan each other with foreign
magazines. I take photographs of stray dogs. In the car, 
the Turkish driver listens to horse races on the radio. I won, he tells us. I dress like a pillar. I want to burn the verbs 
I mispronounce to the Egyptian waiter. My uterus bleeds from Athens
to Istanbul and the moon is a spider tracking its white mud 
across the sky. Orange blossoms open like pepper in the courtyard.
Everywhere, blue rooftops. Antibiotics for my infected jaw. 
We take Rome with us to Rome. At the passport control line,
you tell me to let you speak. You tell them I’m with you.


^^EOP^^




For Timothy Yu



For us. They say: 
just dig your hands 
into the good, good 
soil of the field  
and you will grow into a child 
of our heart. Be quiet 
and work, for you are good 
at it, for you are almost 
a child of our heart 
already. Listen  
and we will reward 
you. We will reward 
you, but don’t talk  
 — you will want to 
have earned the 
reward. We will 
reward you later, much, 
much later. Are you not  
a child of the field, a child 
native to the field?  
But I have never seen 
the field. I was born 
in it but squeezed 
my eyes shut. I squeezed  
my eyes hard shut 
so I could imagine 
another field....


^^EOP^^

                    
                    
                    The first time I ever heard about coyotes
Was in a book called (in Japanese) Seton’s Animals for Boys and Girls
There I encountered Lobo the Wolf King, bighorn sheep, a family of wild boars, cottontail rabbits, and raccoons, but it was the stories of the wise coyote I loved the best
I read the book over and over, over and over, it taught me the wisdom of rabbits, wolves, wild boars, but nothing surpassed the wisdom of the coyote
Tito was raised by humans, was kept constantly on a leash
No one loved her, they teased her until she ran away
She learned to survive
Ran for her life with her pups in her mouth
Trying to get away from dogs and people
I read about her over and over, over and over
There was a map of America in the front of the book with pictures of animals where the stories took place: coyotes in the central plains, wolves in the southwest and north, elsewhere there were cottontails, boars, and partridges
During my childhood, that was America to me
Where did that book go? I no longer live in my childhood home, not even in the same town, not even in the same country, I lost my place there, I lost people and relationships, almost lost others too, I lost my language, but what about that book I read over and over, over and over? I must have lost it too

Just the other day
I tried searching for it on Amazon
It popped right up, and I ordered it straight away
Lives of the Hunted it’s called in English
Published in 1901, reprinted in 1967
It arrived at my home
A former library copy, the word discard stamped on it in big letters, probably the library didn’t want it because the stories are too cruel, too cruel for today’s youth, nowadays kids are used to killing one another in the virtual world, but even so, the stories are too cruel,  a mother coyote was giving her cubs her milk, was licking them when hunters shot her dead, her cubs fled into their den, only to be dragged out one by one
Here is how the book describes it:
Even at this age there was a certain individuality of character among the puppies. Some of them squealed and some of them growled when dragged out to die. One or two tried to bite. The one that had been slowest to comprehend the danger, had been the last to retreat, and so was on top of the pile, and therefore the first killed. The one that had first realized the peril had retreated first, and now crouched at the bottom of the pile. Coolly and remorselessly the others were killed one by one, and then this prudent little puppy was seen to be the last of the family. It lay perfectly still, even when touched, its eyes being half closed, as, guided by instinct, it tried to “play possum.” One of the men picked it up. It neither squealed nor resisted.
Neither squealed
Nor resisted ...    
The book was in English, but I could read it quickly
Since I remembered the Japanese
I had read the book over and over, over and over
All the coyote pups were killed
Only one survived, only a single pup
Tossed with its dead littermates into a sack and taken to a farm
In the original, the hunters named her Tito
That’s what I had suspected, I had read it in an old translation, kids in Japan back then couldn’t be expected to pronounce the unfamiliar sound ti, but that’s the version I was brought up on
So for me, her name was always Chito
I was always Chito

Wow-wow-wow-wow-wow-w-o-o-o-o-o-o-w
I remember her voice
When I was a child, I read the book over and over, over and over
Here is how the book describes it:
an inborn hankering to sing
Her songs were
a volley of short barks
mixed with doleful squalls —
Wow-wow-wow-wow-wow-w-o-o-o-o-o-o-w
Here is how the book describes it:
when the sun went down she would feel the impulse to sing that wild song of the West which means so much to the Coyotes. It is not the invention of an individual nor of the present, but was slowly built out of the feelings of all Coyotes in all ages.
I’m not sure if I remember the Japanese correctly
Getting old is no fun at all, you forget important things like that
It is not the invention of an individual nor of the present,
but was slowly built out of the feelings of all Coyotes in all ages and
Her experiences all emphasized for her that old idea to “lay low”—
that is, to be quiet, unobtrusive, and hide when danger is in sight
Those were the most important things I learned as a child
Chito’s wisdom
How to survive
Seeing the book, I remembered why
I came to this place called America
The most important things I learned as a child
Were in that book I read over and over
Maybe I had lost them for a while
Or just forgotten
The fate of the animals, their lives and deaths
Their lives upon the plains, and my life too
Chito was killed over and over again
But each time she came back to life
The humans tenaciously, persistently killed her
She tricked them and was tricked by them in return
She scattered her feces, went into heat
The more they hunted her
The more clearly things came into focus
In other words, all the things she thought along the way
Not the invention of an individual nor of the present
But slowly built out of the feelings of all coyotes in all ages
It was for Chito
For Chito
That I abandoned my home, bought an airline ticket
And came to this place
There was someone I barely knew, I’d only barely caught his scent
But still I followed my nose and pursued him
I found a room, rented a car
And stayed the full three months permitted without a visa, I thought I’d try to stay
When people asked me why I’d come, I said
I’m a poet, I’ve come to learn about the oral traditions of the Native Americans
And that was true
But I didn’t even know what I wanted to know
I didn’t know where to go
I didn’t know whom to ask
I was terrible at speaking with people in my native tongue, so in English it was damn near impossible, I couldn’t even tell them who I am (it took me decades to say that even in Japanese)
But the real reason I came
Was because I wanted to encounter a coyote
I wanted to prick up my ears and listen to its howl
Rattling dryly over the roads, through the darkness of night
 
Translated from the  Japanese


^^EOP^^

I create time
I cannot create time
I’m frozen in place
I cannot be frozen
I’m moving but don’t notice
I notice me moving, I pay attention
To the small yet immense yet
Small movements that guide
My limbs, my hair growth, my joint oils
I don’t think about it
I don’t feel it either
I don’t have emotions right now
I see films of divine quality
I don’t see any films
This black
This not black
To me I am
I am not to me not
I walk with this hollowness
I walk with this blooming
I’m moving outward forever
Onward eternally inward
I create all objects like shampoos
And cats, I create nothing
Like space and antimatter
I resign to the clocks that keep time
I surrender to the clocks that don’t keep time
I’m sure about it, the color white
I’m not sure about it, what is word?
Oh, the loops and unloops
Destiny unfolds in my knees
I eat breakfast to begin the day


^^EOP^^

I looked brightness in the eye.
The iron, the tang of metal & rust. 
I held a penny
on my tongue. 
The taste shocked me,
its brown-gold sweet. 
I roamed the field
angry & burned 
asking bitter questions of a gun. 
Dance is a body’s refusal
to die. But, oh, your gone hair. 
The flame & orange flare.
Our forms, our least known selves —  
barrel, sugar, & stench.
Your pleas, looped in writing, 
the stutter of a body’s
broken grammar.


^^EOP^^

My mother was in the hospital & everyone wanted to be my friend.
But I was busy making a list: good dog, bad citizen, short
skeleton, tall mocha. Typical Tuesday.
My mother was in the hospital & no one wanted to be her friend.
Everyone wanted to be soft cooing sympathies. Very reasonable
pigeons. No one had the tie & our solution to it
was to buy shinier watches. We were enamored with
what our wrists could declare. My mother was in the hospital
& I didn’t want to be her friend. Typical son. Tall latte, short tale,
bad plot, great wifi in the atypical café. My mother was in the hospital
& she didn’’t want to be her friend. She wanted to be the family
grocery list. Low-fat yogurt, firm tofu. She didn’t trust my father
to be it. You always forget something, she said, even when I do the list for you. Even then.
 


^^EOP^^

A girl stalked a sheep in a field. The sheep began to bleed
& the whole field smelled like carnage.
A butcher had moved in and slaughtered the sheep. 
Red, the stain on her dress. Empty, her basket. The depletion
of resources winter sowed — the house on the hill in disrepair.
In the vacated house, the girl tried to flush 
the blood down the toilet but the infrastructure
couldn’t completely erase the evidence of life. 
The girl studied Islamic history, the origin
of arithmetic. The stain turned the girl into a lady
in her country’s blighted first-world landscape. 
History’s pages were open, one by one they ripped.
When she asked the spout for water, it rusted. 
She grew cold. She grew weary. She grew sad.
If only she could ban the butcher in solidarity 
with the bad children, the refugees and outcasts.
Instead she drove into the city, the urban sprawl
swallowing her. She went into a store, got caught stealing 
a candy bar. Surveillance footage showed she had
no remorse. She justified: We all live on stolen
land. Why not one bar of chocolate, subsidized?

^^EOP^^

In December 1941, after Lvov had already been seized by Nazis while you labored
diligently by day as a quiet feeder of lice in a virus lab
and joined your heart to the resistance that would rise in Warsaw,
my own country’s agents took me from my home in Lā‘ie,
placed me in a jail cell in Honolulu and interrogated me for many days.
Neither of us had thought of our poetry then, Zbigniew,
not of the caustic sarcasm of your strophes stripped of pious words,
not of the praises of the life I would lose like a lavish field of rice
once bending with weight but blighted overnight by the black cowls of disease.
I told them I was just a storekeeper who liked night fishing — no submarines
was I signaling offshore, nothing but schooling fish did I hope would come
to the sputtering lights of my torches that I stuck in the sand like stakes
for growing beans in my family garden. The ocean knew of my intentions,
lapping softly at my knees, curling in kind, foaming waters
around the bones of my bare feet. And the winds knew of my  poverty,
sending me a cloudless night sky, stippling the lagoon with stalks of red flames.
But my government questioners cited my language was the enemy’s,
my academy in Hiroshima a military school, my citizen’s heart black as diesel. 
They sent me to a barracks on an island in Pearl Harbor
where I could see the burnt wreckage of scores of ships,
hear their moaning steel like drowned sailors who still cry out,
throats choked with oil, from their watery graves,
feel nothing but panic and regret as though a child had died,
my hope wrapped in old newspapers and thrown away like offal
cleaned from a fish the size of a man. 
                                                               Then to a ship bound for Oakland,
and by train and truck with men like me, Japanese all, to Fort Missoula,
and a cold wind like a dull razor scraping across my stubbled face.
What was my crime except to belong to an enemy race?
Why can they not see that I love, like them, the promise
that is this land like a wife to whom we have sworn
only faith and practiced devotion? I would wash her feet with water
gathered in a canvas bucket, carry her burdens across canefields
and over the shallows of our bay, ruffled with wind, if she would,
yet once more as on her bridal evening, speak her vows and turn the soft bundles
of her body, heaving like a warm tide in my arms, back to mine.


^^EOP^^

                    
                    
                    At fifteen, my father ran away from his widowed mother to fight the Japanese.

“I’ll come back with a PhD and serve my country with better English and knowledge,” I pledged at the farewell party in Beijing.

Home — 家 — Jia: a roof under which animals live.

When asked where I’m from,
I say “Weihai,” even though
nobody knows where it is,
even though I’ve never been to the place.

He lost his left ear in a bayonet fight with a Japanese soldier. Two years later, American cannons split his eardrums.

The night I arrived at JFK, the Mets won the World Series and the noise on the street went on till dawn. I got up and went to work in my sponsor’s antique shop in Manhattan.

The bag lady stopped her cart on the busy street and peed onto a subway grate.

“Did you jump or fly?” asked my landlady from her mah-jongg table. Then she laughed and told me that her husband had jumped ship ten years ago. When he opened his fifth Chinese takeout, he bought her a passport and flew her to Queens.

The only thing he liked to talk about was his old home, Weihai, its plump sea cucumbers and sweet apples, men with broad shoulders, thick thighs, and girls with long braids making steamed bread.

“Back home, I had no money, but I never felt poor,” she said, shivering behind her fruit stand. “Here, if my money goes down below four figures, I panic.” She scanned the snow-covered streets of Chinatown. “I guess I really don’t want to be homeless here.”

I hired the babysitter when she mentioned her hometown was Weihai.

The president visited the rice paddies in Vietnam where a pilot had been downed thirty-three years ago.

My father tried to return to Weihai after his discharge from the Navy. With his rank, he could find work only in a coal mine town nearby. My mother refused to go. He went alone, and got sick with TB. Mother ordered me to date the county administrator’s son so he could help father come home.

“No, I’m not sad.” The street kid shook her head.
“How can I miss something I’ve never had?”

On her sixtieth birthday, my grandma went home to die, sailing from the island to Shanghai, from Shanghai to Yantai, then two buses to Weihai. I carried her onto the big ship at the Shanghai Port, down to the bottom, where she’d spend three days on a mattress, on the floor, with hundreds of fellow passengers. “How are you going to make it, Grandma?” I asked. She pulled out a pair of embroidered shoes from her parcel and placed them between my feet. “My heart and liver, come to 老家 soon, before it’s too late.”

House — 房 — fang: a door over a square, a place, a direction.

He never lost his accent, never learned Mandarin or the island dialect.

Weihai, a small city
in Shandong Province,
on the coast of the North China Sea,
a home, where my grandfather
and his father were born,
where my grandma married,
raised her children, and
now lies in the yam fields,
nameless, next to her husband,
an old frontier to fend off Japanese pirates,
a place I come from, have never seen.
It’s my 老家 lao jia, old home.

Back from America, my mother furnished her home on the island, bought an apartment in a suburb of Shanghai, and is seeking a third one in Beijing. “A cunning rabbit needs three holes,” she wrote to us, demanding our contributions.

They swore, before boarding the ship, that they’d send money home to bring more relatives over; in return, they were promised that if they died, their bodies would be sent back home for burial.

I drink American milk — a few drops in tea.
I eat American rice — Japanese brand.

Chinese comes to me only in dreams — in black-and-white pictures.

My mother buried her husband on the island, where he lived for forty years.

Room — 屋 — wu: a body unnamed and homeless until it finds a destination.

We greet a stranger with
“Where are you from?”
When we meet a friend on the street, we say,
“Where have you been? Where are you going?”

家 — a roof under which animals live
房 — a door over a square, a place, a direction
屋 — a body unnamed and homeless until it finds a destination

                                    — my tangled roots for old home.
                

^^EOP^^

Oh: I am analytic &
0-1 in a given 
region (unloved/
labial) and such 
unlikeness in a most
minor foot 
: signs suggest
: an ampersand. 
To be old is
to be ode. 
To be
qualified 
is a stipulation
: a slope on the sycamore 
: a day when
pancakes 
are the middle
of a week. 
Ode to weakness, whatever I am:
the situation inside 
the marriage
(phonetic notation). 
(situation) to the rodeo.
The fleece demeans 
the contribution.
Pajamas. 
It would be impractical
(lateral tap) to explain 
impoverished speakers.
In English: 
to pronounce sounds.
I care if I am kissed. 
My father came back floral
(Augmentations in Audio) 
and floral is a door.
Oh: middle low 
IPA key.
Rhyme the half long 
phones. Oh half
in the past. 
Oh. And
again. Oh.


^^EOP^^

At midnight, he can’t see
             the white picket fence
                          or the tomato stalks, shriveled, 
in the garden, though
             he knows the patio,
                          strewn with willow leaves, 
plumes of tall grasses,
             upright and still;
                          and, as he peers into the yard, 
he senses a moment
             wicking into flame — 
                          walking up an arroyo, 
they gaze back
             across the Pojoaque valley,
                          spot the glinting tin roofs, 
cottonwoods leafing
             along the curves of the river — 
                          a green tide 
surges in their arteries
             as well as the trees;
                          tonight, spring infuses fall, 
and memory’s wick
             draws the liquefied
                          wax of experience up into flame.


^^EOP^^

They call us now,
before they drop the bombs.
The phone rings
and someone who knows my first name
calls and says in perfect Arabic
“This is David.”
And in my stupor of sonic booms and glass-shattering symphonies
still smashing around in my head
I think, Do I know any Davids in Gaza?
They call us now to say
Run.
You have 58 seconds from the end of this message.
Your house is next.
They think of it as some kind of
war-time courtesy.
It doesn’t matter that
there is nowhere to run to.
It means nothing that the borders are closed
and your papers are worthless
and mark you only for a life sentence
in this prison by the sea
and the alleyways are narrow
and there are more human lives
packed one against the other
more than any other place on earth
Just run.
We aren’t trying to kill you.
It doesn’t matter that
you can’t call us back to tell us
the people we claim to want aren’t in your house
that there’s no one here
except you and your children
who were cheering for Argentina
sharing the last loaf of bread for this week
counting candles left in case the power goes out.
It doesn’t matter that you have children.
You live in the wrong place
and now is your chance to run
to nowhere.
It doesn’t matter
that 58 seconds isn’t long enough
to find your wedding album
or your son’s favorite blanket
or your daughter’s almost completed college application
or your shoes
or to gather everyone in the house.
It doesn’t matter what you had planned.
It doesn’t matter who you are.
Prove you’re human.
Prove you stand on two legs.
Run.
 


^^EOP^^

Someone decapitated all Birds of Paradise
along Ocean Avenue; strollers and shoes
 
trample the discarded beaks. She keeps walking.
At noon a hallway speaker booms
  Code Blue Code Blue one minute
before her grandson is born.
 
In the evening, a nurse hands him
to her: clean, swaddled, murmuring:
 
the fullness of his being spears her. Why didn’t I pick them up? she wonders,
 
arms tightening around the infant,
whispers I still carry you! to her son
 
when he comes to take his child.
 


^^EOP^^

I live with the small shame
of not knowing the multiple names for blue
to describe the nightsky over New Mexico
to describe the light in my lover’s eyes.
 
It is a small shame that grows.
 
I live with the small shame
which resides in the absences of my speech
as I pause to search for the word in Spanish
to translate a poem to my Father
who sits there waiting
who scans my eyes to see
what I cannot fully describe
who waits for the word from me
the word that escapes me in the moment
the word I fear has never resided within me.
 
It is a small shame that grows
when indigo and cerulean are merely azul
and not añil and cerúleo.
 


^^EOP^^




             July 13, 2013



Saturday afternoon: in the driveway between buildings they blow up
balloons—yellow, red, blue—for a 3-year-old’s party.
 
The intermittent pops startle me like random gunfire—remind me
of birthdays brown boys will no longer celebrate.
 
The DJ, having set up the speakers, begins to play—the music, a rapid fire
of bass thump, commandeers the apartment. We have no choice but leave.
 
An art show: canvases colored with boxes and lines—a grid of red
on a backdrop of yellow. We speak of the abstract with wine in our mouths.
 
Meanwhile, in an antechamber, six are sequestered. They speak of mali-
cious intent, blood, evidence, testimony—murder versus manslaughter.
 
We arrive home to a throng of brown bodies, hands clutching red cups,
and music: its insistent treble stabbing the ears.
 
Inside, we slam all windows, but the music still blares as my niece shoots
people on the video game—its sounds are too realistic to bear.
 
Instead, the news, a verdict is in: not guilty. And everything is a blur
of sound, my heart beating so fast I put a hand to my chest.
 
I watch the TV screen: a collage of abstractions—spotlights, microphones,
smiles, handwritten signs. I stare, as if it were a painting—
 
a smear of twisted faces smothered in gesso and oil, a grid of red
on a backdrop of yellow—to make sense of.
 
The party continues. The 3-year-old probably in bed dreaming of melted
ice cream, and I am tired of partying.
 
There is a police station a half block away and I want it to burn. Instead,
only the smoke of weed, the meaningless music droning on,
 
the popping of balloons. Sunday morning, the birds are angry—their
chirping a noisy chant: NO NO NO NO. Outside, the rubbery flesh
 
of balloons color the driveway like splotches of paint. In an instant,
those still lives of heave and breath—gone in a pop.
 


^^EOP^^

He clings to her while other boys
play Marco Polo. A year of lessons,
this is what she gets?
 
She wants to lie in the sun. Enough, she says, loosens her arms,
releases him. The boy winces at light
 
bouncing off water. He grasps at her,
where he thinks she is, but feels blind.
He decides to drown for his mother.
 
Just this morning he breathed only when
she breathed, laughed when she laughed.
Before he goes under he hears one boy
 
catch another: My eyes were closed!
His cries, underwater, make bubbles
that rise like loose balloons.
 
He watches his mother’s legs
move away. Out of breath, he swims
toward empty blue.


^^EOP^^

A spirit came down
and whispered in our drunk ears
  mark your wombs with wild roses
and between beers I dreamed
 
that we were soldiers missing our mothers
which explains why we are seventeen
 
and in a tattoo parlor that smells of ships and motorcycles,
of leather and ocean, of marijuana and sad men’s blood.
 
We each ask for a single rose
with a ribbon around the stem,
 
for a word, some power.
We want to be fire.
 
The artist changes channels.
We watch Looney Tunes as his needles start.
 
When we stop at the liquor store,
our roses, orange and violet, bleeding through the bandages,
 
I want to tell you that if we ever find ourselves blindfolded in a war,
or in an apple metaphor, accused of ruining it for everybody
 
with hunger, or knowledge,
 
I would not insist on how sacred is the tree or the light,
or how sacred is what moves us—
 
I’d become a storyteller.
And out of our inevitable estrangement
I’d make us up again and again.
 


^^EOP^^

You will need to state the reason for your visit.
Don’t say because I want to walk down old roads and caress stone walls the color of my skin.
 
You will need to state the reason for your visit.
Don’t say because the olives are ready for harvest and I will coax the fruit from the trees, press it into liquid gold.
 
You will need to state the reason for your visit.
Don’t say because my parents’ house  still sits empty on a bluff overlooking the sea, the green shutters my grandfather had just painted remain sealed shut and the army listed the property’s owners as absentees.
 
You will need to state the reason for your visit.
Don’t say because I am carrying prayers in my suitcase for a people who wait, and I’ll unfold them embroidered linens of verse and spread them out across the land.


^^EOP^^

1. did your child lose acquired speech? 
A fount and then silence. A none. An ellipse
between — his breath through
the seams of our windows. Whistle
of days. Impossible bowl of a mouth — 
the open cupboard, vowels
rounded up and swept under the rug.  2. does your child produce unusual noises or infantile squeals? 
He’d coo and we’d coo back. The sound
passed back and forth between us like a ball.
Or later, an astral voice. Some vibrato
under the surface of us. The burst upon — 
burn of strings rubbed
in a flourish. His exhausted face.  3. is your child’s voice louder than required? 
In an enclosure or a cave it is difficult to gauge
one’s volume. The proscenium of the world.
All the rooms we speak of are dark places. Because
he cannot see his mouth, he cannot imagine
the sound that comes out.  4. does your child speak frequent gibberish or jargon? 
To my ears it is a language. Every sound
a system: the sound for dog or boy. The moan
in his throat for water — that of a man with thirst.
The dilapidated ladder that makes a sentence
a sentence. This plosive is a verb. This liquid
a want. We make symbols of his noise.  5. does your child have difficulty understanding basic things (“just can’t get it”)? 
Against the backdrop of the tree he looks so small.  6. does your child pull you around when he wants something? 
By the sleeve. By the shirttail. His light touch
hopscotching against my skin like sparrows.
An insistence muscled and muscled again.  7. does your child have difficulty expressing his needs or desires using gestures? 
Red-faced in the kitchen and in the bedroom
and the yellow light touches his eyes
which are open but not there. His eyes
rest in their narrow boat dream and the canals
are wide dividing this side from this side.  8. is there no spontaneous initiation of speech or  communication from your child? 
When called he eases out of his body.
His god is not our words nor is it
the words from his lips. It is entirely body.
So when he comes to us and looks we know
there are beyond us impossible cylinders
where meaning lives.  9. does your child repeat heard words, parts of words, or tv commercials? 
The mind circles the mind in the arena, far in — far in
where the consonants touch and where the round
chorus flaunts its iambs in a metronomic trot. Humming
to himself in warm and jugular songs.  10. does your child use repetitive language (same word or phrase over and over)? 
A pocket in his brain worries its ball of lint.
A word clicks into its groove and stammers
along its track, Dopplering like a car with its windows
rolled down and the one top hit of the summer
angles its way into his brain.  11. does your child have difficulty sustaining a  conversation? 
We could be anywhere, then the navel of the red moon
drops its fruit. His world. This stained world drips its honey
into our mouths. Our words stolen from his malingering afternoon.  12. does your child use monotonous speech or wrong pausing? 
When the air is true and simple, we can watch him tremble
for an hour, plucking his meaning from a handful of utterances
and then ascend into the terrible partition of speech.  13. does your child speak the same to kids, adults, or objects (can’t differentiate)? 
Because a reference needs a frame: we are mother and father
and child with a world of time to be understood. The car radio
plays its one song. The song, therefore, is important.
It must be intoned at a rigorous time. Because rigor
is important and because the self insists on constant vigils.  14. does your child use language inappropriately (wrong words or phrases)? 
Always, and he insists on the incorrect forms.
The wrong word takes every form for love — 
the good tree leans into the pond,
the gray dog’s ribs show, the memory
bound to the window, and the promise of the radio
playing its song on the hour. Every wrong form
is a form which represents us in our losses,
if it takes us another world to understand.


^^EOP^^

To pass through astonishment and know much too late.
And because habit makes us strange, I find myself
Searching on a landscape that generates questions
Beyond its ability to solve. That dark post
Out there might be this poem standing as you would — 
Lead in the 4th grade play — under theater lights
And your shadows that petal around you. And what
Should be most memorable isn’t. So I recall
Those prolonged moments of silence, incongruous
And revealing as metaphor, most frequently.
For instance: waiting at the bus stop in Pai in
A midmorning the hue of the roadside guardrails
That dot the cliff’s side like Morse code. Before leaving
With trees (those felled, ones half-painted white, the burnt trunks ...    )
That passed by like the so many phenomena
Of our days blurred together into a motion,
At times, convincing as a nickelodeon’s,
I waited under the thatched roof of the station
With other travelers. With each in our common
Solitude risen around like that Haydn piece
In the tunnel I descended into on my
Way out onto Broadway from the 1 train some months
Ago, it seemed of Hopper. Star fruit on the ground
Discolored, withering, blighted. Three of the town’s
Strays hobbled by before midday’s heat stalled the town
Like some lost Stephano, Trinculo, and their lamed,
Dark sycophant — at least that’s what they were for me.
It wasn’t comfort, never comfort, but something else.
And when each moment with expectations for more
Than it can hold leads to the next, and soon — as then — 
Expectation fills up the day as does your breath
A balloon, the day floats with such care and strange hours. And both pleasure and pain are motions of the soul ...    
Plato wrote — poetry’s banisher, beauty’s guard.   2 
My hands grow differently used. While one hand thumbs
Pages, the other hand steadies open the book.
It’s the other hand that rests on the desk, forearm
Paralleled to the table’s edge, all the fingers
Except the thumb holding the blank field. One hand’s mole
A gnat flattened between pinky and ring finger;
The other hand’s palm-side, below the skin enough
It’s likely a splinter left for years. Just one hand
Fits my Discman, plugged in while watching those around
(No news-as-white-noise here to occupy my sight):
Kids who bus to school hours away toothpicking
Slivers of chili-dappled mango slices in;
A triple-sweatered lady palming back her hair
In the thick Thai pre-dawn June; the one foreigner
Other than us, earphone couched; and her shape, dozed slack,
Coat-blanketed, neck against my side. One hand rests.
Half a day ago, under a mosquito net,
Flush with the desk fan sitting on the rattan floor,
One hand kept on the steady act of beckoning
Behind the tongue-swelled clit, uncreasing the ridged roof,
Almost like the mouth’s roof as it slopes down toward teeth,
Like rubbing the dampened cave wall, finger-darkened,
As the guide turns his back to us. The other hand
Traced its crook — that delta-creased pad set between thumb
And fingers, hand’s most fleshy zone — on the torso.
The other hand then stilled her hip, mosquito net,
Weighted, walling out stitches of ants, from its hook
A viscous drape like that through one hand’s two fingers.
Oddly, only one hand drums along (the CD:
Converge, Jane Doe) as the crowd would rupture outward
Into a circle pit — a vortex in reverse — 
If this were a concert. The other hand just bides
Its time. Milton’s clumsy other hand, God’s other
Hand that Lessing chose, and that Spaniard’s other hand
Riddled useless at Lepanto, a bullet lodged
Into that scurvied poet’s chest, the other hand
Remembers and betrays. The other hand cries out, Which was Keats’s living one? Neither hand scarred yet,
Even after thumb-knuckle tempted a sander
In shop class, impulse from imagining too much.
One hand’s cushion bears the pencil (my friend whose tasks
Are split between his hands — “I eat with my left hand,
Punch with the other” — says we whack off with the hand
We write). Each hand on different shaded denim thighs,
The unclipped nails crude halos of sun-blocking hills.
One hand lets forth words; the other hand holds it back.   3 
Chased by a three-legged dog to the temple stairs,
Past all the fallen star fruit (the veined tips the last
To wither, the through-light flesh sun- and bug-eaten),
We crossed paths with a one-legged man — wordless sounds,
And that permanent wild gaze — crutching down the stairs
(Four hundred!) as we stopped to catch a break mid-flight.
Our breath would last us a run-through of the temple,
And, in the first hallway — him?!, his phatic calls, tics,
And unwilled smile facing the morning that just passed,
The sun no longer in front of his propped body,
But above it, the valley overabundant
With the real light that stole our day. The fog too lifted
Against my sight. We paused. Having just climbed the hill,
We agreed to leave our shoes on despite sandals
Stationed on the stoop, and then we turned towards that hall.
“Let’s go,” he ends, befriended, prayer Phaedrus-empty.
 — The driver gases the bus off the parking brakes
To idle back out the station; the attendants
Scoop up the wood wedges and clatter the door shut;
The passengers all shift. In the chapter among
The deformed and footless, Zhuangzi ends, arguing
For the greatest of men, a man void of feelings:
“The Way gave him a face, Heaven gave him a form,
Can’t you call him a man?” Yet there are things I love:
The sun, you, travel. And back again, the thick fog
Parts us from the obliterating Turner sun.
Pretty soon, come day, the motorbikes The Rough Guide
Says all tourists should try will buzz by those three dogs,
All lethargic, the largest too tired to dry-hump,
His red tip unsheathing (there’s no neutering here),
The black one, bald in spots, wouldn’t even fight it off,
The mottled one coiled back like the dog that badgers
Bosch’s wayfarer, bandaged, poor bastard, with his gnarled stick,
Not looking at us, but rather caught looking back,
And above his head a doorway — no, the gallows? — 
The same one Brueghel’s final peasants romped beneath?
My turn now to sleep. I can dab off from my jeans
Your drool just reaching my thigh as you do, with care,
From our sheets when — yet that stuff, all that stuff of ours
Still spots our many beds with different aged salt-rings,
Each gasp less a sound than a failure at silence.
Before us another strange town, while for others
School, home, maybe work, a field, someplace normal, there,
Someplace beyond sight from its roadside stop. Abroad
A month, toward a year in another country, Anne — 
Anacrusis: these days I’m lost in, reminded
Of my presence as if catching a stranger’s wave
To the yet-to-be-seen man behind you as yours.
 
— traveled 2005 / written 2007–2008


^^EOP^^

Spoiler alert: in this all-but-forgotten
masterwork, Jean Stafford—who was once
widely regarded as the leading novelist
 
of her generation, and who wrote
this perverse, short,
lyrical novel, her second, during
 
the flailing failings
of her marriage to my hero
Robert Lowell—kills
 
Molly, her child-alter ego,
a girl too unloved and unloving
to survive puberty, too
 
pure and awful—like Stafford, who died
pickled and childish three
decades later after winning
 
the Pulitzer with her devastating,
hurtfully compassionate Collected  Stories—for this or any other world,
 
especially the necessarily
allegorical one of fiction.
I am broken now, hopeless; hope
 
is proved by this book to be
a contrivance. I have just
read the last pages in which
 
Molly’s brother, Ralph—who,
to live, cannot love
either, has no spare love—shoots
 
her, aiming for the wild mountain
lion whose stuffed corpse
was to be the triumph
 
of his new manhood. I don’t
hate Ralph—how can I, a boy,
mistaken, like me? And can I hate
 
Molly, who so needed Ralph
and everyone, still young enough to savor
the bittersweet of her anger?
 
What about Stafford, who hurt
herself, all our selves, with
this ending, her classic tragedy, writing,
 
decades later, Poor old  Molly! I loved her dearly  and I hope she rests in peace.
 
Fuck insight and analysis:
my heart is shot. Why
did she have to die? Why does
 
anyone? Why do you, do I?
Because of what Ralph was
feeling just before he accidentally
 
slaughtered the future? This book
must have ravaged the already
sleepless poet Gregory Orr,
 
who shot his brother, too, and
suffers that endless error
in poetry and prose. And because Molly
 
refused everything, she stood between
Ralph and tomorrow. But he grew, he
changed. Confused? Read
 
the book. In novels
people die because of what they feel.
In life, people die when
 
their bodies conk out,
exhausted machines that living
expends. And what
 
happens when people feel
their feelings in life?
Nothing? Anything? Brenda,
 
dear Brenda, my love, nothing
happens, I’m afraid. I’m sorry. And afraid.
A small breeze born in the heart
 
gently bends a blade of grass
and no one hears a word.
No one reads Stafford anymore—I asked
 
on Facebook. Stafford died, her
legacy gently dispatched
into the low air. O, life
 
is terrible, literature
ridiculous. Stafford’s prose,
teeming and rich as loam,
 
could take Famous Franzen’s
for a walk, feed it biscuits.
But who cares? Who remembers?
 
O, to have been Jean Stafford,
in the past I idealize, when the world
was less self-conscious, less
 
precise. I could be
dead already, warmish
beneath a blanket of dust. Joyful
 
are the faded, the once-greats
whose afterlives slipped out
a hole in posterity's pocket:
 
they are loved poignantly by
a needy few. O, to be kept
cozy in the bosoms of those
 
desperate and proud, forgotten
for all the good I do. Love
is sunlight streaming unevenly
 
through the canopy of leaves
overhead. We can only grow
in the brighter patches below, fading
 
where light is thin. Molly,
we are with you, nowhere and gone.
Mostly we are forgotten, too.
 


^^EOP^^

1 
What’s The Word! she cries
from her purchase on the iron
finial of the front gate to my heart. 
The radio in the kitchen
is stuck in the year I was born.
The capitals of the world are burning. 
And this sparrow with a woman’s face
roars in the burdened air — air crowded with voices,
but no word, mobbed with talking, but no word,
teeming with speech, but no word — 
this woman with the body of a bird
is shrieking fierce
buzzed volts
in the swarming babble, What’s The Word! 
This evening
is the year of my birth.
The country has just gained its independence.
Social unrest grows rampant as the economy declines.
Under a corrupt government of the army and the rich come
years of mass poverty, decades of starving children
and racially-fueled mayhem. Word is 
armed squads raping women by the hundreds. Word is
beheadings, public lynchings, and riots. Word is
burning, looting, curfews, and shoot-to-kill orders.
And word is more deadly days lie ahead. 
Today, tomorrow, and yesterday, the forecast calls
for more misery, more poverty, more starvation,
more families fleeing their homes,
more refugees streaming toward every border. 
More horror is to come, that’s the word.
More scapegoating is to come, that’s the word.
More violence is to come
on the roads,
in the streets,
in the homes, violence 
in the churches, in the temples
where they preach who to love and who to hate.
How to get to heaven, and who to leave behind.
How to don the fleece of the blameless
and prosecute your neighbor. 
All against all
is to come.
That’s the word. 
Who hasn’t heard that! she spits.
You call yourself a poet? You
tame high finisher of paltry blots! 
You publish doubt and call it knowledge!
You destroy the wisdom of ages
to gratify your envy!
You murder benevolence and virtue
with condescension. You pretend to poetry
and destroy imagination!
Your words mystify, mislead, and misdirect!
You ape The Word made flesh
with words made words
to multiply more words and words about your words!
And you ritualize these sterile pleasures,
miming joy, delight, and generation!
You celebrate cheap distractions!
Your theories bloom in suicide of the mind,
starvation of the heart, and mass maladies of the soul.
You mock and mimic sincerity!
You read and divine by irony!
You snare the little ones!
You pose stumbling blocks to the lame!
You dig pits for the blind!
You sell desolation!
Your science is despair!
What’s The Word! 
I can tell she’s up to no good,
this feathered interval,
monument to the nano,
this deciding gram,
my Geronimo. 
She’s out to overturn an empire,
to usurp principalities and powers,
just by swooping into the right assembly,
perplexing a senate, baffling a parliament,
or bewildering somebody’s crosshairs. 
Not worth a farthing,
and without a cent,
she would own the realm
her shrill cries measure, trading
dying for being. 
I tell her, I sang
in a church choir during one war
North American TV made famous.
I fled a burning archipelago in the rain,
on my mother’s back, in another war
nobody televised. 
In the midst of wars worldwide, many
in countries whose names I can’t pronounce,
I tucked Christ’s promise and Adam’s disgrace
together with my pajamas under my pillow
each morning, unable to distinguish which
was God’s first thought, and which God’s second. 
Therefore, I seek asylum
in the final word,
an exile from the first word,
and a refugee
of an illegible past. 
Who hasn’t witnessed the laws of merging and parting,
blessing and killing! she says. Who isn’t
subject to the hand
that giveth and the hand that taketh,
the change of the guard,
with and without blood,
and their own dismembered history 
fed to the unvanquished flowers?
Lift every clock’s face and see
the counting angels reckoning,
the killing angels
busy at their anvils.
Say what’s The Word,
or die! 
It’s obvious she’s accounted
for what the wind will take,
what the moths must eat,
the ants carry away,
the Caesars keep. 
She’s a breathing remnant
restored to springtime’s living cloth. 
She’s a pair of scissors
trimming lament
to allow for all I don’t know. 
And I can tell by the markings on her coat
and her black eyes
she knows which dreams to parse,
which to heed, and which to bury. 
And look at those prehistoric feet.
No doubt, she’s realized the secret to surviving
her own tribe’s slaughter and dispersal. 
Pocket dictionary
packed with signs in another language,
blazing shard of the original emanation,
Precambrian spark deposit,
igneous jot of infinite magnitude,
fiery iota, 
something about her precise little beak
convinces me she grasps degree,
and knows which i’s to dot
and which to leave large and alone. 
There are words, I say,
and there is The Word. 
Every word is a fluctuating flame
to a wick that dies. 
But The Word, The Word
is a ruling sum and drastic mean,
the standard that travels
without moving. 
Words move,
but The Word is fixed,
the true blank. 
The Word is the voice of the lamp,
and words are soot blackening the glass. 
The movements of words engender time and death.
But The Word lives outside of time and death.
Inside time, death rules.
Life is death’s kingdom.
We live at dying’s rate.
Words are a sop for death.
But The Word is the mother of thresholds,
regulating life and death. 
The Word begets presences impossible
to confirm,
given the blinding action of time
and the sea and the earth’s
turning repose. 
And who is that supposed to feed?
Whose thirst would that quench? 
she screeches, her voice materializing
a greater body of innumerable birds arriving at dominion,
increasing to overwhelm every mile of my heart,
that bloody aerie branching and leafing,
her feathers become all eyes and mouths,
her voice coming now from everywhere,
booming, 
When the Lover is ready,
the Beloved will appear! 
Say what’s The Word or we both die!   2 
I’ll call her my battle angel, this evangelion.
Seraphic herald of the ninth echelon,
pleromatic aeon demanding a founding gnosis,
her voice electric tekhelet, Septuagint, a two-leaved door
opening onto porches, chambers, and courts,
her voice a Solomonic column of barley sugar. 
She’s why I’m crazy.
She’s why I can’t sleep. She’s why I never
sleep. She’s why I avoid people.
She’s why I drill the eight limbs with the mud-step,
why I walk the octagon of trigrams inscribed on Wudang,
why I practice the Spiral Ox Jaw and the Tiger’s Mouth.
She’s why I’m hard to live with
and why I say, 
The bread that rises in a house that fails,
The Word, father of zero and one,
is our advocate. 
A shut eye we name Beginning,
The Word sleeps,
and all is darkness. 
An open eye
we name The Treasure,
The Word wakes
and voices are heard among the sounds of water. 
The Word dreams, and worlds appear.
And stars beyond and behind our eyes.
And the moon with its hair tied up
and its hair let down. 
Bound on every side,
and wide open in the center,
The Word hosts our breath, our span, the space
of our dreaming and our thinking,
our stillness and our moving. And the emerging present
is one of its bodies. 
The fulcrum, the eye, the heart enthroned,
the dove without person, homing, The Word 
is a hammer raining down its songs,
a river pouring out of the mouth of the anvil. 
Twin and unlike, The Word is without peer.
Black and white, it is a wheeling pair
of coincident opposites turning on a point:
Existence and Nonexistence hand in hand.
Substance and Void begetting life and death. 
The Word is an open book,
and its first and last pages are missing. 
It is a brother and sister
telling each other
the missing parts
of one another’s stories. 
It is the lover and the beloved
constantly changing places in the fire. 
And it is the wind in the treetops
outside our window,
a voice torn to pieces. Hear it? 
The wind without a house, she says.
Time without a gate, she says.
A memory of the ocean
torments the trees,
a homesickness, she says. 
The wind is leafing through both of our histories,
looking for a happy ending. 
It is my hand moving over your body, I say,
finding more and more to know. 
It is a circle of women
reciting in the round
the oldest stories of Death disguised as a traveler
or overlooked familiar, friend we shunned
for less faithful playmates. 
It is a house,
and from inside come the voices of children
taking turns reading to one another.
It is their own story they read. 
But why do their voices seem uneasy?
Does the moon, giant
at the window, frighten them? 
Does death run amok through all
the pages of the story?
Do the pages turn by themselves?
Are there strangers in the house?
Is the house burning? 
Soldiers with guns are at our door again.
Sister, quick. Change into a penny.
I’ll fold you in a handkerchief,
put you in my pocket,
and jump inside a sack of rice,
one of the uncooked kernels. 
Men with knives are looking in our windows again.
Brother, hurry. Turn yourself
into one of our mother’s dolls
sitting on the living room shelf. I’ll be the dust
settling on your eyelids. 
The ones wearing wings are in the yard. 
The ones adorned with lightning are in the house. 
The ones decorated with stars
are dividing our futures among them. 
Don’t answer when they call to us in the voice of Nanny. 
Don’t believe them when they promise sugar. 
Don’t come out until evening,
or when you hear our mother weeping to herself. 
If only I could become the mirror in her purse,
I’d never come back until the end of time.   3 
The treetops buck and heave
in the night wind.
Like drunks at sea leaning
too far over a rocking bulwark.
Like a woman throwing her green and gold hair
in time to a song only she can hear. 
And from inside
that windswept bulk growing darker
comes a frenzied uproar
of what must be
hundreds of hidden birds. 
All that noise
of wind, leaves, and branches,
all that uttering from unseen throats,
and is there no word? 
All that shrieking, iterating, crying
in the rustling leaves. All that screaming,
shrilling, running din
of squeaky wheels, radiant numbers of tongues,
beaks, hubs, wings, spokes
keening in centrifugal spinning,
and not one word?
Not any? Nor part? No bearing? 
One hunger, a fanned fire, roars
in the voice of the sea. 
One light eats itself, unconsumed. 
The wind is taking the night apart, she says.
The wind is dismantling
the leaves, the branches, the minutes, our listening, 
and finding more and more
moving pieces to index:
our hands, our mouths, our voices, recurring stairs 
of an imperfect past,
a rumored present,
figures multiplying inside a mirror. 
Each, alone
in his dream of the world, I say,
is host and guest, a book
and the one who reads it
by the light of a vanished childhood. 
Don’t say that, she says.
We see by the light of who we are.
Look at us: you inside me
inside you. We’ve lived inside
each other from the beginning.
And from before beginning.
Before the world was ever found. 
Before the world was found, I say,
I dwelled inside you,
and you breathed all through me,
in my body and its happiness,
in my body and its loneliness. 
After I found the world, I had to go
looking for you. Ever since the world,
I only lose you and find you.
Lose you. And find you. 
The body of the beloved
is the lover’s true homeland, she says. 
I can hear you, but I can’t hear me, I say,
your voice a burning gown of song and time,
and me with my ghosts, me with my mockingbird. 
Don’t say that, she says. 
What is my mind, I wonder,
but the reflected light of your 
voice, O, burning one, O, seeing voice, O,
speaking eye that renders us 
now legible,
now indecipherable, now
strangers traveling
under assumed names. 
Don’t say that, she says.
Look. A single page of the wind
copied by hand
is the volume of despair
the smallest living wing displaces.
And your voice will be your cup
each day my wings shelter
your dear, momentary earth. 
My mind is several minds, I say,
each abiding differently: in your eyes,
in the smell of your hair, in your voice
moving over me, in my voice moving over you. 
She says, Don’t look at your hands.
Watch the shadows they make. 
I say, Moving over you, my voice crosses
out of forbidden chambers of the Emperor of China,
through chronicles of exile and death in a foreign country,
to touch the ground I touch in me
when I speak to you. 
She says, A new mind makes the world new.
True words are a little blue.
And being human makes the saddest music in the world. 
She says, Postpone all morning bells.
The ore lies awake inside the rock, a dream
of origin waiting to be rescued. 
I say, The glare of your nakedness
confounds me, a distraction
from the darker incandescence of your being.
Inside you is the safest place to be. 
The radio in the kitchen is stuck
in the year I was born.
The capitals of the world are burning. 
And of all the things on my mind this evening,
words weigh the least,
Death weighs the most,
and your voice’s body
beneath my voice’s moving hand
is a green agent of freedom and law,
best friend to my earth and my ache. 
Of all the things keeping me from sleep,
words weigh too much, yet not enough.
Time weighs nothing at all,
but I can’t bear it.
And your body, burdened by minutes
and ancient rites, is my favorite sad song. 
One wave that gives rise to three, shoulder, hip, and knee,
your body is the Lord’s pure geometry.
Disguised as Time, your body is tears, lilies,
and the mouth of the falls. 
And of all the things we’re dying from tonight,
being alive is the strangest,
surviving our histories is the saddest.
Time leaves the smallest wounds,
and your body, a mortal occasion
of timeless law,
is all the word I know.


^^EOP^^

The olla knocked with steam. The masa cooked.
                           She said her eyes are china. The vowel switched
on an aura, a shine that sheens the threshold.
                                          The vowel was spell: an i that might we,
an i that echoes how we’re seen and see.                            Eyedentity. Ay Dios, she exclaimed
surrounded by photos — niños and nietos — 
                                          where I’m the only chino. How might I
see through my family’s eyes — an owl’s eyes
                           in ojos and one in its lid turned sideways 目 — 
I wondered with her at the table where we
                                         placed one olive — ojo negro — in each hoja,
that worn folio for field corn’s field notes.
                          What does that dark eye in the ear’s husk see?


^^EOP^^

                    
                    
                    I was so afraid. I couldn’t escape it. It was bigger than me and 3 horned. It dashed for me and missed and missed again. It leapt for me in my skirt. I was younger than it. It opened its parent mouth and I could die trying.

It would never never miss me.
It would stand on its two legs
and I was its message.

Running hands over this country’s pantalones.

I’m still surprised by our hulking silhouette.

Our hopeful investments and slightly whiny children.

Pompous jars of mustard in the fridge.

We as blunt as gum

under tables in restaurants.
                

^^EOP^^

coolie naam dharaiya ham tej pakare
jaisan chhuri kate hamke Guyana mein aike

^^EOP^^

And trip me up
a startled robbed way 
Dreamt a burnt stump
for a tongue            Ash-haired girl
              Cowbell girl

^^EOP^^

Quick swim up through my headlights: gold eye
a startle in black: green swift glance
raking mine. A full second
we held each other, then gone.
Gone. And how did I know
what to call it? Lynx, the only possible
reply though I’d never seen one. The car
filling with it: moonlight,
piñon: a cat’s acrid smell
of terror. How quickly the gray body
fled, swerving to avoid
my light. And how often
that sight returns to me, shames me
to know how much more this fragment
matters. More than the broad back
of a man I loved. More than the image
of my friend, cancer-struck, curled
by her toilet. More than my regret
for the child I did not have which I thought
once would pierce me, utterly. Nothing
beside that dense muscle, faint gold guard hairs
stirring the dark. And if I keep
these scraps of it, what did it keep of me?
A flight, a thunder. A shield of light
dropped before the eyes, pinned
inside that magnificent skull only time
would release. Split back, fade
and reveal. Wind
would open him. Sun would turn him
commonplace: a knot of flies, a rib cage
of shredded tendon, wasp-nest
fragile. The treasure of him, like anything,
gone. Even now, I thumb that face
like a coin I cannot spend. If I ever lived,
I lived in him, fishing the cold
trout-thick streams, waking to snow, dying
when he died, which is a comfort.
I must say this. Otherwise, I myself
do not exist. It looked at me
a moment. A flash of green, of gold
and white. Then the dark came down
again between us. Once, I was afraid
of being changed. Now that is done.
The lynx has me in its eye.
I am already diminished.


^^EOP^^




Als das Kind Kind war,
war es die Zeit der folgenden Fragen:
Warum bin ich ich und warum nicht du?
— Peter Handke, “Lied Vom Kindsein”



i 
Began like pu, the uncarved block in a strange land.
Simulacrum, wood golem knocking about, dreaming of flesh.
Lies, truths, growths, recede and wonder what it is to be:  D’où Venons Nous Que Sommes Nous Où Allons Nous  Woher kommen wir Wer sind wir Wohin gehen wir  Where Do We Come From? What Are We? Where Are We Going?  How long have I got? 
Father never answers. Why he is surprised when I bolt,
A prodigal arrow, into
The world, I can only suspect, among gears and puppets.   ii 
Wander the world. 
I saw a boy herding ox. 
I saw a dog dropping bones in the water, barking for more.
I saw a bathing woman with a beggar on a crutch of wood. 
I saw a wretch with a dead albatross envy archers
Whose arrows were beyond them. 
I may have seen a fleeting vanity fair, some carnival of souls.
I saw a Hmong orphan calling Naga kings from the riverbank,
Expecting nothing.   iii 
Maw like Leviathan, peer of Melville’s albino,
Abyssal gaze returned.
Within your belly like a worm,
After a lifetime of fighting, how 
I’ve become like you,
Adrift 
In the sea, Jonah, a leaf,
While the boy next to me has become a jackass.
And yet I still wish and yearn,
Dionysian, a destiny, if not a dynasty.


^^EOP^^

Because the butterfly’s yellow wing flickering in black mud
was a word stranded by its language.
Because no one else was coming — & I ran
out of reasons. So I gathered fistfuls
of  ash, dark as ink, hammered them into marrow, into
a skull thick enough to keep the gentle curse
of  dreams. Yes, I aimed for mercy — 
but came only close as building a cage
around the heart. Shutters over the eyes. Yes, I gave it hands
despite knowing that to stretch that clay slab into five blades of light, I would go
too far. Because I, too, needed a place
to hold me. So I dipped my fingers back
into the fire, pried open the lower face until the wound widened
into a throat, until every leaf shook silver with that god
-awful scream & I was done.
& it was human.


^^EOP^^

of Azamor
at the mouth of the Oum er Rbia River
Province, Doukkala
Dorantes’s slave, with Captain Castillo
and myself Álvar Núñez Cabeza de Vaca
named in honor of Alhajahad
grandson to the conqueror of Canaria,
four far from a tribe, lost
band of followers, at once
master and slave, trader and healer
lost, after shipwrecks, having starved,
our thirst so great we drank salt
as foretold by the Muslim woman from Hornachos
We sought war and gold and souls
among the barbarians, burned their villages,
then separated, lost, but in the end escaped
by the mercy en la pasión de nuestro redentor Jesucristo
to tell the tale of the Seven Cities of Cíbola
             The hunger and thirst we endured
the people always cured, whatever they had they gave
us, warmed us by their fires, sheltered us
             People who mourned their dead children
for a year, each morning before sunrise,
the whole clan wept, noon and at daybreak,
household didn’t eat for three months,
so deep is their mourning for their children
             People of the bison, men naked, women
and elders clothed in deerskin, the land parched,
maizeless, they boiled their water with hot stones, we
headed into the setting sun, following the maize road,
surviving each day on a handful of deer fat,
crossed the river, to the people who only ate polvos
de paja, powders of grass, for four months of the year,
they gave us flour and squash and frijoles and cotton
mantles, we crossed the medranos, the people
gave us beads and coral and emerald arrowheads
             We saw women in lengths of cotton, closed
with ties in the front, half-sleeves of buckskin
that touched the ground, and wearing shoes
The people sought our blessings, thought
we came from the sky, Estevanico
speaking for us, as we passed
through a great number of diverse languages,
we knew six, but found a thousand differences
            We were fed on the hearts of deers,
some feared and fled from us, the people
having been chained by the ones who came before us,
the ones we sought so feverishly to tell them
No more killing
No more chains, please
Do no more harm, Holy Majesty,
the wretched and disastrous end
we suffered on account of our sins


^^EOP^^




To CD Wright



No body is fixed in position no one can be known 
Still I am read by satellites my tendency extrapolated 
In the mountains I have no GPS I don’t know where to go 
There are those trees their leaves flicker like little jewels a whole bucketful 
Darkness stares back are you even human anymore 
I close the curtains at night not because I think others will see in 
Turn left there but so I do not see the reflection that is pure dark 
I am not afraid of anything oh is that so 
Citizen bear do this place not belong to you 
Unseen I wander through the thorny place of what I no that ain’t it 
No fear can be knew can be none fuck how do you spell it 
I held a heavy jade pendant in my hand once not in this valley in another 
In the range of  limited human experience how many places are there really 
I don’t even have to look at the earth anymore I just have to listen 
Now that hillbilly whisper guides me which way to turn how far up the turn is 
Drawling like moonshine we’re really off the grid now 
Making wild prayers to the green dark which kind do you mean 
Thank god we thought of  her recording this voice both kinds


^^EOP^^

They call us now,
before they drop the bombs.
The phone rings
and someone who knows my first name
calls and says in perfect Arabic
“This is David.”
And in my stupor of sonic booms and glass-shattering symphonies
still smashing around in my head
I think, Do I know any Davids in Gaza?
They call us now to say
Run.
You have 58 seconds from the end of this message.
Your house is next.
They think of it as some kind of
war-time courtesy.
It doesn’t matter that
there is nowhere to run to.
It means nothing that the borders are closed
and your papers are worthless
and mark you only for a life sentence
in this prison by the sea
and the alleyways are narrow
and there are more human lives
packed one against the other
more than any other place on earth
Just run.
We aren’t trying to kill you.
It doesn’t matter that
you can’t call us back to tell us
the people we claim to want aren’t in your house
that there’s no one here
except you and your children
who were cheering for Argentina
sharing the last loaf of bread for this week
counting candles left in case the power goes out.
It doesn’t matter that you have children.
You live in the wrong place
and now is your chance to run
to nowhere.
It doesn’t matter
that 58 seconds isn’t long enough
to find your wedding album
or your son’s favorite blanket
or your daughter’s almost completed college application
or your shoes
or to gather everyone in the house.
It doesn’t matter what you had planned.
It doesn’t matter who you are.
Prove you’re human.
Prove you stand on two legs.
Run.
 


^^EOP^^

Someone decapitated all Birds of Paradise
along Ocean Avenue; strollers and shoes
 
trample the discarded beaks. She keeps walking.
At noon a hallway speaker booms
  Code Blue Code Blue one minute
before her grandson is born.
 
In the evening, a nurse hands him
to her: clean, swaddled, murmuring:
 
the fullness of his being spears her. Why didn’t I pick them up? she wonders,
 
arms tightening around the infant,
whispers I still carry you! to her son
 
when he comes to take his child.
 


^^EOP^^

I live with the small shame
of not knowing the multiple names for blue
to describe the nightsky over New Mexico
to describe the light in my lover’s eyes.
 
It is a small shame that grows.
 
I live with the small shame
which resides in the absences of my speech
as I pause to search for the word in Spanish
to translate a poem to my Father
who sits there waiting
who scans my eyes to see
what I cannot fully describe
who waits for the word from me
the word that escapes me in the moment
the word I fear has never resided within me.
 
It is a small shame that grows
when indigo and cerulean are merely azul
and not añil and cerúleo.
 


^^EOP^^




             July 13, 2013



Saturday afternoon: in the driveway between buildings they blow up
balloons—yellow, red, blue—for a 3-year-old’s party.
 
The intermittent pops startle me like random gunfire—remind me
of birthdays brown boys will no longer celebrate.
 
The DJ, having set up the speakers, begins to play—the music, a rapid fire
of bass thump, commandeers the apartment. We have no choice but leave.
 
An art show: canvases colored with boxes and lines—a grid of red
on a backdrop of yellow. We speak of the abstract with wine in our mouths.
 
Meanwhile, in an antechamber, six are sequestered. They speak of mali-
cious intent, blood, evidence, testimony—murder versus manslaughter.
 
We arrive home to a throng of brown bodies, hands clutching red cups,
and music: its insistent treble stabbing the ears.
 
Inside, we slam all windows, but the music still blares as my niece shoots
people on the video game—its sounds are too realistic to bear.
 
Instead, the news, a verdict is in: not guilty. And everything is a blur
of sound, my heart beating so fast I put a hand to my chest.
 
I watch the TV screen: a collage of abstractions—spotlights, microphones,
smiles, handwritten signs. I stare, as if it were a painting—
 
a smear of twisted faces smothered in gesso and oil, a grid of red
on a backdrop of yellow—to make sense of.
 
The party continues. The 3-year-old probably in bed dreaming of melted
ice cream, and I am tired of partying.
 
There is a police station a half block away and I want it to burn. Instead,
only the smoke of weed, the meaningless music droning on,
 
the popping of balloons. Sunday morning, the birds are angry—their
chirping a noisy chant: NO NO NO NO. Outside, the rubbery flesh
 
of balloons color the driveway like splotches of paint. In an instant,
those still lives of heave and breath—gone in a pop.
 


^^EOP^^

He clings to her while other boys
play Marco Polo. A year of lessons,
this is what she gets?
 
She wants to lie in the sun. Enough, she says, loosens her arms,
releases him. The boy winces at light
 
bouncing off water. He grasps at her,
where he thinks she is, but feels blind.
He decides to drown for his mother.
 
Just this morning he breathed only when
she breathed, laughed when she laughed.
Before he goes under he hears one boy
 
catch another: My eyes were closed!
His cries, underwater, make bubbles
that rise like loose balloons.
 
He watches his mother’s legs
move away. Out of breath, he swims
toward empty blue.


^^EOP^^

A spirit came down
and whispered in our drunk ears
  mark your wombs with wild roses
and between beers I dreamed
 
that we were soldiers missing our mothers
which explains why we are seventeen
 
and in a tattoo parlor that smells of ships and motorcycles,
of leather and ocean, of marijuana and sad men’s blood.
 
We each ask for a single rose
with a ribbon around the stem,
 
for a word, some power.
We want to be fire.
 
The artist changes channels.
We watch Looney Tunes as his needles start.
 
When we stop at the liquor store,
our roses, orange and violet, bleeding through the bandages,
 
I want to tell you that if we ever find ourselves blindfolded in a war,
or in an apple metaphor, accused of ruining it for everybody
 
with hunger, or knowledge,
 
I would not insist on how sacred is the tree or the light,
or how sacred is what moves us—
 
I’d become a storyteller.
And out of our inevitable estrangement
I’d make us up again and again.
 


^^EOP^^

You will need to state the reason for your visit.
Don’t say because I want to walk down old roads and caress stone walls the color of my skin.
 
You will need to state the reason for your visit.
Don’t say because the olives are ready for harvest and I will coax the fruit from the trees, press it into liquid gold.
 
You will need to state the reason for your visit.
Don’t say because my parents’ house  still sits empty on a bluff overlooking the sea, the green shutters my grandfather had just painted remain sealed shut and the army listed the property’s owners as absentees.
 
You will need to state the reason for your visit.
Don’t say because I am carrying prayers in my suitcase for a people who wait, and I’ll unfold them embroidered linens of verse and spread them out across the land.


^^EOP^^

1. did your child lose acquired speech? 
A fount and then silence. A none. An ellipse
between — his breath through
the seams of our windows. Whistle
of days. Impossible bowl of a mouth — 
the open cupboard, vowels
rounded up and swept under the rug.  2. does your child produce unusual noises or infantile squeals? 
He’d coo and we’d coo back. The sound
passed back and forth between us like a ball.
Or later, an astral voice. Some vibrato
under the surface of us. The burst upon — 
burn of strings rubbed
in a flourish. His exhausted face.  3. is your child’s voice louder than required? 
In an enclosure or a cave it is difficult to gauge
one’s volume. The proscenium of the world.
All the rooms we speak of are dark places. Because
he cannot see his mouth, he cannot imagine
the sound that comes out.  4. does your child speak frequent gibberish or jargon? 
To my ears it is a language. Every sound
a system: the sound for dog or boy. The moan
in his throat for water — that of a man with thirst.
The dilapidated ladder that makes a sentence
a sentence. This plosive is a verb. This liquid
a want. We make symbols of his noise.  5. does your child have difficulty understanding basic things (“just can’t get it”)? 
Against the backdrop of the tree he looks so small.  6. does your child pull you around when he wants something? 
By the sleeve. By the shirttail. His light touch
hopscotching against my skin like sparrows.
An insistence muscled and muscled again.  7. does your child have difficulty expressing his needs or desires using gestures? 
Red-faced in the kitchen and in the bedroom
and the yellow light touches his eyes
which are open but not there. His eyes
rest in their narrow boat dream and the canals
are wide dividing this side from this side.  8. is there no spontaneous initiation of speech or  communication from your child? 
When called he eases out of his body.
His god is not our words nor is it
the words from his lips. It is entirely body.
So when he comes to us and looks we know
there are beyond us impossible cylinders
where meaning lives.  9. does your child repeat heard words, parts of words, or tv commercials? 
The mind circles the mind in the arena, far in — far in
where the consonants touch and where the round
chorus flaunts its iambs in a metronomic trot. Humming
to himself in warm and jugular songs.  10. does your child use repetitive language (same word or phrase over and over)? 
A pocket in his brain worries its ball of lint.
A word clicks into its groove and stammers
along its track, Dopplering like a car with its windows
rolled down and the one top hit of the summer
angles its way into his brain.  11. does your child have difficulty sustaining a  conversation? 
We could be anywhere, then the navel of the red moon
drops its fruit. His world. This stained world drips its honey
into our mouths. Our words stolen from his malingering afternoon.  12. does your child use monotonous speech or wrong pausing? 
When the air is true and simple, we can watch him tremble
for an hour, plucking his meaning from a handful of utterances
and then ascend into the terrible partition of speech.  13. does your child speak the same to kids, adults, or objects (can’t differentiate)? 
Because a reference needs a frame: we are mother and father
and child with a world of time to be understood. The car radio
plays its one song. The song, therefore, is important.
It must be intoned at a rigorous time. Because rigor
is important and because the self insists on constant vigils.  14. does your child use language inappropriately (wrong words or phrases)? 
Always, and he insists on the incorrect forms.
The wrong word takes every form for love — 
the good tree leans into the pond,
the gray dog’s ribs show, the memory
bound to the window, and the promise of the radio
playing its song on the hour. Every wrong form
is a form which represents us in our losses,
if it takes us another world to understand.


^^EOP^^

To pass through astonishment and know much too late.
And because habit makes us strange, I find myself
Searching on a landscape that generates questions
Beyond its ability to solve. That dark post
Out there might be this poem standing as you would — 
Lead in the 4th grade play — under theater lights
And your shadows that petal around you. And what
Should be most memorable isn’t. So I recall
Those prolonged moments of silence, incongruous
And revealing as metaphor, most frequently.
For instance: waiting at the bus stop in Pai in
A midmorning the hue of the roadside guardrails
That dot the cliff’s side like Morse code. Before leaving
With trees (those felled, ones half-painted white, the burnt trunks ...    )
That passed by like the so many phenomena
Of our days blurred together into a motion,
At times, convincing as a nickelodeon’s,
I waited under the thatched roof of the station
With other travelers. With each in our common
Solitude risen around like that Haydn piece
In the tunnel I descended into on my
Way out onto Broadway from the 1 train some months
Ago, it seemed of Hopper. Star fruit on the ground
Discolored, withering, blighted. Three of the town’s
Strays hobbled by before midday’s heat stalled the town
Like some lost Stephano, Trinculo, and their lamed,
Dark sycophant — at least that’s what they were for me.
It wasn’t comfort, never comfort, but something else.
And when each moment with expectations for more
Than it can hold leads to the next, and soon — as then — 
Expectation fills up the day as does your breath
A balloon, the day floats with such care and strange hours. And both pleasure and pain are motions of the soul ...    
Plato wrote — poetry’s banisher, beauty’s guard.   2 
My hands grow differently used. While one hand thumbs
Pages, the other hand steadies open the book.
It’s the other hand that rests on the desk, forearm
Paralleled to the table’s edge, all the fingers
Except the thumb holding the blank field. One hand’s mole
A gnat flattened between pinky and ring finger;
The other hand’s palm-side, below the skin enough
It’s likely a splinter left for years. Just one hand
Fits my Discman, plugged in while watching those around
(No news-as-white-noise here to occupy my sight):
Kids who bus to school hours away toothpicking
Slivers of chili-dappled mango slices in;
A triple-sweatered lady palming back her hair
In the thick Thai pre-dawn June; the one foreigner
Other than us, earphone couched; and her shape, dozed slack,
Coat-blanketed, neck against my side. One hand rests.
Half a day ago, under a mosquito net,
Flush with the desk fan sitting on the rattan floor,
One hand kept on the steady act of beckoning
Behind the tongue-swelled clit, uncreasing the ridged roof,
Almost like the mouth’s roof as it slopes down toward teeth,
Like rubbing the dampened cave wall, finger-darkened,
As the guide turns his back to us. The other hand
Traced its crook — that delta-creased pad set between thumb
And fingers, hand’s most fleshy zone — on the torso.
The other hand then stilled her hip, mosquito net,
Weighted, walling out stitches of ants, from its hook
A viscous drape like that through one hand’s two fingers.
Oddly, only one hand drums along (the CD:
Converge, Jane Doe) as the crowd would rupture outward
Into a circle pit — a vortex in reverse — 
If this were a concert. The other hand just bides
Its time. Milton’s clumsy other hand, God’s other
Hand that Lessing chose, and that Spaniard’s other hand
Riddled useless at Lepanto, a bullet lodged
Into that scurvied poet’s chest, the other hand
Remembers and betrays. The other hand cries out, Which was Keats’s living one? Neither hand scarred yet,
Even after thumb-knuckle tempted a sander
In shop class, impulse from imagining too much.
One hand’s cushion bears the pencil (my friend whose tasks
Are split between his hands — “I eat with my left hand,
Punch with the other” — says we whack off with the hand
We write). Each hand on different shaded denim thighs,
The unclipped nails crude halos of sun-blocking hills.
One hand lets forth words; the other hand holds it back.   3 
Chased by a three-legged dog to the temple stairs,
Past all the fallen star fruit (the veined tips the last
To wither, the through-light flesh sun- and bug-eaten),
We crossed paths with a one-legged man — wordless sounds,
And that permanent wild gaze — crutching down the stairs
(Four hundred!) as we stopped to catch a break mid-flight.
Our breath would last us a run-through of the temple,
And, in the first hallway — him?!, his phatic calls, tics,
And unwilled smile facing the morning that just passed,
The sun no longer in front of his propped body,
But above it, the valley overabundant
With the real light that stole our day. The fog too lifted
Against my sight. We paused. Having just climbed the hill,
We agreed to leave our shoes on despite sandals
Stationed on the stoop, and then we turned towards that hall.
“Let’s go,” he ends, befriended, prayer Phaedrus-empty.
 — The driver gases the bus off the parking brakes
To idle back out the station; the attendants
Scoop up the wood wedges and clatter the door shut;
The passengers all shift. In the chapter among
The deformed and footless, Zhuangzi ends, arguing
For the greatest of men, a man void of feelings:
“The Way gave him a face, Heaven gave him a form,
Can’t you call him a man?” Yet there are things I love:
The sun, you, travel. And back again, the thick fog
Parts us from the obliterating Turner sun.
Pretty soon, come day, the motorbikes The Rough Guide
Says all tourists should try will buzz by those three dogs,
All lethargic, the largest too tired to dry-hump,
His red tip unsheathing (there’s no neutering here),
The black one, bald in spots, wouldn’t even fight it off,
The mottled one coiled back like the dog that badgers
Bosch’s wayfarer, bandaged, poor bastard, with his gnarled stick,
Not looking at us, but rather caught looking back,
And above his head a doorway — no, the gallows? — 
The same one Brueghel’s final peasants romped beneath?
My turn now to sleep. I can dab off from my jeans
Your drool just reaching my thigh as you do, with care,
From our sheets when — yet that stuff, all that stuff of ours
Still spots our many beds with different aged salt-rings,
Each gasp less a sound than a failure at silence.
Before us another strange town, while for others
School, home, maybe work, a field, someplace normal, there,
Someplace beyond sight from its roadside stop. Abroad
A month, toward a year in another country, Anne — 
Anacrusis: these days I’m lost in, reminded
Of my presence as if catching a stranger’s wave
To the yet-to-be-seen man behind you as yours.
 
— traveled 2005 / written 2007–2008


^^EOP^^

Spoiler alert: in this all-but-forgotten
masterwork, Jean Stafford—who was once
widely regarded as the leading novelist
 
of her generation, and who wrote
this perverse, short,
lyrical novel, her second, during
 
the flailing failings
of her marriage to my hero
Robert Lowell—kills
 
Molly, her child-alter ego,
a girl too unloved and unloving
to survive puberty, too
 
pure and awful—like Stafford, who died
pickled and childish three
decades later after winning
 
the Pulitzer with her devastating,
hurtfully compassionate Collected  Stories—for this or any other world,
 
especially the necessarily
allegorical one of fiction.
I am broken now, hopeless; hope
 
is proved by this book to be
a contrivance. I have just
read the last pages in which
 
Molly’s brother, Ralph—who,
to live, cannot love
either, has no spare love—shoots
 
her, aiming for the wild mountain
lion whose stuffed corpse
was to be the triumph
 
of his new manhood. I don’t
hate Ralph—how can I, a boy,
mistaken, like me? And can I hate
 
Molly, who so needed Ralph
and everyone, still young enough to savor
the bittersweet of her anger?
 
What about Stafford, who hurt
herself, all our selves, with
this ending, her classic tragedy, writing,
 
decades later, Poor old  Molly! I loved her dearly  and I hope she rests in peace.
 
Fuck insight and analysis:
my heart is shot. Why
did she have to die? Why does
 
anyone? Why do you, do I?
Because of what Ralph was
feeling just before he accidentally
 
slaughtered the future? This book
must have ravaged the already
sleepless poet Gregory Orr,
 
who shot his brother, too, and
suffers that endless error
in poetry and prose. And because Molly
 
refused everything, she stood between
Ralph and tomorrow. But he grew, he
changed. Confused? Read
 
the book. In novels
people die because of what they feel.
In life, people die when
 
their bodies conk out,
exhausted machines that living
expends. And what
 
happens when people feel
their feelings in life?
Nothing? Anything? Brenda,
 
dear Brenda, my love, nothing
happens, I’m afraid. I’m sorry. And afraid.
A small breeze born in the heart
 
gently bends a blade of grass
and no one hears a word.
No one reads Stafford anymore—I asked
 
on Facebook. Stafford died, her
legacy gently dispatched
into the low air. O, life
 
is terrible, literature
ridiculous. Stafford’s prose,
teeming and rich as loam,
 
could take Famous Franzen’s
for a walk, feed it biscuits.
But who cares? Who remembers?
 
O, to have been Jean Stafford,
in the past I idealize, when the world
was less self-conscious, less
 
precise. I could be
dead already, warmish
beneath a blanket of dust. Joyful
 
are the faded, the once-greats
whose afterlives slipped out
a hole in posterity's pocket:
 
they are loved poignantly by
a needy few. O, to be kept
cozy in the bosoms of those
 
desperate and proud, forgotten
for all the good I do. Love
is sunlight streaming unevenly
 
through the canopy of leaves
overhead. We can only grow
in the brighter patches below, fading
 
where light is thin. Molly,
we are with you, nowhere and gone.
Mostly we are forgotten, too.
 


^^EOP^^

1 
What’s The Word! she cries
from her purchase on the iron
finial of the front gate to my heart. 
The radio in the kitchen
is stuck in the year I was born.
The capitals of the world are burning. 
And this sparrow with a woman’s face
roars in the burdened air — air crowded with voices,
but no word, mobbed with talking, but no word,
teeming with speech, but no word — 
this woman with the body of a bird
is shrieking fierce
buzzed volts
in the swarming babble, What’s The Word! 
This evening
is the year of my birth.
The country has just gained its independence.
Social unrest grows rampant as the economy declines.
Under a corrupt government of the army and the rich come
years of mass poverty, decades of starving children
and racially-fueled mayhem. Word is 
armed squads raping women by the hundreds. Word is
beheadings, public lynchings, and riots. Word is
burning, looting, curfews, and shoot-to-kill orders.
And word is more deadly days lie ahead. 
Today, tomorrow, and yesterday, the forecast calls
for more misery, more poverty, more starvation,
more families fleeing their homes,
more refugees streaming toward every border. 
More horror is to come, that’s the word.
More scapegoating is to come, that’s the word.
More violence is to come
on the roads,
in the streets,
in the homes, violence 
in the churches, in the temples
where they preach who to love and who to hate.
How to get to heaven, and who to leave behind.
How to don the fleece of the blameless
and prosecute your neighbor. 
All against all
is to come.
That’s the word. 
Who hasn’t heard that! she spits.
You call yourself a poet? You
tame high finisher of paltry blots! 
You publish doubt and call it knowledge!
You destroy the wisdom of ages
to gratify your envy!
You murder benevolence and virtue
with condescension. You pretend to poetry
and destroy imagination!
Your words mystify, mislead, and misdirect!
You ape The Word made flesh
with words made words
to multiply more words and words about your words!
And you ritualize these sterile pleasures,
miming joy, delight, and generation!
You celebrate cheap distractions!
Your theories bloom in suicide of the mind,
starvation of the heart, and mass maladies of the soul.
You mock and mimic sincerity!
You read and divine by irony!
You snare the little ones!
You pose stumbling blocks to the lame!
You dig pits for the blind!
You sell desolation!
Your science is despair!
What’s The Word! 
I can tell she’s up to no good,
this feathered interval,
monument to the nano,
this deciding gram,
my Geronimo. 
She’s out to overturn an empire,
to usurp principalities and powers,
just by swooping into the right assembly,
perplexing a senate, baffling a parliament,
or bewildering somebody’s crosshairs. 
Not worth a farthing,
and without a cent,
she would own the realm
her shrill cries measure, trading
dying for being. 
I tell her, I sang
in a church choir during one war
North American TV made famous.
I fled a burning archipelago in the rain,
on my mother’s back, in another war
nobody televised. 
In the midst of wars worldwide, many
in countries whose names I can’t pronounce,
I tucked Christ’s promise and Adam’s disgrace
together with my pajamas under my pillow
each morning, unable to distinguish which
was God’s first thought, and which God’s second. 
Therefore, I seek asylum
in the final word,
an exile from the first word,
and a refugee
of an illegible past. 
Who hasn’t witnessed the laws of merging and parting,
blessing and killing! she says. Who isn’t
subject to the hand
that giveth and the hand that taketh,
the change of the guard,
with and without blood,
and their own dismembered history 
fed to the unvanquished flowers?
Lift every clock’s face and see
the counting angels reckoning,
the killing angels
busy at their anvils.
Say what’s The Word,
or die! 
It’s obvious she’s accounted
for what the wind will take,
what the moths must eat,
the ants carry away,
the Caesars keep. 
She’s a breathing remnant
restored to springtime’s living cloth. 
She’s a pair of scissors
trimming lament
to allow for all I don’t know. 
And I can tell by the markings on her coat
and her black eyes
she knows which dreams to parse,
which to heed, and which to bury. 
And look at those prehistoric feet.
No doubt, she’s realized the secret to surviving
her own tribe’s slaughter and dispersal. 
Pocket dictionary
packed with signs in another language,
blazing shard of the original emanation,
Precambrian spark deposit,
igneous jot of infinite magnitude,
fiery iota, 
something about her precise little beak
convinces me she grasps degree,
and knows which i’s to dot
and which to leave large and alone. 
There are words, I say,
and there is The Word. 
Every word is a fluctuating flame
to a wick that dies. 
But The Word, The Word
is a ruling sum and drastic mean,
the standard that travels
without moving. 
Words move,
but The Word is fixed,
the true blank. 
The Word is the voice of the lamp,
and words are soot blackening the glass. 
The movements of words engender time and death.
But The Word lives outside of time and death.
Inside time, death rules.
Life is death’s kingdom.
We live at dying’s rate.
Words are a sop for death.
But The Word is the mother of thresholds,
regulating life and death. 
The Word begets presences impossible
to confirm,
given the blinding action of time
and the sea and the earth’s
turning repose. 
And who is that supposed to feed?
Whose thirst would that quench? 
she screeches, her voice materializing
a greater body of innumerable birds arriving at dominion,
increasing to overwhelm every mile of my heart,
that bloody aerie branching and leafing,
her feathers become all eyes and mouths,
her voice coming now from everywhere,
booming, 
When the Lover is ready,
the Beloved will appear! 
Say what’s The Word or we both die!   2 
I’ll call her my battle angel, this evangelion.
Seraphic herald of the ninth echelon,
pleromatic aeon demanding a founding gnosis,
her voice electric tekhelet, Septuagint, a two-leaved door
opening onto porches, chambers, and courts,
her voice a Solomonic column of barley sugar. 
She’s why I’m crazy.
She’s why I can’t sleep. She’s why I never
sleep. She’s why I avoid people.
She’s why I drill the eight limbs with the mud-step,
why I walk the octagon of trigrams inscribed on Wudang,
why I practice the Spiral Ox Jaw and the Tiger’s Mouth.
She’s why I’m hard to live with
and why I say, 
The bread that rises in a house that fails,
The Word, father of zero and one,
is our advocate. 
A shut eye we name Beginning,
The Word sleeps,
and all is darkness. 
An open eye
we name The Treasure,
The Word wakes
and voices are heard among the sounds of water. 
The Word dreams, and worlds appear.
And stars beyond and behind our eyes.
And the moon with its hair tied up
and its hair let down. 
Bound on every side,
and wide open in the center,
The Word hosts our breath, our span, the space
of our dreaming and our thinking,
our stillness and our moving. And the emerging present
is one of its bodies. 
The fulcrum, the eye, the heart enthroned,
the dove without person, homing, The Word 
is a hammer raining down its songs,
a river pouring out of the mouth of the anvil. 
Twin and unlike, The Word is without peer.
Black and white, it is a wheeling pair
of coincident opposites turning on a point:
Existence and Nonexistence hand in hand.
Substance and Void begetting life and death. 
The Word is an open book,
and its first and last pages are missing. 
It is a brother and sister
telling each other
the missing parts
of one another’s stories. 
It is the lover and the beloved
constantly changing places in the fire. 
And it is the wind in the treetops
outside our window,
a voice torn to pieces. Hear it? 
The wind without a house, she says.
Time without a gate, she says.
A memory of the ocean
torments the trees,
a homesickness, she says. 
The wind is leafing through both of our histories,
looking for a happy ending. 
It is my hand moving over your body, I say,
finding more and more to know. 
It is a circle of women
reciting in the round
the oldest stories of Death disguised as a traveler
or overlooked familiar, friend we shunned
for less faithful playmates. 
It is a house,
and from inside come the voices of children
taking turns reading to one another.
It is their own story they read. 
But why do their voices seem uneasy?
Does the moon, giant
at the window, frighten them? 
Does death run amok through all
the pages of the story?
Do the pages turn by themselves?
Are there strangers in the house?
Is the house burning? 
Soldiers with guns are at our door again.
Sister, quick. Change into a penny.
I’ll fold you in a handkerchief,
put you in my pocket,
and jump inside a sack of rice,
one of the uncooked kernels. 
Men with knives are looking in our windows again.
Brother, hurry. Turn yourself
into one of our mother’s dolls
sitting on the living room shelf. I’ll be the dust
settling on your eyelids. 
The ones wearing wings are in the yard. 
The ones adorned with lightning are in the house. 
The ones decorated with stars
are dividing our futures among them. 
Don’t answer when they call to us in the voice of Nanny. 
Don’t believe them when they promise sugar. 
Don’t come out until evening,
or when you hear our mother weeping to herself. 
If only I could become the mirror in her purse,
I’d never come back until the end of time.   3 
The treetops buck and heave
in the night wind.
Like drunks at sea leaning
too far over a rocking bulwark.
Like a woman throwing her green and gold hair
in time to a song only she can hear. 
And from inside
that windswept bulk growing darker
comes a frenzied uproar
of what must be
hundreds of hidden birds. 
All that noise
of wind, leaves, and branches,
all that uttering from unseen throats,
and is there no word? 
All that shrieking, iterating, crying
in the rustling leaves. All that screaming,
shrilling, running din
of squeaky wheels, radiant numbers of tongues,
beaks, hubs, wings, spokes
keening in centrifugal spinning,
and not one word?
Not any? Nor part? No bearing? 
One hunger, a fanned fire, roars
in the voice of the sea. 
One light eats itself, unconsumed. 
The wind is taking the night apart, she says.
The wind is dismantling
the leaves, the branches, the minutes, our listening, 
and finding more and more
moving pieces to index:
our hands, our mouths, our voices, recurring stairs 
of an imperfect past,
a rumored present,
figures multiplying inside a mirror. 
Each, alone
in his dream of the world, I say,
is host and guest, a book
and the one who reads it
by the light of a vanished childhood. 
Don’t say that, she says.
We see by the light of who we are.
Look at us: you inside me
inside you. We’ve lived inside
each other from the beginning.
And from before beginning.
Before the world was ever found. 
Before the world was found, I say,
I dwelled inside you,
and you breathed all through me,
in my body and its happiness,
in my body and its loneliness. 
After I found the world, I had to go
looking for you. Ever since the world,
I only lose you and find you.
Lose you. And find you. 
The body of the beloved
is the lover’s true homeland, she says. 
I can hear you, but I can’t hear me, I say,
your voice a burning gown of song and time,
and me with my ghosts, me with my mockingbird. 
Don’t say that, she says. 
What is my mind, I wonder,
but the reflected light of your 
voice, O, burning one, O, seeing voice, O,
speaking eye that renders us 
now legible,
now indecipherable, now
strangers traveling
under assumed names. 
Don’t say that, she says.
Look. A single page of the wind
copied by hand
is the volume of despair
the smallest living wing displaces.
And your voice will be your cup
each day my wings shelter
your dear, momentary earth. 
My mind is several minds, I say,
each abiding differently: in your eyes,
in the smell of your hair, in your voice
moving over me, in my voice moving over you. 
She says, Don’t look at your hands.
Watch the shadows they make. 
I say, Moving over you, my voice crosses
out of forbidden chambers of the Emperor of China,
through chronicles of exile and death in a foreign country,
to touch the ground I touch in me
when I speak to you. 
She says, A new mind makes the world new.
True words are a little blue.
And being human makes the saddest music in the world. 
She says, Postpone all morning bells.
The ore lies awake inside the rock, a dream
of origin waiting to be rescued. 
I say, The glare of your nakedness
confounds me, a distraction
from the darker incandescence of your being.
Inside you is the safest place to be. 
The radio in the kitchen is stuck
in the year I was born.
The capitals of the world are burning. 
And of all the things on my mind this evening,
words weigh the least,
Death weighs the most,
and your voice’s body
beneath my voice’s moving hand
is a green agent of freedom and law,
best friend to my earth and my ache. 
Of all the things keeping me from sleep,
words weigh too much, yet not enough.
Time weighs nothing at all,
but I can’t bear it.
And your body, burdened by minutes
and ancient rites, is my favorite sad song. 
One wave that gives rise to three, shoulder, hip, and knee,
your body is the Lord’s pure geometry.
Disguised as Time, your body is tears, lilies,
and the mouth of the falls. 
And of all the things we’re dying from tonight,
being alive is the strangest,
surviving our histories is the saddest.
Time leaves the smallest wounds,
and your body, a mortal occasion
of timeless law,
is all the word I know.


^^EOP^^

The olla knocked with steam. The masa cooked.
                           She said her eyes are china. The vowel switched
on an aura, a shine that sheens the threshold.
                                          The vowel was spell: an i that might we,
an i that echoes how we’re seen and see.                            Eyedentity. Ay Dios, she exclaimed
surrounded by photos — niños and nietos — 
                                          where I’m the only chino. How might I
see through my family’s eyes — an owl’s eyes
                           in ojos and one in its lid turned sideways 目 — 
I wondered with her at the table where we
                                         placed one olive — ojo negro — in each hoja,
that worn folio for field corn’s field notes.
                          What does that dark eye in the ear’s husk see?


^^EOP^^

                    
                    
                    I was so afraid. I couldn’t escape it. It was bigger than me and 3 horned. It dashed for me and missed and missed again. It leapt for me in my skirt. I was younger than it. It opened its parent mouth and I could die trying.

It would never never miss me.
It would stand on its two legs
and I was its message.

Running hands over this country’s pantalones.

I’m still surprised by our hulking silhouette.

Our hopeful investments and slightly whiny children.

Pompous jars of mustard in the fridge.

We as blunt as gum

under tables in restaurants.
                

^^EOP^^

coolie naam dharaiya ham tej pakare
jaisan chhuri kate hamke Guyana mein aike

^^EOP^^

And trip me up
a startled robbed way 
Dreamt a burnt stump
for a tongue            Ash-haired girl
              Cowbell girl

^^EOP^^

Quick swim up through my headlights: gold eye
a startle in black: green swift glance
raking mine. A full second
we held each other, then gone.
Gone. And how did I know
what to call it? Lynx, the only possible
reply though I’d never seen one. The car
filling with it: moonlight,
piñon: a cat’s acrid smell
of terror. How quickly the gray body
fled, swerving to avoid
my light. And how often
that sight returns to me, shames me
to know how much more this fragment
matters. More than the broad back
of a man I loved. More than the image
of my friend, cancer-struck, curled
by her toilet. More than my regret
for the child I did not have which I thought
once would pierce me, utterly. Nothing
beside that dense muscle, faint gold guard hairs
stirring the dark. And if I keep
these scraps of it, what did it keep of me?
A flight, a thunder. A shield of light
dropped before the eyes, pinned
inside that magnificent skull only time
would release. Split back, fade
and reveal. Wind
would open him. Sun would turn him
commonplace: a knot of flies, a rib cage
of shredded tendon, wasp-nest
fragile. The treasure of him, like anything,
gone. Even now, I thumb that face
like a coin I cannot spend. If I ever lived,
I lived in him, fishing the cold
trout-thick streams, waking to snow, dying
when he died, which is a comfort.
I must say this. Otherwise, I myself
do not exist. It looked at me
a moment. A flash of green, of gold
and white. Then the dark came down
again between us. Once, I was afraid
of being changed. Now that is done.
The lynx has me in its eye.
I am already diminished.


^^EOP^^




Als das Kind Kind war,
war es die Zeit der folgenden Fragen:
Warum bin ich ich und warum nicht du?
— Peter Handke, “Lied Vom Kindsein”



i 
Began like pu, the uncarved block in a strange land.
Simulacrum, wood golem knocking about, dreaming of flesh.
Lies, truths, growths, recede and wonder what it is to be:  D’où Venons Nous Que Sommes Nous Où Allons Nous  Woher kommen wir Wer sind wir Wohin gehen wir  Where Do We Come From? What Are We? Where Are We Going?  How long have I got? 
Father never answers. Why he is surprised when I bolt,
A prodigal arrow, into
The world, I can only suspect, among gears and puppets.   ii 
Wander the world. 
I saw a boy herding ox. 
I saw a dog dropping bones in the water, barking for more.
I saw a bathing woman with a beggar on a crutch of wood. 
I saw a wretch with a dead albatross envy archers
Whose arrows were beyond them. 
I may have seen a fleeting vanity fair, some carnival of souls.
I saw a Hmong orphan calling Naga kings from the riverbank,
Expecting nothing.   iii 
Maw like Leviathan, peer of Melville’s albino,
Abyssal gaze returned.
Within your belly like a worm,
After a lifetime of fighting, how 
I’ve become like you,
Adrift 
In the sea, Jonah, a leaf,
While the boy next to me has become a jackass.
And yet I still wish and yearn,
Dionysian, a destiny, if not a dynasty.


^^EOP^^

Because the butterfly’s yellow wing flickering in black mud
was a word stranded by its language.
Because no one else was coming — & I ran
out of reasons. So I gathered fistfuls
of  ash, dark as ink, hammered them into marrow, into
a skull thick enough to keep the gentle curse
of  dreams. Yes, I aimed for mercy — 
but came only close as building a cage
around the heart. Shutters over the eyes. Yes, I gave it hands
despite knowing that to stretch that clay slab into five blades of light, I would go
too far. Because I, too, needed a place
to hold me. So I dipped my fingers back
into the fire, pried open the lower face until the wound widened
into a throat, until every leaf shook silver with that god
-awful scream & I was done.
& it was human.


^^EOP^^

of Azamor
at the mouth of the Oum er Rbia River
Province, Doukkala
Dorantes’s slave, with Captain Castillo
and myself Álvar Núñez Cabeza de Vaca
named in honor of Alhajahad
grandson to the conqueror of Canaria,
four far from a tribe, lost
band of followers, at once
master and slave, trader and healer
lost, after shipwrecks, having starved,
our thirst so great we drank salt
as foretold by the Muslim woman from Hornachos
We sought war and gold and souls
among the barbarians, burned their villages,
then separated, lost, but in the end escaped
by the mercy en la pasión de nuestro redentor Jesucristo
to tell the tale of the Seven Cities of Cíbola
             The hunger and thirst we endured
the people always cured, whatever they had they gave
us, warmed us by their fires, sheltered us
             People who mourned their dead children
for a year, each morning before sunrise,
the whole clan wept, noon and at daybreak,
household didn’t eat for three months,
so deep is their mourning for their children
             People of the bison, men naked, women
and elders clothed in deerskin, the land parched,
maizeless, they boiled their water with hot stones, we
headed into the setting sun, following the maize road,
surviving each day on a handful of deer fat,
crossed the river, to the people who only ate polvos
de paja, powders of grass, for four months of the year,
they gave us flour and squash and frijoles and cotton
mantles, we crossed the medranos, the people
gave us beads and coral and emerald arrowheads
             We saw women in lengths of cotton, closed
with ties in the front, half-sleeves of buckskin
that touched the ground, and wearing shoes
The people sought our blessings, thought
we came from the sky, Estevanico
speaking for us, as we passed
through a great number of diverse languages,
we knew six, but found a thousand differences
            We were fed on the hearts of deers,
some feared and fled from us, the people
having been chained by the ones who came before us,
the ones we sought so feverishly to tell them
No more killing
No more chains, please
Do no more harm, Holy Majesty,
the wretched and disastrous end
we suffered on account of our sins


^^EOP^^




To CD Wright



No body is fixed in position no one can be known 
Still I am read by satellites my tendency extrapolated 
In the mountains I have no GPS I don’t know where to go 
There are those trees their leaves flicker like little jewels a whole bucketful 
Darkness stares back are you even human anymore 
I close the curtains at night not because I think others will see in 
Turn left there but so I do not see the reflection that is pure dark 
I am not afraid of anything oh is that so 
Citizen bear do this place not belong to you 
Unseen I wander through the thorny place of what I no that ain’t it 
No fear can be knew can be none fuck how do you spell it 
I held a heavy jade pendant in my hand once not in this valley in another 
In the range of  limited human experience how many places are there really 
I don’t even have to look at the earth anymore I just have to listen 
Now that hillbilly whisper guides me which way to turn how far up the turn is 
Drawling like moonshine we’re really off the grid now 
Making wild prayers to the green dark which kind do you mean 
Thank god we thought of  her recording this voice both kinds


^^EOP^^

Because this is a monsoon poem
expect to find the words jasmine,
palmyra, Kuruntokai, red; mangoes
in reference to trees or breasts; paddy
fields, peacocks, Kurinji flowers,
flutes; lotus buds guarding love’s
furtive routes. Expect to hear a lot
about erotic consummation inferred
by laburnum gyrations and bamboo
syncopations. Listen to the racket
of wide-mouthed frogs and bent-
legged prawns going about their
business of mating while rain falls
and falls on tiled roofs and verandas,
courtyards, pagodas. Because such
a big part of you seeks to understand
this kind of rain — so unlike your cold
rain, austere rain, get-me-the-hell-
out-of-here rain. Rain that can’t fathom
how to liberate camphor from the vaults
of the earth. Let me tell you how little
is written of mud, how it sneaks up
like a sleek-gilled vandal to catch hold
of your ankles. Or about the restorative
properties of mosquito blood, dappled
and fried against the wires of a bug-zapping
paddle. So much of monsoon is to do
with being overcome — not from longing
as you might think, but from the sky’s
steady bludgeoning, until every leaf
on every unremembered tree gleams
in the abyss of postcoital bliss.
Come. Now sip on your masala tea,
put your lips to the sweet, spicy skin
of it. There’s more to see — notice
the dogs who’ve been fucking on the beach,
locked in embrace like an elongated Anubis,
the crabs scavenging the flesh of a dopey-
eyed ponyfish, the entire delirious coast
with its philtra of beach and saturnine
clouds arched backwards in disbelief.
And the mayflies who swarm in November
with all their ephemeral grandeur to die
in millions at the behest of light, the geckos
stationed on living room walls, cramming
fistfuls of wings in their maws. Notice
how hardly anyone mentions the word death, even though the fridge leaks
and the sheets have been damp for weeks.
And in this helter-skelter multitude
of gray-greenness, notice how even the rain
begins to feel fatigued. The roads and sewers
have nowhere to go, and like old-fashioned pursuers
they wander and spill their babbling hearts
to electrical poles and creatures with ears.
And what happens later, you might ask,
after we’ve moved to a place of shelter,
when the cracks in the earth have reappeared?
We dream of wet, of course, of being submerged
in millet stalks, of webbed toes and stalled
clocks and eels in the mouth of a heron.
We forget how unforgivably those old poems
led us to believe that men were mountains,
that the beautiful could never remain
heartbroken, that when the rains arrive
we should be delighted to be taken
in drowning, in devotion.


^^EOP^^




For Pos Moua



What is the name for an antelope
          who grazes inside a dream 
then vanishes into the
                          nebula’s brush. 
                   What is the face
for refurbishing grammar 
              at each comma’s lip.
                   Whose identity never 
remembers the shape of beige.
   What is the word 
                          for how to conjure
             the sigh of a line hushed 
     beneath the flap of a thousand
shifting plumes. 
What is the body of a
             garden where a crescent 
                    despairs, drifts beneath
   the melt of amber. 
The season is always growing
out its hooves. 
                          One cradlesong
           of your leaving is not larger 
    than the forest of your arrival. To make you a noun forever. 
                A loss of you
cannot be equal to the loss of you.


^^EOP^^

Poised on a bridge, streetlights
on either shore, a man puts
a saxophone to his lips, coins
in an upturned cap, and a carousel 
in a piazza begins to turn:
where are the gates to paradise?
A woman leans over an outstretched
paper cup — leather workers sew 
under lamps: a belt, wallet, purse — 
leather dyed maroon, beige, black — 
workers from Seoul, Lagos, Singapore — 
a fresco on a church wall depicts 
the death of a saint: a friar raises
both hands in the air — on an airplane,
a clot forms in a woman’s leg
and starts to travel toward her heart —  
a string of notes riffles the water;
and, as the clot lodges, at a market
near lapping waves, men unload
sardines in a burst of argentine light.


^^EOP^^

1


You may find at the market a casual comment swerves into  conversation that’s deeply metaphysical with a young man by  produce.

He wears a white T and jeans, ordinary yet careful about his food.

“Every time I meditate, I begin in space among the stars,” he says.

“Many of these beings,” he continues, “are not physically 3-D, so it’s frustrating to describe them.”

“I have the impression their silver color comes from within.”

“They look at me with tremendous love from almond-shaped eyes.”

“There’s no sunlight. The whole cloud structure is luminous and the ground crystalline.”

“A lot of purple and blue, like twilight.”

It’s a complex, partly inarticulate narrative, perhaps because he feels I won’t believe him, yet he’s spontaneous.

I don’t need to question the reality of his story.

He’s sincere.

 
2


There’s more energy now as heat, connectivity, radio waves, data, X-rays, and all kinds of interactions.

We operate with higher electrical current inside, which can  rejuvenate you physically by the nature of connectivity, moving  freely around the body.

The next week, smiling, mid-sentence, “seeing Earth from deep space, blue and alive.”

More often now, ETs are discussed at the co-op, also, coincidence, spirit molecules, time tunnels, and quanta uncertainty, since we’re close to The Institute.

I like that he expresses himself to me as a kind of witness in transition.

He’s read my work, and thinks me more knowledgeable than I am, since my poems aren’t true.

“Pleiadians create new visuals through which I can imagine,” he says.

My care is required for witness to resonate energetically with listener, however nonchalant I appear.

The more compassion one has for non-normal experiences of others, the sooner consciousness will shift toward the stars.

To him, this means shifting the ethical structure of communicating a narrative.

“I think of myself in a service capacity.”

 
3


“One silvery insect was seven feet tall; I shook his claw and we  conversed.”

“Sometimes reptiles hoard crystals to send and receive information.”

“They can space-travel versions of themselves here, as snakes.”

“Lipids in a membrane behave like that, channeling the atmosphere.”

At home I write, “The membrane is like a liquid crystal to the sky.”

Next week, in line, he’s with a beautiful woman with a worn face who knows me.

She’s not well, and she wants me to visit them and their animals.

“They know they don’t end when they die,” she says; “It’s sad they’re leaving, but it’s voluntary.”

“They’ve relatives on other planets, sentient beings with the right to vote.”

“Have you ever watched an animal and suddenly it disappears?” he chips in.

Witness involves a significance equivalent to truth.

“The whole idea of visiting another planet, communicating with a being from another world, to me that’s spiritual.”

 
4


“When they speak, they subtly vary certain sounds; I hear words, but their sound carries different meaning to my body.”

“Some words I read weren’t there when I began.”

“Use these new words, enhanced by your imagining, to allow our  dimension to emerge.”

“Imagination stabilizes the shift.”

In Santa Fe, in Tucson, Lima, La Paz, people see extraterrestrials.

When I step outside, a velvety multitude of moths and insects,  transparencies, on my screen door whirls up to the porch light.

Milky Way shines 3-D with white clottings and dark rifts, covering the ground and trees with phosphorescence.

Comets, asteroids from deep space, planets moving at will, contribute  to this glamour of wonder.

He shows me how to pull frequency, starlight, down through his body into the ground, and I try it; I’m more open now.

I can carry more light, which fuses with similar energies in mass  consciousness.

Earth will radiate this consciousness as a star or sun on horizons of his other worlds.

“Let us hold that portal open for you, in the form of your little crush on him, of light streaming down, and feel a surrounding new ideal,” they say to me.

“Now, imagine yourself in the Pleiades.”

“You wish to give a present to the source, like compassion or rainwater  from home.”

Early on, I divined that this book already exists in the future.

After all, I’d thought of it; it’s a probability, somewhere, complete, on a shelf.

My intention is to seek that future edition and consult it to create this one, the original, for you.
                

^^EOP^^


 


 


 


 


 


 


^^EOP^^

Someone is in the kitchen washing the dishes.
Someone is in the living room watching the news. 
Someone in a bedroom is holding a used stamp
with tweezers and adding it to his collection. 
Someone is scolding a dog, barking now for
decades, a different dog for each of the decades. 
Someone is reading the paper and listening to
a baseball game on the radio at the same time —  
At the base of the altar, you drop some coins
into a wooden box and the lights reveal the vast, 
worn painting in front of you. The holy subject
is illuminated for a few minutes before it is dim 
again. There are churches all over Italy where
you can do this. The smell of incense, stone —  
Someone is taking the ashes out of the small
cave of the fireplace, though this might have been 
a hundred years ago, when the house was new
and we didn’t live in it. Someone is writing 
a letter on thin blue paper. Someone is putting
down the needle onto a spinning record, just so. 
On the couch, someone is sleeping. Upstairs,
someone is looking into the bathroom mirror —  
While we were waiting for her surgery to finish,
I walked around the hospital and came across 
a waiting room that had an enormous aquarium.
The black fish with red stripes, the yellow fish 
with blue stripes, the triangle fish, the cylinder
fish, the little orange schools and the cellophane 
glints of their quick turns in the box of water,
among arrangements of coral, the city of bones —  
Someone is walking down the creaking staircase
in the dark, a hand sliding on the rail. Someone 
is on the telephone, which means nobody else
can use it for another hour. Someone in his room 
is doing homework, me or someone almost like
me, twenty, fifty years ago. Someone is reading 
in her room. Someone is talking to the gray wall.
Someone is talking to the gray wall. In summer, 
on a hot afternoon, someone peels at a corner
of wallpaper and sees more wallpaper beneath —  
I used to think that to write poems, to make art,
meant trying to transcend the prosaic elements 
of the self, to arrive at some essential plane, where
poems were supposed to succeed. I was wrong.


^^EOP^^

                    
                    
                    For a place I hate, I invoke you often. Stockholm’s: I am eight years old and the telephone poles are down, the power plant at the edge of town spitting electricity. Before the pickup trucks, the strip malls, dirt beaten by Cherokee feet. Osiyo, tsilugi. Rope swung from mule to tent to man, tornadoes came, the wind rearranged the face of the land like a chessboard. This was before the gold rush, the greed of engines, before white men pressing against brown women, nailing crosses by the river, before the slow songs of cotton plantations, the hymns toward God, the murdered dangling like earrings. Under a redwood, two men signed away the land and in history class I don’t understand why a boy whispers sand monkey. The Mexican girls let me sit with them as long as I braid their hair, my fingers dipping into that wet black silk. I try to imitate them at home — mírame, mama — but my mother yells at me, says they didn’t come here so I could speak some beggar language. Heaven is a long weekend. Heaven is a tornado  siren canceling school. Heaven is pressed in a pleather booth at the Olive Garden, sipping Pepsi between my gapped teeth, listening to my father mispronounce his meal.
                

^^EOP^^

I have come to collect the various species of America:
    ruby-spotted, tigers, kites & pipevines — an armory
of wings & two-week bodies. The room swells openly
    & I ascend to the top —  
              I am separate from the boy
                 who swats persistently. 
Tucked in the corner of a window, a white morpho,
    the only kind to perch long enough for me to satisfy
my collecting — its lunar afterglow still hanging
    as I pulse & pace to get a closer look. 
I am separate from the boy who climbs a nearby tower
    & shouts for his father. 
Perhaps I am half of this — a set of dots for eyes,
    spine for spine, my insides half my father’s — 
half my mother’s. Kuv tus ntsuj plig unlike the fate
    of quick bodies, sovereign cavities, mother
whose torso fell early in harvest — a bed of muscle
    to hold her from splitting in two —  
                                         & do we hear it? 
As in a fever the boy runs back & does not see
    the white morpho the way I must see it:
my personal moon stone-ripe in this foreign corner,
    mother as fauna forever — inhuman & gazing. 
Then my body a chariot pulled by a pair of orange helicons
    sweeping towards the main water feature (complete with koi). 
This place in which I dream the new body — whole & abiding —  
    I am reaching for the boy now as warden to both the living
& the afterliving — the privilege in every gesture — like mother’s
    first gifts: name & citizenship, poetry always in departure,
the song about the moon falling over, fast in flames — 


^^EOP^^

Baby is unique
                               untainted, original
 
                                               We know she is special
 
 
Every baby is
 
She arrives without baggage to hamper
         
                her way through tunnels or time
 
but she demands attention
 
                              AND HOW
 
Baby
               means to survive
 
aims to be fed, changed, bathed
 
                                                           resorting to no more than a cry
                                             a squirm
 
 
               I observe Baby
now that she
 
                               breathes on her own
 
I swear I’ll keep copious notes
 
  I’ll invite her for dinner or lunch
                                                               for a glug of lukewarm milk
 
I vow to take good care          I WILL
 
Why, then, does she bathe in the sink
 
 
                No one, not a single one, close by to lift her out
 
 
Why, then, does she not grow
 
Neglected Baby                    Pauvre Enfant
 
 
I have asked Baby to forgive me
   Baby, Baby stay          Baby, Baby stay
 
Do not become a stab in my brain
 
                              a chronic ache
a shrouded shout
                              a question mark laid out
 
in the morgue
 
                              daily vivisection
 
vapor-spiral woe going mad
beyond control though the venue is small
                                 and it doesn’t matter where one sleeps
 
 
There is evil in the world
 
It awaits Baby
 
Sins                              even Sloth
                               fiesta through hills and vales
 
               each time she is born
 
 
Morals and meanings stumble
 
                             but Sins know how to tango and tap
 
They make nimble partners
                               on the ballroom floor
 
Like tigers
 
        they stalk their prey
 
                                                      Lead, follow, tight embrace
 
Baby in a frame, a pose
                              in a box
 
 
Tricky moves
                              l
                              a
                              n
                              g
                              u
                              i
                              d               obambulations
 
                                               warm morning          sunny day
 
One, two, three, four         one, two, three, four
 
We touch, we part
 
                                        We yearn for tender mores
 
 
Baby beware
              Baby be quick
 
Jump for the sky
 
                 Match to your flame
 
Watch the flares fly
 
                                                                           Baby, there’s scorch here
 


^^EOP^^

Can’t stop eating you, movie-style extra butter microwave popcorn.
Can’t stop watching you, rented movie about an immigrant family
from Lebanon. Can't help but weep, seeing the family wave
 
goodbye to relatives in the Beirut airport—tear salt mixing with
popcorn salt. Can’t hide my mess, myself from the friend beside me.
Can’t answer his question, Does it remind you of your family, leaving China?
 
I want to say, No, it’s completely different, which in many ways it is, but really
I’m remembering what a writer friend once said to me, All you write about  is being gay or Chinese—how I can’t get over that, & wonder if it’s true,
 
if everything I write is in some way an immigrant narrative or another
coming out story. I recall a recent poem, featuring fishmongers in Seattle,
& that makes me happy—clearly that one isn’t about being gay or Chinese.
 
But then I remember a significant number of Chinese immigrants
live in Seattle & how I found several of the Pike Place fishmongers
attractive when I visited, so I guess that poem's about being gay
 
& Chinese, too. So I say to my friend, I'm not sure, & keep eating
the popcorn. Thank god we chose the giant “family size” bag. Can’t stop
the greasy handfuls, noisy mouthfuls. Can’t eat popcorn quietly.
 
Later, during my friend’s smoke break, still can’t come up with a worthy
response to his radical queer critique of homonormativity, of monogamy,
domesticity, front lawn glory. These middle-class gays picking out
  garden gnomes, ignoring all the anti-racist work of decolonization that still needs to be done—don’t you think they’re lame? I say, Yeah, for sure,
but think, marriage, house, 1 kid, 2 cats—how long have I wanted that?
 
Could I give that up in the name of being a real queer? Probably can’t.
& it’s like another bad habit I can’t give up. Eating junk, can’t. Procrastinating,
can’t. Picking scabs, can’t. Being friends with people who challenge
 
my beliefs & life plans, can’t. Reading & believing in Ayn Rand, though?
Can, Brief phase as a Christian because I liked the cross as an accessory? Can.
WWJD? Can. White heterosexist patriarchy? Can. America . . . can’t.
 
Can’t help but think, when we get back to the movie, how it was my father’s
decision to move here, not my mother’s, just like the parents on screen.
Can’t stop replaying my mother’s walk onto the plane, carrying me,
 
though I was getting too old for it, holding me, my face pressed into her
hair, her neck, as she cried, quietly—can’t stop returning to this scene of leaving,
can’t stop pausing the scene, thinking I’ve left something out again,
 
something else my mother told me. Like my grandmother at the airport,
how she saw my small body so tied to my mother’s body, & still she doubted,
she had to say, You better not lose him. & my mother kept that promise
 
till she couldn’t, she lost me, in the new country, but doesn’t
that happen to all parents & their children, one way or another,
& don’t we need to get lost? Lost, dizzy, stubbly, warm, stumbling,
 
whoa—that’s what it felt like, 17, kissing a boy for the first time.
Can’t forget it. Can’t forget when my mother found out & said, This would never have happened if we hadn’t come to this country.
 
But it would’ve happened, every bit as dizzy, lost, back in China.
It didn’t happen because of America, dirty Americans. It was me,
my need. My father said, You have to change, but I couldn’t, can’t
 
give you up, boys & heat, scruff & sweet. Can’t get over you. Trying to get
over what my writer friend said, All you write about is being gay or Chinese. 
Wish I had thought to say to him, All you write about is being white
  or an asshole. Wish I had said, No, I already write about everything—
& everything is salt, noise, struggle, hair,
carrying, kisses, leaving, myth, popcorn,
 
mothers, bad habits, questions.
 


^^EOP^^

A book with poems
about Bessie Smith,
Marilyn Monroe,
Queen Elizabeth,
William Tell,
W.B. Yeats,
Ted Hughes,
Sitting Bull,
an otter, a fox, and a hare
won the Pulitzer Prize
in the first year
of the war. 
In the second year,
the year of insurgency,
of bridges, corpses,
blindfolds, and dogs,
a poet who wrote
about the only species
that commits suicide
received the prize. 
In the year of boycotts
and stained fingertips,
the third of the war,
the prize went
to a retired life insurance executive
who lived on acreage
near the village of Garland,
Nebraska. 
Disappearance,
from one life
to another,
was the subject
of the prizewinner
in the year of growing
sectarian violence,
the fourth of the war,
also the year of verdict
and hanging. 
In the fifth year,
of surge
and black water,
the civil war continued,
and the prize
was given to a book
about our civil war,
which ended
143 years earlier. 
In the sixth year,
the prize was granted
to a poet who wrote a lovely poem
about war, the war
in Europe,
where white men
killed each other
by the millions;
his poem
still mentioned an Arab,
a young man who performs
an act of purification,
removing hair
from his body,
before flying
a plane into an office building,
an act that took place
fifty-eight years after the war
the poem is actually about. 
The prize was shared
in the sixth year of the war,
the other book
evoking pleasures
(of family, beaches, and dogs)
and horrors
(of young men
purifying their bodies
with speed
and conviction). 
In the seventh year,
the year of ceasefire
and effigy,
the prize was presented
to a book about loss,
memory,
and the continuum of time;
the book was named
after a dog
in the sky. 
The war went on,
for eight years now,
and many
soldiers
(300,000)
were returned home,
and many
others
(not soldiers,
too many to count)
were returned
to the earth;
this was the year
of exit strategies,
and a book described as filled
with “little thought-bombs”
won the Pulitzer Prize. 
In the year of renaming,
the ninth, a new dawn
replaced freedom,
and the prizewinner
had served
as United States Poet Laureate
in the war’s sixth,
seventh, and eighth years. 
The last year,
the year of withdrawal,
the prize was given to a book
named after life
on another planet,
which is a yearning
for another way to live,
which is also
another way to die. 
Long after life on Earth
the depleted uranium
in the Tigris
will reach its half-life,
four and a half billion years
after the tenth year of the war,
which is
the end of time.


^^EOP^^

Give me a church
made entirely of salt.
Let the walls hiss
and smoke when
I return to shore. 
I ask for the grace
of a new freckle
on my cheek, the lift
of blue and my mother’s
soapy skin to greet me. 
Hide me in a room
with no windows.
Never let me see
the dolphins leaping
into commas 
for this water-prayer
rising like a host
of sky lanterns into
the inky evening.
Let them hang 
in the sky until
they vanish at the edge
of the constellations — 
the heroes and animals
too busy and bright to notice.


^^EOP^^

Dreaming of one day being as fearless as a mango.
 
As friendly as a tomato. Merciless to chin & shirtfront.
 
Realizing I hate the word “sip.”
 
But that’s all I do.
 
I drink. So slowly.
 
& say I’m tasting it. When I’m just bad at taking in liquid.
 
I’m no mango or tomato. I’m a rusty yawn in a rumored year. I’m an arctic attic.
 
Come amble & ampersand in the slippery polar clutter.
 
I am not the heterosexual neat freak my mother raised me to be.
 
I am a gay sipper, & my mother has placed what’s left of her hope on my brothers.
 
She wants them to gulp up the world, spit out solid degrees, responsible grandchildren ready to gobble.
 
They will be better than mangoes, my brothers.
 
Though I have trouble imagining what that could be.
 
Flying mangoes, perhaps. Flying mango-tomato hybrids. Beautiful sons.
 


^^EOP^^

                    
                    
                    I’ve been sad and can’t find a seasonal sequence. I go forward then my order reverses and it’s winter again two years ago, with that sticky ice that lost your footing as you gripped that container of Greek yogurt you brought to the doctor’s, even when you couldn’t speak; you only darted your eyes with a fear that continually registered in your pupil size. You clutched your sets of things. I am full of what are sets of things I know well then I go backwards and I don’t have any sets of things. I see your pink-stained washcloth from your wool coat. Your cerebellum tumor is inside with your other tumors but I don’t know it’s there yet neither do you. It appeared and controlled your brain and the things you couldn’t hold. I wonder what things really are, if they are just a set of symbols we sequence and then find purposeful. I wonder if they are like rituals that we learn for our brain. We have those for our body and those for our brain. I look at you — you are alive — and you breathe labored breaths then you died. There, in the hospital bed, when I let time lapse not knowing how to hold you. I let you die for seven days. Your daughter, bigger than I am, could hold you. She could use her muscles to grip you, but I couldn’t hold you, even though you lost forty pounds your last month. I couldn’t find the sequence because I reversed everything into its pain cycle and you didn’t want me to watch you die but I couldn’t understand how everyone could let it happen and I could too, but only if I could let it fall into its hole, its awkward sequence, around death; it’s not awkward it’s just not right. I could make as many intuitive decisions, and many logical sequences occurred around your treatments, but I didn’t know you were stepping out of sequence, and treatments are not producing remedies, and I left myself at the side of the hospital bed. You were in another light, exiting slowly. I thought the sequence of grieving would banish all the anxiety but it came back this year. I became debilitated. I have a debilitating anxiety that I thought was gone.  I have too many anxious sequences now and they are blurring meaning. They are blurring my truths like time-lapses and I don’t rush to find the joy of the occurrence without looking for the traps, and my logic, and my stumbling out into another bed that places me in this now-future and you don’t see me because you are no longer alive with me and I can’t rectify this sequence. And I worry that when I love him he will die too. I can’t happen into its learning like it’s wisdom. It’s still deeply unconscious to hold this fear after I banished worry because I looked it in the eyes and it was real and I felt I knew what it looked like. It’s the unknowing learning that I was deeply afraid to imagine and yet it’s your empty bed, your empty closet, you’re empty of the spirited you that gave you to me, in that human way we come to rely upon and that shames us so. And every night of this thinking is a long night of this thinking. Do you fall into bed with us, and I have no idea of this? I’d love to think it’s so, and we have room for your sets of things.
                

^^EOP^^

                    
                    
                    So we told him to tell those dudes to meet at the park, on a Friday night, 7 o’clock, and they would get the surprise of their lives. I was working a shift at the grocery store, the stiff apron covered in flour and scarred with dirt, wet from the spray nozzle a crooked crane in my hand. One of us had borrowed an enormous Cadillac. Racially inclusive casting to some, hiring kids from the neighborhood to us. What I remember was how much I wanted to go. It wasn’t so much that we were going to beat the shit out of fake roughnecks from the burbs who had no clue what they had coming. It was because I wanted to be one of the ants in a swarm. All my life I hid in the library reading about Greek heroes smiting their enemies. My best friend in the bunch was trying to convince me to skip out of work, even if it meant getting fired. I owed this minimum wage job nothing. My paychecks mostly went to my mom anyways. This was the critical moment in the hero’s journey and you’re going to miss it, he told me, though for sure he did not use those words. Of course I did not go — not because of cowardice, but for the much more boring reason that it did not seem proper for me to break the promise I made when I took this shitty job, to be there when I said I would, to clean what I would clean, break down what I would break down. They drove to that park as the dusk broke like a bloody egg over the nearby lake, blasting Ice Cube the entire way, his song disparaging Koreans seemingly not bothering the one Korean in the crew, and the suburban boys never even showed up. I am guessing they just smoked a bit and shouted over the too loud music and fit back into the warehouse of a car that could carry their stupid boy bodies over the roads, a Cadillac become Pegasus, none of our dreams having wings.
                

^^EOP^^

The couple is traveling up the mountain.
They have been traveling a long time to get to the mountain.
They left early with their son who strums
sweet songs with his fingers,
songs his mother sang when she was young,
singing sweetly like him for all that was yet to come. 
In the morning they saw snow on the mountain,
waking as if to another country,
far away from rain on the island of orchids
where smoke is indistinguishable from mist, rain from stone.
They wanted to get there before the snow melted,
before it vanished like a memory. 
They left early, leaving the house they had built
in the forest, the house that had aged with them,
skin as dry as the logs they threw into evening fires.
Before the son could talk, he walked among the trees,
dreamed where roots lifted as if to let the earth breathe,
resting to the sounds of his parents pulling, clearing, dragging,
the sounds he later understood as what needs tending. 
The boy would climb the ladder to the loft,
survey the trees and, peering through a curtain of leaves,
proclaim himself ruler of all that he saw.
His mother and father moved in and out of the mist,
lumpy shadows lifting rocks, carrying water, planting
heart-shaped flowers, speaking wordlessly to each other. 
The boy is alone in the back seat as they drive past
the tin-roofed town, the market where under blue waves of tarp
orchids spray out of buckets,
bananas hang like tropical chandeliers,
coffee beans slide down waxy pyramids
and vendors fan at the jeweled flies,
keeping fish on ice. 
His fingers pluck single notes,
random at first and then combined
as if his fingers could find a way to string
his thoughts the way the road progressed
past the last house, the last fern, the last
tree sparkling fireworks of red blossoms.
Pickup trucks hauling snow speed down the mountain,
racing to unload the precious cargo
for children who will run from TV sets
to fall like angels in small fenced yards. 
The man is thinking about another woman
as he climbs the slopes into clouds.
It is all confusion — a whiteout he must negotiate,
the puny engine unsuitable for the elevation, the dangerous road conditions.
The woman is wondering how she will ever be able to leave him.
The boy strums the guitar, strums and looks out the window. 
They break into sky, a blue unimaginable in the dome of the forest.
The white glare hits their eyes like splintered glass.
Clouds erupt in a thousand directions,
tumbling below them like a cascade of white water.
Observatories rise above the snow.
At this hour, even though the gigantic lenses are shut,
someone is watching the stars,
predicting the trajectory of orbits
spinning out of control.


^^EOP^^

A blue and green city, with the sun rising behind it, just not swiftly enough
Don’t worry about being perfect. Just make sure you have some juice left in the pump 
I have many other remedies on hand, not just history’s bags of sumptuous soot
Hello, I am beauty’s representative; I work in the self-improvement sector 
Don’t worry about being perfect. Just make sure you have some juice left in the pump
How do you see yourself on the material plane of observed  phenomena 
Hello, I am beauty’s representative; I work in the self-improvement sector
Have you ever been sideswiped by a bad investment in love 
How do you see yourself on the material plane of observed  phenomena
You might need a reevaluation, an estimate, or an era to expire 
Have you ever been sideswiped by a bad investment in love
Before you decide that you are nothing more than a clump or splatter 
You might need a reevaluation, an estimate, or an era to expire
Have you learned how to remove yourself from every mirror you pass 
Before you decide that you are nothing more than a clump or splatter
Let me tell you about the palm trees on the horizon of your future 
Have you learned how to remove yourself from every mirror you pass
A blue and green city, with the sun rising behind it, just not swiftly enough 
Let me tell you about the palm trees on the horizon of your future
I have many other remedies on hand, not just history’s bags of sumptuous soot


^^EOP^^




abdominal and/or epigastric pain, digestive issues, heart pain



could the opium have gone bananas
tripped a deeper horror? 
say the chiu chau defeat the green gang
take control of the comprador colony
make a chungking mansion
out of every high-rise tower 
n tu yueh-sheng n chiang kai-shek
kick mao tse-tung in his long march
and blast chinese workers back
to american levels of oppression 
fragrant harbor as chicago of the east
all the girls go suzie
and a thousand gross-out william holdens
fantan the port 
reveals america’s fascist sympathies sooner
land of the free goes all man in the high tower
and china industrializes quicker
on gangster cash
enters the arms race
and puts mutual assured destruction on notice 
what reversal would right its left then? 
say hannah arendt waxes total recall
n chow yun-fat schwarzeneggers
our cyborg asses all the way to daddy cool
too cool for nuclear winter school


^^EOP^^

1 
I close my eyes and I see a dot.
It becomes a spot of light.
It grows into the size of a person
who distances away
until it returns to a spot of light,
a dot.   2 
Like communion bread,
your words dissolve in my mouth
and never die.   3 
I don’t care under which sky — 
just sing your song till the end.   4 
The bone-city I am choked by
is also salt
also sugar
also boiling water
in the kettle with no lid.   5 
Ask not how many houses were built.
Ask how many residents remained in the houses.   6 
The flame opens like a giant plant
swallowing them one by one
with their lost and found sheep.   7 
She whose song
has no beginning
nor end —
She whose voice faded
into stars and moons —
Where is she?
Where is she?   8 
Dreams come in two types:
vertical and horizontal.
Tell me the shape of your dream
and I will tell you where you come from.   9 
Fire and light
both sting.
We go to sleep when the other half
of the globe wakes up.
Night and day
crammed with dreams.   10 
Your look
passes through me
like lightning.   11 
The butterfly that flew a moment ago
over the killed ones
was the soul
searching for home.   12 
Our time together
has ripened
and smashed like berries.   13 
Can your camera capture
fear in the eyes
of mother-sparrow, see
the broken eggs in her eyes?   14 
A little air means so much for the bird.
In the air, a full world extends.
The clouds gather and then separate.
The leaves wave to each other.
For the bird, everything hangs in the air.   15 
The pomegranate seeds
scattered with our steps
were not from heaven.   16 
My paper boat that drifted into the river
with the world behind it
had a special note.
It may arrive one day,
although late,
all truths come late.   17 
Dried leaves
over there
our first yearnings.   18 
The shoes by the door
will not fit them when they return.   19 
She counts the pebbles by her fingers.
The other pebbles under water
are losses outside her hands.   20 
Specks of sand
scattered
from the fingers
our people.   21 
The sun reveals
a hole in the boat,
a glow in the fins
of fish still breathing.   22 
The day and the night
divide our steps on the road
as they equally
divide the world.   23 
I was born.
I write poetry.
I will die.   24 
Her shadow
is still here
feeding the birds.


^^EOP^^

At a college in Dearborn,
Michigan, I read a poem
about watching girls
at camp hold their breaths
under the showers
so I could see
their breasts swell.
Some people call Dearborn
a hub of “terrorist” activity.
I’ve placed the word terrorist
between quotation marks
because “Arab” or “Muslim”
or “people who look like
the terrorists we fear”
is what they mean.
In the poem about the camp
I also use quotation marks
around the words
“pussy” and “chicken-shit,”
but for different reasons — 
I’m waiting in line
to jump over a dam
into a river where other boys
have drowned, and I hesitate,
until someone shouts
“pussy” and “chicken-shit”
and you don’t need me
to tell you what I did,
what I had to do.
A famous poet says
for a speaker to express
authority, he must possess
three virtues, one of which
is passion.
After the reading
a young man
approached me.
He turned out to be
the younger brother of someone
I knew and wrote
a poem about, a lifeguard
who saved a drowning girl.
The child pulled from the pool
could have been a boy — 
I don’t remember,
it doesn’t matter.
I care about what I’m saying — 
that matters. Passion
is a deep-seated conviction,
says the famous poet.
You need to believe
that I believe.
I told the young man
in Dearborn about his brother
saving a life, as if
he didn’t already know.
He listened, politely,
until I stopped talking
and then he said
I was out of line and had acted
inappropriately. How,
I asked. He said I shouldn’t
use words like that.
Which words, I asked.
He was getting flustered.
I asked him again.
I wanted him to say
“pussy” and “chicken-shit.”
He said I should not use words
like that in front of women.
By “women,” he meant
Arab and Muslim women.
Maybe he meant
all women. I don’t know,
I didn’t ask.
A lot of Arabs and Muslims
live in Dearborn.
That’s why some people
think of it as a hotbed
of Islamic terrorism.
The phrase “a hotbed
of Islamic terrorism”
should probably appear
between quotes every time
people use it, even if
they are Arab or Muslim,
like me. The other virtues
a speaker should possess,
says the famous poet,
are discrimination
and inclusiveness.
By “discrimination”
he means the speaker
should come to his position
without ignoring but considering
opposed positions,
and finding them wanting.
By “inclusiveness” he means
the speaker immediately
sees connections
between the subject at hand
and other issues.
Also, the speaker needs
to make the reader believe
he is doing his subject justice,
that he is relating it
to the world.
This makes his voice
communal, speaking not
for any community
but with the goal
of making communities,
the first of which is
that of speaker and reader.
The young man speaking
on behalf of Arab and Muslim
women told me that my poems
were “indecent”
and “immoral,”
that I should be ashamed,
that I was a terrible Muslim.
“Go fuck yourself,”
is what I wanted to say,
but — maybe he was right — 
so I smiled, I thanked him
for listening, and I told him
I loved his brother, and, “Please,
will you say I said hello.”


^^EOP^^

The house collapsed and I was crushed under the rubble,
pulverized, but here I am,
walking around as if I were alive —  
the swain,
with an oxeye daisy in my buttonhole,
the bitter voluptuary, never satisfied,
the three-legged dog,
the giant under the tiny parasol at
the Fontaine-de-Vaucluse,
the only Abyssinian in the choir of the
Abyssinian Baptist Church. 
(Somebody must have done a self-portrait of me.) 
Just amazing. I think I could wrap my arms all the way around
the 24,901-miles-circumferenced Earth.


^^EOP^^

Lugging my exploded home
And trampling on my own name,
I trek to a yearned deformation. 
Imperial chaos hacks flesh,
Sends the unmeshed toward a
Capsized horizon. They dream
Of clean graphic design, houses
That don’t collapse onto cribs. 
Invaded, the invaded invade
The invaders’ kitchens and,
Soon enough, bedrooms. Look,
They’re invading each other. 
Shut up, smug face, you know
Nothing of ugliness, even that
Which you’ve long bankrolled.


^^EOP^^

                    
                    
                    I came to encounter a coyote
I left all sorts of things behind
You couldn’t get on a plane unless you traveled light
Back then there were weight restrictions for planes, they don’t have them any longer, American bodies have no restrictions, they’ve become so big that there aren’t restrictions on the weight of bodies or luggage any more, but back then, I can’t even count how many times I picked up my bags and stepped on the scale, no matter how many times I weighed myself, I still wasn’t the least bit lighter
Not knowing what else to do, I took out my books
Then I took out my clothes
Then I went to the bathroom and defecated
Then I took out more clothes
Then I threw up
Then I took out more books
Then I stripped off all my clothes, held my bag, and stood on the scale, but I wasn’t the least bit lighter
Know what I mean? That’s what it means to go on a trip
That’s what it means to leave the place where you live
Trips and then more trips
There are things you need to carry with you to survive
Not knowing what else to do, I called my husband, filed for divorce, talked to my children and told them Mommy wouldn’t be home for a while, in other words, it was only after I abandoned my relationships, my attachments, and even my language that I was light enough to get on the plane, when I arrived, all I had was a few changes of clothes, some cash, my passport, my visa waiver, my credit cards, and an  international driver’s license
In California, the sky was blue, there was nothing but seashore, wild land, and housing developments, it was hazy and hard to see in the evenings, it was as if everything was immersed in mother’s milk, my toes got cold, I bought some socks, but after wearing them three days, the cheap things were ready to fall apart, I looked long and hard at them, feeling like a coyote
(Yeah, I tell people I came alone
But that is not entirely true
I was always thinking about the coyote
The two of us traveling together)
I saw dead raccoons
I saw dead skunks
I smelled them too
Someone I met the first day said to me
The whole place smells like skunk, must be a dead one somewhere
It was an unfamiliar scent, but now I know it well
The whole place smells like skunk, must be a dead one somewhere
I know to say that to people now
In any case, I didn’t see
Any coyotes
(Two traveling together)
Someone in the street
Told me to get the hell out of here
Why had I come? I couldn’t find what I wanted, I had come so far but, get the hell out, this isn’t the place where the coyotes are, they’re farther away, in deeper places, where there is nothing, where there is much more emptiness
So I headed east
From the western edge of the continent to the east
The interstates
With odd numbers run north and south
While even numbers run east and west
Those in the 500s are the bypasses for I-5 (north-south)
Those in the 800s are the bypasses for I-8 (east-west)
I took I-5 south to I-580
I went further south to I-8 then went east
East, east, east
And even further east
In Arizona, I took I-17
At Flagstaff, I took US Route 89
I dashed into a roadside motel, slept, and woke
And started driving again
The morning light shone brilliantly
Each time I stopped to fill up with gas, I bought some brownies, each individually wrapped, I tore off the wrappers with one hand and ate them as I drove, the ridiculously sweet lumps stuck to the roof  of my mouth, when I stopped in front of a motel that night, my fingers didn’t want to leave the steering wheel, at the registration desk, the words I needed to say in English didn’t rise to my lips, even though  I knew them all too well
(Two traveling together)
There was a woman standing at the side of the road, I called out to her in broken English, asking her what was the matter, she answered in what was also broken English
Would you mind taking me to the nearest gas station?
She sat in the passenger’s seat
I’m Navajo
Where are you from?
From California, I answered
No, that’s not what I meant
What tribe are you from? she asked
(Two traveling together)
From Kayenta I took US Route 163 toward Monument Valley
I had heard that coyotes lived there long ago
That it’s an amazing place, the moon rises, the sun sets
I imagined it would be like seeing the ocean
But when I got there, it wasn’t like the ocean at all
Rocks soared into the air
Rocks, rocks, even more rocks
Red rocks
In the dust
I watched the sun set over them
By the time I got back to Route 163, the sun had sunk deep beyond the horizon, the only thing I could see was the road in front of me,  I drove on looking for a place to sleep, but I didn’t see a thing, there wasn’t anything to see, air rushed through my cracked window,  letting out a long, thin, high-pitched whistle
Hii-iuu-uuuuu
Hii-iuu-uuuuu
Like a reed flute
My thin, hard window was slightly open, the wind rushed in but couldn’t escape
Hii-iuuu
Uuu-uuuuu
Uuu-hiiuuuuu
(Two of us heard it)
I drove a long way before spying a large motel, I saw the vacancy sign as I approached, I thought I’d have to drive for hours and hours before finding a place to sleep, I thought I wouldn’t stop, that I’d drive all night without stopping, but the place I found was part of a chain you see in every city, the bed was big and deep, and there was lots of hot water in the tub
(Two of us were there)
The next morning
The car was completely filthy
The whole thing was covered with bright red dirt and sand
The windshield was covered with the splattered bodies of countless insects
No one knew I had slept there, nor that I was leaving, nor which direction I was headed, no one knew
It was a day that invited
Death along the roadside
I hadn’t even driven for five minutes before I saw it —
A single, dead coyote
Lying on its back, legs in the air
(It was both me and
My travel companion, too)
 
Translated from the  Japanese


^^EOP^^

To be a good
ex/current friend for R. To be one last
                                                                       
inspired way to get back at R. To be relationship
advice for L. To be advice
 
for my mother. To be a more comfortable
hospital bed for my mother. To be
 
no more hospital beds. To be, in my spare time,
America for my uncle, who wants to be China
 
for me. To be a country of trafficless roads
& a sports car for my aunt, who likes to go
 
fast. To be a cyclone
of laughter when my parents say
 
their new coworker is like that, they can tell because he wears pink socks, see, you don’t, so you can’t, 
  can’t be one of them. To be the one
my parents raised me to be—
 
a season from the planet
of planet-sized storms.
 
To be a backpack of PB&J & every
thing I know, for my brothers, who are becoming
 
their own storms. To be, for me, nobody,
homebody, body in bed watching TV. To go 2D
 
& be a painting, an amateur’s hilltop & stars,
simple decoration for the new apartment
 
with you. To be close, J.,
to everything that is close to you—
 
blue blanket, red cup, green shoes
with pink laces.
 
To be the blue & the red.
The green, the hot pink.


^^EOP^^

                    
                    
                    I dreamed of you tonight, Wayne Kaumualii Westlake, as I walked down on the sidewalk under plumeria trees with a vog headache looking at the Māhealani moon.

In my need fo’ grindz, and hungry fo’ modernity, I stumbled into the gentrified lights of Whole Foods, dreaming of your manifestos!
    What pineapples and what papayas! Busloads of tourists shopping at night! Bulk aisle full of hippies! Millennials in the kale! Settlers in the Kona coffee! And you, Richard Hamasaki, what were you doing kissing the ripe mangos?

I saw you, Wayne Kaumualii Westlake, broomless, ghostly janitor, sampling the poke in the seafood section and eyeing the smoked fish.
    I heard you ask questions of each: Who butchered the mahimahi? What price opah belly? Are you my ‘aumakua?
    I wandered in and out of the canned goods aisle following you, and followed in my imagination by Sir Spamalot.
    In our bourgeois fancy we strolled through the cooked foods  section tasting hand-churned cheese, possessing every imported delicacy, and whispering to the cashier, “Go fuck yourself.”

Where are we going, Wayne Kaumualii Westlake? The doors of perception close in an hour. Which way does your pakalōlō point  tonight?
    (I touch your book and dream of our huaka‘i in Whole Foods and feel dādā.)
    Will we sail all night through Honolulu streets? The coconut trees no have nuts, tarps up for the homeless, we’ll both be lonely.
    Will we cruise witnessing the ruined empire of America, past pink mopeds in driveways, home to our overpriced apartments?
    Ah, dear uncle, Buddhahead, ghostly poetry teacher, what Hawai‘i did you have when TheBus quit turning its wheels and you arrived in Waikīkī and stood watching the canoes disappear on the murky waters of the Ala Wai?
                

^^EOP^^

It’s about to rain, suddenly
and without mercy.
                                   The rain will be brief, I can tell.
 
but I will be driven inside within earshot
 
of those anxious sounds bent
on occluding my mind
                                        like a pile of unpaid bills
 
—perhaps I will even see the pile of bills.
The rain will be brief, but no matter—I won’t
 
get back outside tonight.
 
~
 
So, I have maybe ten minutes
 
for this to get said
before all is wet and after the fact
 
~
 
because I have only a succession
of chances,
                         most missed.
 
~
 
Cal is finally fast asleep; the machine
that makes the mist that keeps
his trach moist rattles like an idling truck.
 
Simone is plotting something, standing and yelling
in her crib, jumping now,
                                                  her sleep a bad joke.
 
Ten years since last I was alone.
My mind is not my own.
 
~
 
Reading the new poems tonight of my old teacher
—she was never taken with me, not
particularly—I admire her lifelong pursuit
 
of childhood
through art.
 
She has pursued art as though
it is as serious as childhood,
which we all pursue to the end.
 
~
 
And yet, if her poems—ornate as stained glass
leaning against a wall in the glass shop, windows
looking in on almost
                                        nothing—say anything,
 
it is, I am alone; beauty is everything except company, so beauty is nothing, almost.
 
~
 
Does she want what I have? Do I? My poems
lie.
 
The rain is coming. A few drops more and I’ll lose
these letters. Simone still won’t sleep.
 


^^EOP^^

How tense it makes me, reading
poetry, knowing how much I miss, misunderstand,
how only some of the words
resolve under my eyes
                                             into sentences
while others slip by unnoticed,
like a note inscribed on a greeting card
by an aunt who never knew me well.
What I mean is the job is never
done, I’m never through. And I’m not made
for tasks that linger; some
of me is always considering
all the money I owe
to banks and credit card companies
and the kid
                    who kindly bought
me most of my high school lunches
because my dad forgot to send me to school
with a couple of bucks.
                                             Which is of course to say
reading poetry is a metaphor.
Nothing ever
finishes.
 
~
 
So why did I choose poetry?
Maybe because it acknowledges right away
what scares me most,
how the line breaks before
the thought is done, how the line,
a partial thing,
is the measure,
and it’s never enough. My
                                             college love
never did come running back
after I sent her
that photocopied pamphlet
of heartbroke verses,
                                        and my lamentation
did not un-injure my son or
get me back my job.
 
~
 
I woke up panting and confused
from the same nightmare over and over
through childhood—I can’t remember when
it stopped: my task was to build
with colored blocks atop
                                             a floating green
island a kind of little city;
this was urgent—there would be no
forgiveness if it was not complete.
The dream ended
                                   with me standing before
this hovering shard of land
as it hovered away,
my job still undone, and I was
dropped back into my bed to
beg my mother
                              for something she could
understand but not give.
 
It’s hard now not to see it as
a premonition, maybe a preparation
for her dying only a few years
later, her life, my life
like all lives, unfinished.
 
~
 
And so I came to poetry.
 


^^EOP^^

Big smelly bowel movements this blue January morning. 
From the living room TV, a commercial from our TV company: We’re the fastest, the only —  
Meaning, Love us above all others. 
What makes poop more pungent on certain days? 
A question for science. 
From the living room TV: the powerful cite Law, bark Order —  
Meaning, Love us or else. 
Years ago, a teacher said never to use the word “poop” in a poem. 
Today, the icy kiss of the toilet seat wakes me up. 
Today, I poop while my boyfriend shouts from the living room,  Did you hear that, meaning the atomic scientists who say we are now two & a half minutes to midnight. 
But still I marvel whenever poop comes out as one true Platonic tube. 
I am trying to be marvelous. 
& to make my enemies throw up. 
I mean, if you shower with soap & eat well, maintaining consistent gastrointestinal health, you should be ready for a rimjob or other forms of anal play. 
My boyfriend & I are not platonic. 
From the TV: a white supremacist cites Science, barks Two sides to every — 
I mean, up the throat, out the mouth: the fastest, the only way the powerful will let go of their shit. 
I mean, my boyfriend & I are not into scat but if you are I hope your beloved produces the most fragrant, citrusy shit. 
I mean, is “shit” more or less literary than “poop”? 
I mean, one winter night I got sick & pooped the bed. 
& he just got up with me. 
Helped strip the sheets, carry it all to the washer. 
I kept saying, I’m so sorry, shivering, I’m so, I’m sorry. But he said, What? Hey. I love you.


^^EOP^^

My soul is not itself,
A loud jargogle invades the plague of contingency.
 
Of course, I often delicate in a state of confusion,
Especially when I wildly corrade detritus with illusion.
                                                    
Many collages create mayhem, but these days folks
Giggle and kench, hosting bitter tears in their eyes.
 
No one seeks the mockery or scorn of ludibrious games.
Our ailing world is dedicated to erase sanguinolency.
 
Hence the decline of bloodshed in our current wars.
Drones, our best-to-date grade A, silent, unmanned aerial
 
vehicles, our sleek UAVs, aces of launch and leave,
Save lives. SAVE LIVES. Hip, hip, hooray, yippee!?
 
Remote control: surf the Web, site define
In its prime: eye on the screen, eye in the sky.
 
Get it down cold in comfy seats at safe old Creech.
Skill the scan, learn the drill and clinch their cease.
 
The shift is done, a setting sun, and home
To ground round patties on the grill, a jog with the dog,
 
A kiss for kids, drowsy, and wiped, hitting the sheets,
Plus shades down for a fuck, a hug, and a good night's sleep.
 
We've navigated a boundless longinquity.
 
Life is luculent.
 
                                        War is kind.
 


^^EOP^^

Is it the glassy, empty potential
of the unfilled blouses
their prescient capability,
flat as catalogued moths
hung on racks
that require realization?
A poem, for instance,
pulls something thin
over itself.
A transparency with a weird fur collar.
A skin of microscopic dirtiness.
Or, is it the soul comes to clothing
already intricately made.
Seeks a garment
a white horse hair
to enfold its deviation
pink as a petal, foldable as a Kleenex.
It’s raining outside the thrift store at night.
My clothing is stained by strangers.
The poem slips away through slots of lace
liquefied as a fat caterpillar
dressed in the capsule of a  cocoon.


^^EOP^^

o Farrah pharaoh:
the feather up and off
your shoulder—
an absence of pressure.
but the weight
of the guitar and the bass,
the synth and kit—
the all that was all you
ever wanted to do.  the disco
video grain like a leopard skin
or baby powder
tossed at an afro.
                                 someone
blowing in your face gently—
maybe the 80s you were coursing.
you keep changing parts—
this one that,
mother and sister, too.
 
was it you wanted as easy as making
something not you speak you
you spoke it —you say—maybe first:
if you love
you get loved.
the spangle in the air shine
before the light shine it.
the tips of your hair
coming back with they own air.
 


^^EOP^^




¿Cómo es posible que me llamen extranjero?*



A large plastic bag will keep you dry
during the heavy rain storms.
In Tapachula, you have a safe place to rest; ** 
it might be your last chance to call home.
You know there are killers and thieves
who are setting their traps along the way,
and when you are riding on top of it,
watch for the wasps living in the trees.
Don’t fall asleep inside it—you might disappear.
If you are exhausted, jump off and rest.
Follow its tracks until you feel it returning.
The faster it advances, the stronger its pull is.
Don't be fooled—at first it will lure you in
with its steady prowess, but it can slit
a leg off or two, so don't be fooled by its hum.
 
If you jump off, don't just stand there.
And don't run beside its belly either—
No, run away from the pounding. Run like
a ceiling is falling, like people are falling on you.
As for routes, go through Matamoros
for getting into Texas, and for California,
get to Tijuana, but if you cross Nogales
into Arizona, be very careful. You will find
discarded shoes and gutted suitcases in fields.
There are graveyards without names.
No one carries an ID. For others and you,
we give offerings to our clandestino priest
who was killed during the Cristero War. ***                                 
  
Always watch out for the white vans—they
are full of policemen. They drive very slow.
It takes up to six days to cross the desert.
Always carry plenty of water. Ranchers carry guns.
Everything has thorns. At first sight, think twice
before trusting even a good omen.


^^EOP^^

The next morning I felt that our house
had been lifted away from its foundation
during the night, and was now adrift,
though so heavy it drew a foot or more
of whatever was buoying it up, not water
but something cold and thin and clear,
silence riffling its surface as the house
began to turn on a strengthening current,
leaving, taking my wife and me with it,
and though it had never occurred
to me until that moment, for fifteen years
our dog had held down what we had
by pressing his belly to the floors,
his front paws, too, and with him gone
the house had begun to float out onto
emptiness, no solid ground in sight.


^^EOP^^

I tell myself softly, this is how love begins—
the air alive with something inconceivable,
seeds of every imaginable possibility
floating across the wet grasses, under
the thin arms of ferns. It drifts like snow
or old ash, settling on the dust of the roadways
as you and I descend into thickets, flanked
by the fragrance of honeysuckle and white
primrose.
 
I recall how my grandmother imagined
these wanderers were living beings,
some tiny phylum yet to be classified as life.
She would say they reminded her of maidens
decked in white dresses, waltzing through air.
Even after I showed her the pods from which
they sprang, blossoming like tiny spiders,
she refused to believe.
 
Now, standing beside you in the crowded
autumn haze, I watch them flock, emerge from
brittle stalks, bursting upon the world as
young lovers do—trysting in the tall grasses,
resting fingers lightly in tousled hair.
Listen, and you can hear them whisper
in the rushes, gazing out at us, wondering— what lives are these?
 


^^EOP^^

Like newlyweds,
my parents slip out of their clothes.
He puts aside the sweater I chose
for him, she undoes her pearls.
 
They rise up from their old ailments,
their fears of falling, broken hips
and other bad news.
                     Now they dance
barefoot in their living room,
go bowling on a whim.
They garden all day without pain,
calling out like songbirds,
          come see the hollyhocks,
          they have grown so tall!
 
                    Nights, they lie down
like dolls and their sleepless eyes
glide closed. They seem so eager
for morning, I pray they will find each other
                      again and again.
 


^^EOP^^

It sprang up wild along the chain link fence—thick,
with glorious white
and yellow summer blooms, and green tips that we
pinched and pulled for one
 
perfect drop of gold honey. But Dad hated
it—hated its lack
of rows and containment, its disorder. Each
year, he dug, bulldozed,
 
and set fire to those determined vines. But each
year, they just grew back
stronger. Maybe that's why I felt the urge to
plant it that one day
in May, when cancer stepped onto my front porch
and rang the doorbell,
 
loose matches spilling out of its ugly fists.
 


^^EOP^^

                              1
When we were leaving home for the army
you burst into tears on the train.
You said, “I will miss my parents.
I have never travelled that far.”
But you also claimed
it was everyone’s duty to defend the country,
and you would fight the Russian Revisionists
                              to the dead end.
 
I lowered my head and did not cry.
But my mother’s eyes, dimmed with tears,
were striving in the cold wind
to hold back the train going to the North.
 
                              2
On the Northern land
our foot-prints
disappeared in the snow.
The hard ice was slowly
losing its layers.
 
We didn’t have to wear fur hats
on our patrols along the borderline,
and watered our horses at little springs.
 
                              3
At last the rain loosened the black earth.
Azaleas bloomed on the mountain slopes.
 
The woods did not understand war.
The mountains and the rivers did not understand war.
 
But every night we slept
with our clothes on.
 
We were prepared to fight.
 
                              4
The tanks, which played the enemy,
were running through the valley.
Wooden grenades and rubber bazooka-projectiles
started raining towards them.
 
Everything was false,
but we did it seriously.
 
Why did you choose that tank
with a revolving barrel like a gigantic scythe,
to lay an explosive package at its back?
 
It laid you on the ground
and its caterpillar ran over your limbs.
 
We carried you down the hill.
Your blood dropped into a small brook
                              flowing towards the Amur.
 
                              5
White ceilings,
white walls,
white nurses.
Only your black eyes were sliding slowly.
 
Our eyes collided.
You were staring at me
in deadly silence.
 
Can you speak?
Can you hear what others say?
You are two feet shorter than before.
 
You sluggishly turned into your ward
like a startled turtle.
 
Watching your warped back
I was sending off an epoch.
 
                              6
Are you still alive?
 
You are a little dog, abandoned,
often groaning at the door
of my conscience.
 
Tonight, in the long silence
again I am thinking of you.
 


^^EOP^^

Once I have the freedom to say
my tongue will lose its power.
Since my poems strive to break the walls
that cut off people’s voices,
they become drills and hammers.
 
But I will be silenced.
The starred tie around my neck
at any moment can tighten into a cobra.
 
How can I speak about coffee and flowers?
 


^^EOP^^

How should I index myself so that you can retrieve & cut me
               from the 1970 catalogs 
of infant headshots & paste me beside you?
               This I wanted to know 
while the grandfather held up his 1940 photo
               of three men laughing beside a new Buick. He said, 
"If you could identify them, then my life would be changed forever."
               If anyone knows the names 
for paper as vulnerable as skin, then please tell me
               if I find my birth documents 
burned, ripped, or yellowed with information missing,
               or if I don't find them at all? I listened 
as the panelists advised the grandfather to search the database,
               my body like too much information 
unsorted: all errors, useless without a way to see it
               linked to get somewhere. My arms disappearing 
while the grandfather passed his laminated photo around the room.


^^EOP^^




(1970-2001)



After the bullet discharges through the tunnel of his mouth,
               after it shatters
 
the Oklahoma evening, rips through ragweed & across many rivers,
               my apartment in Pittsburgh,
 
the metal clips my arm, slams into a plaster wall,
               & the silence is his
 
body slackening & the black fact of the gun underwater.
 
I compress my wound as his ghost kneels beside his body,
               the bathtub, &
                              as his ghost draws the shower curtain back,
 
I look away. No, I don’t want to know his secrets, why
                              surer hands will tag, bag as evidence.
 
He is a poet. He makes the difficult question of speaking
               a matter of remembering
                              how he shouted the poems he loved.
 
His outbursts were pure country. Yes, rumors circulated,
                              how vets suffer
 
medication, what he saw as a S.E.A.L., how weird,
               & no one could stand
                                             the belabored way he read aloud,
 
& I said all the above & more, & to his face
               when no one was around when he finally caught on, 
I asked him, ‘Why are you quieter? I’ve noticed, & it scares me.’
 
                                                  *
 
Even now I’m busy with details, the dirty work of gathering.
 
Here’s rosemary & some pansies, that’s for thoughts
               rambled to me one Fall afternoon, Cathedral of Learning,
 
how Komunyakaa showed him a way to anchor a moment
               between stillness & approach
 
turning toward tall grass or a woman’s wet hair to braid,
               or how it could lock arms with an enemy,
 
lose to an overwhelming grasp, or listen to the dying
               echo of paradise birds singing
 
so much gibberish, as if a whole life could be reduced to one image
               dangling from a fist & engraved with a number,
 
as if a poem wants only to be identified upon delivery,
               which was why Daniel read Blake,
 
Calvino & Crane for fire & crystal. Why he shut himself up
               with Bishop. Why Stern’s huge breath,
 
why Oppen, Tu Fu & Paz. Lewis & Vollmer mattered
               for their generosities, lines layered like the earth
                              in his face,
 
the reds & browns of his voice deepening to what he pursued,
               half-formed in haze
 
& burrowing underneath to avoid tripwire, & Daniel yelling as he
               plunged after its gray, disappearing shape.
 
                                                  *
 
I listen to his ghost pace the hallway as if barefoot across dirt,
               fronds like unfurled scrolls, rustle.
 
Root scent & rainfall stain his cheeks with welcome, risk.
               He has walked far to finish this conversation between us.
 
He brushes against the wood, taps the doorknob trying to explain
               the jagged web of cracks in my wall,
 
hot metal at the center like a labyrinth chamber
               or the slick tip of a widow
 
hunched over & spinning a bundle or the pure ore from a journey
               toward sublimation, a soul’s treasure,
 
or the soul, itself, lodged in a network & inconsolable
               because wings never guaranteed perfect pitch.
 
                                                  *
 
Daniel, the scar on my arm fades as I read your poems again,
               & the maps you drew
 
time spackles over for a move out west.
 
The twenty that someone taped to my office desk for flowers
               remains unspent,
                              a bookmarker for a Ramses biography.
 
I tried.   I couldn’t find your permanent address.
 
Daniel, the news today proclaims disaster, code orange to survive
               for tomorrow’s headline
 
that you were right could, at any moment, slip under a thicket,
               emerge skittish beside a pile of leaves,
 
its long gray nose & black eyes focused on your movements.
 
How you wrote it down, my friend, held it
               in the starless night
                              & gave it pink fingers with which to scratch back.
 


^^EOP^^

It is no use to beg anymore.
He has begged them many times
to let me speak to the head of the army hospital,
but he’s told nobody will listen to him,
a bad-egg, who only deserves a bullet.
 
“We’ve been ordered to get your skin,”
the squad-leader says, “to repair
the extensive burns of Liu Yi
who risked his own life
saving horses from the burning stable.
Now, let’s go.”
 
They take him to the hill behind the hospital.
 
It’s dinner time
and the loudspeaker is playing music.
Nobody will hear the shot in the woods.
 
They stop at a ruined temple
whose stones, bricks and rafters
have been ripped off by the villagers.
 
In the distance
a light is shining like a glow-worm.
He doesn’t know whether it’s a star or a lamp.
It doesn’t matter now.
He takes it as the pole-star.
His only worry is: I’m not nineteen yet
and my parents will never know
how their son disappeared.
 
“Now you may say something if you want.”
They pull out the towel from his mouth and wait.
 
Suddenly he starts yelling, “I curse all of you,
the whole hospital! All your babies
will have no ass-holes and die at birth!
I curse Liu Yi and his family too!
He and his folks will be struck by thunderbolts!”
They raise their pistols
and he raises his tied hands:
“Long live the Chinese Communist Party!
Long live—”
One pistol fires.
 
He wanted to shout “Chairman Mao,”
but they wouldn’t let him get it out.
 
The bullet hit his penis—
which is the best way to save the skin.
 


^^EOP^^

Guards, please keep your triggers locked.
My camera, maps, and pick are left behind.
 
No spy, I do not come to break the code
Nor tour the warning walls.  No uncle waits
 
To reunite across electric wire,
To touch my face and call it true to his
 
One memory: the burning trees and mud-
Caked women running in the hazy night.
 
No memories, but still my grief has skin
And hands to comb the Han with nets cast deep
 
And hands to comb the Han with nets cast wide
And lips to speak my peace. I can’t recall
 
The distant whistling growing louder when
It flashed across the dark, careened, then boomed
 
And echoed in the crash of pummeled walls
Collapsing in the strobe-lit dark, while late
 
Alarms began to wail of fighter jets
Diving low in rows for gunner range.
 
I wasn’t with the people trapped inside
Mistaken targets; throngs of people fled,
 
Ignored the old ones stumbling, children, parts
Of bodies hurled with rubble, shrapnel pierced
 
Debris, and smoke. A sister stopped to check
Her brother slipping down her back and strapped
 
To his, a kettle came untied and spilled.
Its grain was lost to sludge, cold and chance,
 
The midnight raids on fallout shelters smashed
By aircraft, tanks forever on the move
 
To battle fronts while people streamed against
Advancing troops to safety. Where was that?
 
It’s hard to tell when lines deployed in all
Directions, rivers soured by floating fish.
 
Yet hunger had to eat, examined hair for lice,
Dug roots and worms. The stench of shit and muck,
 
The stains of vomit, rags bound tight to stop
The spread of gangrene, sores mosquitoes sucked
 
Or numbed by fever’s spell, exposed, each eye
Ahead on sunset, nights of transit, hush.
 
The people wound through hills till nitrous gas
Lashed their faces peeled to bone. They shone
 
Absurdly white in morning fields of charred
Anemone awaiting help, return,
 
Some sign. “I’ll find you” promised. No one could
Identify their paths by what remained.
 
Missing children hid inside ravines
Or crept outside their hiding place to search
 
The ruins, found a metal strip and bent
It back-and-forth into a knife to fend
 
Off men who tried to snatch the can of food
That they had stolen as a barefoot gang,
 
Or stayed beside her broken body spread
Into a shape of loss I cannot trace
 
To find her soldier-lover marching south
Or husband killed in action. Nameless men
 
Forced themselves upon her, cupped some snow
To pack a ball inside her pleading mouth?
 
I can’t go on, can’t imagine how
She bore this child though I could be that child
 
Of mixed-up rivers, hard attempts to keep
A secret. Why return to unknown names
 
I feel are mine when snipers watch this ground?
While they remain, how can I begin?


^^EOP^^




                                                  “I want to understand the joy I felt
                                                                      as I was letting him go.”
                                                                                        —Hwang Jini



As I listened to the fabric of his jacket
               assume the casual shape of leave-taking.
 
I learned how to unhinge form from breath
               unbind & unknot the numinous black,
 
so that again I was a woman & an artist
               whose ravens fell onto the ondol floor
 
like cords, not a suicide’s hair floating
               in a village well & souring the water.
 
Callus on my finger, cushion for the kayabam,
               we shall pluck the string to forget triumphs
 
before royalty taxing us for a celadon barge,
               shall sweep princes’ names into a crevice
 
where we store besotted & sudden proposals
               to suck a jujube’s succulent orb,
 
as if we required their directions to resist
               the stone in which a waiting life will crack
 
a rooting. Tendril of song, evening calm,
               guide my sense of use across the instrument
 
transforming my desire for vengeance
               into forest hearth smoke from which I fled
 
as a pretty child, selected by the king’s men.
               Help me never to forget the elation I felt
 
when my first patron swore by the river’s force
               his love for me, & I understood its swelling
 
to rush & breach could teach me to survive it
               by emptying myself to play a perfect note.
 
 


^^EOP^^

On the morning of the 20th National Day
my uncle came home and told us:
“All our troops have got into position,
for the Russians may throw an atom-bomb on us today.”
 
After breakfast he returned to the headquarters,
but I had to go to school and join the celebration.
 
The fear oppressed my back like a bag of sand.
I could not raise the little triangle flag in my hand,
nor could I shout slogans with my classmates.
 
During the break I called together my best friends
and told them what would occur on this day.
Benli said, “I must go home
and tell my dad to kill all our chickens.”
Qingping said, “I must tell my aunt
not to buy a sewing machine.
Who would care about clothes if that happens.”
Yimin and I said nothing,
but we knew what we were going to do.
 
We decided to go to the army,
for we did not want to be roasted at home
like little pigs.
 


^^EOP^^

From the remains
of his cremation,
the monks recovered
 
the seat of Thich Quang Duc’s
consciousness —
 
a bloodless protest
to awaken the heart
of the oppressor
 
offered
at the crossing of
Phanh Dinh Phung
                                     & Le Van Duyet
doused in gasoline &
immolated by 4-meter
flames the orange-robed
 
arhat folded in
the stillness
of full lotus
 
his body withering
his crown blackening
 
his flesh charring
his corpse collapsing
 
his heart refusing to burn
his heart refusing to burn
his heart refusing to burn
 


^^EOP^^

At Pearl Street station,
two brown-skinned men
 
in painter’s pants stand
out in a sea of white
 
I am just one more face
sticking out in a crowd
 
& it is my privilege
 
that prevents me from
understanding why
 
the workers want to know
how to buy one-way trips
 
the automated machine
sells only one roundtrip fee,
 
back to where you came from
 
he isn’t asking me for change
says it clear enough so that
 
there can be no mistake Sí. Yo sé.
  But a dollar fifty is a lot of money.
 


^^EOP^^

It takes just two people to bring the world
to ruin. So goes the history of love.
At the end of the day we tally the casualties
of war, victory for the one who gets wounded
 
the least. You say it’s time for a change
but I don’t know to what end, change being
just the skin of some incandescent creature
whose grotesque beauty is what we adore,
 
whom some people call love, whom we
venerate because it consumes us, slim pickings
for its huge soul. My people say, don’t look
or you’ll go blind. You say the end was always
 
just around the bend. I say all we have
is unconditional surrender to the future.
So unreliable is the past that I feel compelled
to leave unmourned the blind, relentless loves
 
that may have scorched into our hearts
the way the saints accepted stigmata. My people say,
look back or lose your way. Or, walk backwards,
if you can. So I found myself on a bus to New York City
 
to lose myself completely. Past Hunters Point
we hit the factory of souls—a thousand tombstones
from which a silk-like canopy of smoke rose to meet
God knows what—a spacious emptiness, the end.
 
I’ve heard the world’s never going to end.
I’ve heard it will go on and on, and we will be
as nebulous as Nebuchadnezzar, our live
not worth a footnote, our grandest schemes
 
no more than feeble whispers, all memory
shifting like the continental plates. In the future,
all science will finally come around; genetic
engineering, I’ve been told, will be all the rage,
 
and we will be a super race in a world
infallibly perfected, where trains run on time,
love never dies, and hope can be purchased
by the pound. It’s called immortalization
  of the cell lines. We will choose what will survive.
Our destiny made lucid, we will find the world
contemplating itself, like the young Narcissus,
one hand about to touch the pool, his body
 
lurched towards that marvelous reflection.
I suppose we’ve always felt compelled
to desensitize our failures. My people say,
to go unnoticed, you play dead. I myself
 
may have chosen to forget a face, a name,
some cruel word uttered carelessly, but not,
after all the harm is done, intending any pain.
And many others may have chosen to forget me.
 
It works both ways. My people say, nasa huli ang pagsisi: regret is the final emotion.
It’s what you see when you look back.
It’s what’s no longer there.


^^EOP^^

We spend the afternoon together watching a docudrama about wild horses that roamed the ancient Arctic Circle. Surprisingly sleek, built for speed and not the weather, they were remarkable for their recklessness. They careen headlong down ice bluffs to fall into a broken heap. We can hear the small, tinny sounds of their terror as they plunge across vast, glowing glacial faces. All of this takes place alongside an abstractly relentless gunmetal sea. I can feel you turn to me, wetness marking the corners of your lips and eyes. I, too, am mesmerized, my vision limited to a sense of motion on the peripheries. Later, I am summoned for an impromptu scan and, miraculously, I pass.


^^EOP^^

The coal-dust hushed
parameters of the room.
 
Outside, my mother stitched
whole dresses for $3.00 a piece.
 
I slept in a bedroom
which faced the street.
 
A cheerleader was killed
in a drive-by that year.
 
She died in her sleep.
 
I watched the headlights
sweep overhead.
 
          *
 
It felt like skin.
 
It did not
feel obscene.
 
When that boy
tongue-kissed me
 
and wiped
his mouth,
 
it was a coming
into knowledge.
 
          *
 
When my mother whispered, Has anyone touched you there?
I had to pick.
  Alan, I said.
 
I was seven.
The training wheels
were coming off.
 
Between the couch
and wall, the ceiling was white
with popcorn bits. The boys stood
 
and watched. I lay there,
my eyes open like a doll’s.
Someone said, Let me try.
 
He pulled down his pants
and rode on top,
then abruptly stopped.
 
The boys laughed,
said Shhh
and stood me up.
 


^^EOP^^

                                 How much chemical disorder
                 can be survived depends                on medical technology.
    A hundred years ago, cardiac arrest was irreversible.
                                       People were called dead
                when their heart                  stopped beating.
            Today death is                                  believed to occur 4
      to 6 minutes after                                      the heart stops beating
              because after                                     several minutes it is difficult
      to resuscitate the brain.
                                                    However, with new experimental
              treatments, more than         10 minutes of warm cardiac
                                      arrest can       now be survived without
      brain injury.     Future technologies
                                                          for molecular repair may extend the
 
 
                               frontiers of resuscitation beyond
                                    60 minutes or more,
                             making today’s             beliefs about
                       when death                             occurs
                                                                        obsolete
 
 
        merely transitory evidence          a stray boundary between
   a much longer-lasting            (invisible                     opposite polarities
         feature                                                             the fields annihilate
                        the field tries to                        one another
                             repel the intruder                        rapidly
 
 
 
                            velocities     directly                    shine in emission
                          visible                                                              shortly
 
 
                                  in terms of                  before
                                                       brightness                              totality
 
 


^^EOP^^




          after Neil deGrasse Tyson, black astrophysicist & director of the Hayden
          Planetarium, born in 1958, New York City. In his youth, deGrasse Tyson was
          confronted by police on more than one occasion when he was on his way to
          study stars.
“I’ve known that I’ve wanted to do astrophysics since I was nine years old, a first visit to the Hayden Planetarium...So I got to see how the world around me reacted to my expression of these ambitions. & all I can say is, the fact that I wanted to be a scientist, an astrophysicist, was, hands down, the path of most resistance...Anytime I expressed this interest teachers would say, Don’t you want to be an athlete? Or, Don’t you wanna...I wanted to become something that was outside of the paradigms of expectation of the people in power.
And I look behind me and say, Well, where are the others who might have been this? And they’re not there. And I wonder, What is the [thing] along the tracks that I happened to survive and others did not? Simply because of the forces that prevented it. At every turn. At every turn.”
                                                 —NdT, The Center for Inquiry, 2007
 
                    Body of space. Body of dark.
                    Body of light.



The Skyview apartments
                    circa 1973, a boy is
kneeling on the rooftop, a boy who
                     (it is important
to mention here his skin
                    is brown) prepares his telescope,
the weights & rods,
                    to better see the moon. His neighbor
(it is important to mention here
                    that she is white) calls the police
because she suspects the brown boy
                    of something, she does not know
what at first, then turns,                     with her looking,
his telescope into a gun,
                    his duffel into a bag of objects
thieved from the neighbors’ houses
                     (maybe even hers) & the police
(it is important to mention
                    that statistically they
are also white) arrive to find
                    the boy who has been turned, by now,
into “the suspect,” on the roof
                    with a long, black lens, which is,
in the neighbor’s mind, a weapon &
                    depending on who you are, reading this,
you know that the boy is in grave danger,
                    & you might have known
somewhere quiet in your gut,
                    you might have worried for him
in the white space between lines 5 & 6,                     or maybe even earlier, & you might be holding
your breath for him right now
                    because you know this story,
it’s a true story, though,
                    miraculously, in this version
of the story, anyway,
                    the boy on the roof of the Skyview lives
to tell the police that he is studying
                    the night & moon & lives
long enough to offer them (the cops) a view
                    through his telescope’s long, black eye, which,
if I am spelling it out anyway,
                    is the instrument he borrowed
& the beautiful “trouble” he went through
                    lugging it up to the roof
to better see the leopard body of
                    space speckled with stars & the moon far off,
much farther than (since I am spelling The Thing
                    out) the distance between
the white neighbor who cannot see the boy
                    who is her neighbor, who,
in fact, is much nearer
                    to her than to the moon, the boy who
wants to understand the large
                    & gloriously un-human mysteries of
the galaxy, the boy who, despite “America,”
                    has not been killed by the murderous jury of
his neighbor’s imagination & wound. This poem                     wants only the moon in its hair & the boy on the roof.
This boy on the roof of this poem
                    with a moon in his heart. Inside my own body
as I write this poem my body
                    is making a boy even as the radio
calls out the Missouri coroner’s news,
                    the Ohio coroner’s news.
2015. My boy will nod
                    for his milk & close his mouth around
the black eye of my nipple.
                    We will survive. How did it happen?
The boy. The cops. My body in this poem.
                    My milk pulling down into droplets of light
as the baby drinks & drinks them down
                    into the body that is his own, see it,
splayed & sighing as a star in my arms.                     Maybe he will be the boy who studies stars.
Maybe he will be (say it)
                    the boy on the coroner’s table
splayed & spangled
                    by an officer’s lead as if he, too, weren’t made
of a trillion glorious cells & sentences. Trying to last.
 
 
Leadless, remember? The body’s beginning,
splendored with breaths, turned,
by time, into, at least, this song.
 
This moment-made & the mackerel-“soul”
caught flashing inside the brief moment of the body’s net,
then, whoosh, back into the sea of space.
 
The poem dreams of bodies always leadless, bearing
only things ordinary
as water & light.


^^EOP^^

We stopped to watch the accident.
Fire! It had finally come to pass.
Just as surely as I was a coward
carrying a wolf. It stepped out from me,
it was paradise leaving me, running towards
the giant idea of that melting house.
So often you don’t think,
“Little nicks of monstrosity, I shall be splendid in it.”
 


^^EOP^^

If there is a god, let it be the hyena
who plunges her mouth into the river after eating
our grandfather’s poisoned bait, who,
dark with thirst, poisons the river
unbeknownst to both of them.
 
Her ghosts stand in the street where we are called
already through “time” out of our houses. She tells
her stories. We tell her ours. We all clean our teeth
with what is sharp. She asks, Will you add this  story to your stories of history & land & peace?
Yes, we will add this story. We ask her, Will you add these poems to your repertoire of songs about hunger & thirst & fur? & she, being wiser than we,
says, Yes, I will sing them if you grant me your permission to turn them into poems about a mercy.
 


^^EOP^^

Be large with those small fears. The whole sky
has fallen on you and all you can do about it is
shout, dragging your fear-ettes by their pinked ears.
 
They dance a number now: consequence without
sequence. Lovingly broadminded in their
realization and ruin, expert at the parting shot.
 
Not so small after all, we micro to
macro, swelling to the horror shows
lifted from the sly ways of life.
 
You, both scorched and shining in the terror
of the equivocal moment, its box of cheeky
logics rattling cold certainties out of bounds
 
and into the plaits of a girl’s desirous ends.
A little debauched, the flirt in a freckling,
wondering spun to falling comes to this
 
pert contract of a paradox: saying things
because they will do no good, ringing change
in frumpy mono-determination, fruity and fruitless.
 
Exploded out of shelter, the tides come roaring in.
Let in the hoarse Cassandras and the dull pain of the
storyteller. You’ve needed those eyes all along.
 
We thought them disconcerting at first,
but it’s the only way. You live here now
having exchanged etiquette for energy.
 
Don’t be clever, don’t be shy! Participate today.
Yesterday you say everything for their own sake,
and soon enough, tomorrow, you learn a lot from them.
 


^^EOP^^

in the shooter’s
face, she recognizes
 
her sibling’s coarse
unforgiving hair,
 
his yellow skin,
& vacant stare,
 
the year her brother
broke down, she was
 
still in high
school, seventeen —
 
w/ a taste for cutting
not class but hands
 
& arms any outlet
to escape
 
this “community”
 
denies illness,
a family reacts —
 
against crying out loud let it be some other Asian
 
in the shooter’s
face, I recognize
 
my sibling’s coarse
unforgiving hair,
 
his yellow skin,
& vacant stare,
 
the year my brother
broke down, I was
 
still in high
school, seventeen —
 
w/ a taste for cutting
not class but hands
 
& arms any outlet
to escape
 
this “community”
 
denies illness,
a family reacts —
 
against crying out loud let it be some other Asian
 


^^EOP^^

My father does his own dental work.
A power drill and epoxy
and steady hands—
 
On Christmas Day, he mistook
the Macy’s star
for the Viet Cong flag.
 
While watching Forrest Gump, he told me
how he too carried a friend.
  He squeezed around my throat so tight, I thought I’d die with him.
 


^^EOP^^

She opened her mouth and a moose came out, a donkey, and an ox—out of her mouth, years of animal grief. I lead her to the bed. She held my hand and followed. She said, Chết rồi, and like that, the cord was cut, the thread snapped, and the cable that tied my mother to her mother broke. And now her eyes red as a market fish. And now, she dropped like laundry on the bed.
 
The furniture moved toward her, the kitchen knives and spoons, the vibrating spoons—they dragged the tablecloth, the corner tilting in, her mouth a sinkhole. She wanted all of it: the house and the car too, and the flowers she planted, narcissus and hoa mai, which cracked open each spring—the sky, she brought it low until the air was hot and wet and broke into a rain—
 
the torrents like iron ropes you could climb up, only I couldn’t. I was drowning in it. I was swirled in. I leapt into her mouth, her throat, her gut, and stayed inside with the remnants of my former life. I ate the food she ate and drank the milk she drank. I grew until I crowded the furnishings. I edged out her organs, her swollen heart. I grew up and out so large that I became a woman, wearing my mother’s skin.


^^EOP^^

You are running away from everyone
who loves you,
from your family,
from old lovers, from friends.
 
They run after you with accumulations
of a former life, copper earrings,
plates of noodles, banners
of many lost revolutions.
 
You love to say the trees are naked now
because it never happens
in your country. This is a mystery
from which you will never
 
recover. And yes, the trees are naked now,
everything that still breathes in them
lies silent and stark
and waiting. You love October most
 
of all, how there is no word
for so much splendor.
This, too, is a source
of consolation. Between you and memory
 
everything is water. Names of the dead,
or saints, or history.
There is a realm in which
—no, forget it,
 
it’s still too early to make anyone understand.
A man drives a stake
through his own heart
and afterwards the opposite of nostalgia
 
begins to make sense: he stops raking the leaves
and the leaves take over
and again he has learned
to let go.
 


^^EOP^^

Taking on an aspect of the Orient,
Skies full of hatchets and oranges
Love, uninvited, hangs in the blood:
But what is a kingdom to a dying emperor?
 
Skies full of hatchets and oranges
Keep the birds singing, sorrows fresh—
But what is a kingdom to a dying emperor,
As the nights grow steadily into mountains.
 
Keep the birds singing, sorrows fresh—
The princess braids these into a necklace
As the nights grow steadily into mountains,
Why, even regrets recede unexpectedly.
 
The princess braids these into a necklace:
Roads and rivers that lead away from the palace.
Why, even regrets recede unexpectedly
In a solitude full of wars and songs.
 
Roads and rivers that lead away from the palace
Never converge in that vast landscape;
In a solitude full of wars and songs,
The words remain light and fugitive.
 
Never converge in that vast landscape
In the way that stars keep their distance.
The words remain light and fugitive
In an anticipation crossed with absence. 
In the way that stars keep their distance,
Love, uninvited, hangs in the blood
In an anticipation crossed with absence,
Taking on an aspect of the Orient.


^^EOP^^

Mid-October in Central Park, one of the elms
has changed early, burning with a light
grown accustomed to its own magnificence,
 
imperceptible until this moment when it becomes
more than itself, more than a ritual
of self-immolation. I think of sacrifice
 
as nourishment, the light feeding bark and veins
and blood and skin, the tree better off
for wanting nothing more. I used to imagine
 
the chakra like this—a hole in the soul
from the top of the head, where the light of knowing
can shimmer through. In the summer of 1979
 
I saw that light shoot from my brother’s forehead
as we sat chanting in a temple in Manila.
He didn’t see it pulsing like a bulb in a storm,
 
but he said he felt the warmth that wasn’t warmth
but peace. And I, who have never been
so privileged, since then have wondered
 
if we believed everything because not to believe
was to be unhappy. I’ve seen that light elsewhere
—on a river in Bangkok, or pixeled across
 
the shattered façades of Prague—but it is here
where I perceive its keenest rarity, where I know
it has passed over all the world, has given shape
 
to cities, cast glamour over the eyes of the skeptic,
so that it comes to me informed with the wonder
of many beings. I can’t begin to say how infinite I feel,
 
as though I were one of many a weightless absence
touches, and out of this a strange transformation:
the soul ringed with changes, as old as a tree,
 
as old as light. I am always learning the same thing:
there is no other way to live than this,
still, and grateful, and full of longing.
 


^^EOP^^




For James Kim (1971 — 2006)



it could have
happened to any
of us
 
a wrong turn
down a logging road
tires tunneled
into snow
 
a man’s undying
love for his children
 
moves satellites
maps aerial images
 
eighteen care packages
dropped over 16
miles of the Siskiyou,
 
bearing handwritten
notes from a father
to his son
 
the signs
you left for those
who came after you
 
a red t-shirt
a wool sock,
a child’s blue skirt
 
layers of a life,
stripped down to
a family’s fate —
 
the weight of being
unseen — to travel
a path back to
 
what you knew
at birth, the warmth
of being held close
 
brought home


^^EOP^^

Please raise your hand,
whomever else of you
has been a child,
lost, in a market
or a mall, without
knowing it at first, following
a stranger, accidentally
thinking he is yours,
your family or parent, even
grabbing for his hands,
even calling the word
you said then for “Father,”
only to see the face
look strangely down, utterly
foreign, utterly not the one
who loves you, you
who are a bird suddenly
stunned by the glass partitions
of rooms.
                                        How far
the world you knew, & tall,
& filled, finally, with strangers.
 


^^EOP^^

My skin crawls at odd hours of the day, a residual effect of my recent radiation therapies, how they inadvertently synced me to coronal flares. During my morning tea, at the gym, during the drive back home. A simple turn transforms into an avalanching pinprick of tremors one millimeter thick. I’d have preferred a suppurative response—one that collects under the skin—to this invisible, blistering, cracklesome lightning scar. One can’t choose the mood that gathers, the body’s response.
 
The brightest moments of the day rarely correlate to a discharge. Gray sky or blackness, a foggy haze aswirl between stars and nothing halts. Some moments tear my teeth.
 
The news feed portends rolling blackouts across the state. I read over the last of my messages: A blanket request for a plasma donation, Sasha asking if I want a ride to the wake.


^^EOP^^

Something I learned about agape when I was young: the Iliad tells
us fellow-feeling is finite in communities. Brotherly love becomes a
number that has to be divided among persons—so if you’re too kind to
others, that might explain your neighbor’s graft. I sometimes wonder if
perception is the same; if the quantity of percepts, or our trove of eidetic
things, is not limitless but rather constant: the measure, say, of a sunlit
field. So if we dip like deep-sea divers to the world, we’ll have to use a
purse-seine to sieve our sense impressions. We’re hoarding the image
at our peril. That bluest scilla smeared by a finger writing in the grass?
Endangered. Poetry’s work is not to ravish, but diminish.
 


^^EOP^^

I adore you: you’re a harrowing event.
I like you very ugly, condensed to one
deep green pang. You cannot ask the simplest
question, your hold is all clutch and sinker.
                                                  Cannibal old me,
with my heart up my throat, blasting on all sides
with my hundred red states. Hidden little striver.
How not to know it, the waist-deep trance of you,
the cursing, coursing say of you. Embarrassing today.
                                                  Curiouser and curiouser,
your body is a mouth, is a night of travel, your body
is tripling the sideways insouciance. The muscle
in you knows gorgeous, in you knows tornadoes.
In an instant’s compass, your blood flees you like a cry.
                                                  You put on my heat,
(that’s the way you work) I’m a bandit gripping
hard on the steal. The substitutions come swiftly,
hungering down the valley, no one question to cover
all of living. I arrange myself in the order of my use.
                                                  You’re wrong and right
at the same time, a breathless deluxe and a devouring
chopping down the back door. You slap my attention
all over the dark. What’s in me like a chime?
Sometimes, sometimes, I come to you for the surprise.
 


^^EOP^^

I see my mother, at thirteen,
in a village so small
it’s never given a name.
 
Monsoon season drying up—
steam lifting in full-bodied waves.
She chops bắp chuối for the hogs.
 
Her hair dips to the small of her back
as if smeared in black
and polished to a shine.
 
She wears a deep side-part
that splits her hair
into two uneven planes.
 
They come to watch her:
Americans, Marines, just boys,
eighteen or nineteen.
 
With scissor-fingers,
they snip the air,
point at their helmets
 
and then at her hair.
All they want is a small lock—
something for a bit of good luck.
 
Days later, my mother
is sent to the city
for safekeeping.
 
She will return home once,
only to be given away
to my father.
 
In the pictures,
the cake is sweet
and round.
 
My mother’s hair
which spans the length
of her áo dài
 
is long, washed, and uncut.


^^EOP^^

I. MORPHO MENELAUS
 
Foiled acqua-
moiré wings the
butterfly’s beauty-
mark hydraulic in its
purposes   his
hair’s flame lifts
you snarls you 
 
II. MORPHO ACHILLES
 
Sea-bed in semaphore / an
eyepiece     wing-span
delft dye vat-dipped shingle
scintilla        :        truant
and acclimate     enfold
or infuriate:     SOS: Don’t surround Don’t surround yourself with yourself 
 
III. MORPHO RHETENOR HELENA
 
Neon heather sky-
lit bluer than moiré:
 
inseam of street
trash     lush mask-
 
contour     soul-
strait fungible
 
as raiment in the
crawlspace     radiating
 
amatory birds’
egg bulls-eye
 


^^EOP^^

The dry basin of the moon must have held
the bones of a race, radiant minerals,
or something devoid of genesis, angel-heavy,
idea-pure. All summer we had waited for it,
 
our faces off-blue in front of the TV screen.
Nothing could be more ordinary—two figures
digging dirt in outer space—while mother repeated
Neil Armstrong’s words, like a prayer
 
electronically conveyed. The dunes were lit
like ancient silk, like clandestine pearl.
In the constant lunar night this luminescence
was all we hoped for. A creature unto itself,
 
it poured into the room like a gradual flood
of lightning, touching every object with the cool burn
of something not quite on fire. If we stepped out
Manila would be blank ether, way station,
 
a breathless abeyance. It didn’t matter,
at that moment, where our lives would lead:
father would disown one brother,
one sister was going to die. Not yet unhappy,
 
we were ready to walk on the moon. Reckless
in our need for the possible, we knew
there was no turning back, our bags already packed,
the future a religion we could believe in.
 


^^EOP^^


        An hendy hap ichabbe yhent;
    Ichot, from hevene it is me sent;
    From alle wymmen mi loue is lent,
        And lyght on Alysoun. 
  Bytuene Mersh and Averil,
    When spray biginneth to springe,
The lutel foul hath hire wyl
    On hyre lud to synge.
    Ich libbe in love longinge
    For semlokest of alle thinge.
    He may me blisse bringe;
      Icham in hire baundoun. 
  On heu hire her is fayr ynoh,
    Hire browe broune, hire eye blake;
With lossum chere he on me loh;
    With middel smal, and wel ymake.
    Bote he me wolle to hire take,
    Forte buen hire owen make,
    Longe to lyven ichulle forsake,
      And feye fallen adoun. 
  Nihtes when y wende and wake,
    Forthi myn wonges waxeth won;
Levedi, al for thine sake
    Longinge is ylent me on.
    In world nis non so wyter mon,
    That al hire bounté telle con.
    Hire swyre is whittore then the swon,
      And feyrest may in toune. 
  Icham for wowyng al forwake,
    Wery so water in wore.
Lest eny reve me my make,
    Ychabbe y-yerned yore.
    Betere is tholien whyle sore
    Then mournen evermore.
    Geynest under gore,
      Herkne to my roun.
 
 


^^EOP^^

Like as the armed knight
Appointed to the field,
With this world will I fight
And Faith shall be my shield. 
Faith is that weapon strong
Which will not fail at need.
My foes, therefore, among
Therewith will I proceed. 
As it is had in strength
And force of Christes way
It will prevail at length
Though all the devils say nay. 
Faith in the fathers old
Obtained rightwisness
Which make me very bold
To fear no world's distress. 
I now rejoice in heart
And Hope bid me do so
For Christ will take my part
And ease me of my woe. 
Thou saist, lord, who so knock,
To them wilt thou attend.
Undo, therefore, the lock
And thy strong power send. 
More enmyes now I have
Than hairs upon my head.
Let them not me deprave
But fight thou in my stead. 
On thee my care I cast.
For all their cruel spight
I set not by their haste
For thou art my delight. 
I am not she that list
My anchor to let fall
For every drizzling mist
My ship substancial. 
Not oft use I to wright
In prose nor yet in rime,
Yet will I shew one sight
That I saw in my time. 
I saw a rial throne
Where Justice should have sit
But in her stead was one
Of moody cruel wit. 
Absorpt was rightwisness
As of the raging flood
Sathan in his excess
Suct up the guiltless blood. 
Then thought I, Jesus lord,
When thou shalt judge us all
Hard is it to record
On these men what will fall. 
Yet lord, I thee desire
For that they do to me
Let them not taste the hire
Of their iniquity.


^^EOP^^

Fore there neidfaerae naenig uuiurthit
thoncsnotturra than him tharf sie
to ymbhycggannae aer his hiniongae
huaet his gastae godaes aeththa yflaes
aefter deothdaege doemid uueorthae.


^^EOP^^


    Blow, northerne wynd,
  Send thou me my suetyng!
  Blow, northerne wynd,
    Blou, blou, blou! 
  Ichot a burde in boure bryht,
That fully semly is on syht,
Menskful maiden of myht,
    Feir ant fre to fonde;
In al this wurhliche won,
A burde of blod and of bon
Never yete y nuste non
    Lussomore in londe. 
  With lokkes lefliche and longe,
With frount and face feir to fonge,
With murthes monie mote heo monge,
    That brid so breme in boure;
With lossom eye, grete ant gode,
With browen blysfol under hode;
He that reste him on the rode
    That leflich lyf honoure! 
  Hire lure lumes liht
Ase a launterne a nyht,
Hire bleo blykyeth so bryht:
    So feyr heo is ant fyn!
A suetly suyre heo hath to holde,
With armes, shuldre, ase mon wolde,
Ant fyngres feyre forte folde,
    God wolde hue were myn! 
  Middel heo hath menskful smal;
Hire loveliche chere as cristal;
Theyes, legges, fet, ant al,
    Ywraht is of the beste.
A lussum ledy lasteles
That sweting is, and ever wes;
A betere burde never nes
    Yheryed with the heste. 
  Heo is dereworthe in day,
Graciouse, stout, and gay,
Gentil, jolyf so the jay,
    Worhliche when heo waketh.
Maiden murgest of mouth;
Bi est, bi west, by north and south,
Thér nis fithele ne crouth
    That such murthes maketh. 
  Heo is coral of godnesse,
Heo is rubie of ryhtfulnesse,
Heo is cristal of clannesse,
    Ant baner of bealté;
Heo is lilie of largesse,
Heo is paruenke of prouesse,
Heo is solsecle of suetnesse,
    Ant ledy of lealté. 
  For hire love y carke ant care,
For hire love y droupne ant dare,
For hire love my blisse is bare,
    Ant al ich waxe won;
For hire love in slep y slake,
For hire love al nyht ich wake,
For hire love mournynge y make
    More then eny mon.
 
 


^^EOP^^

Nu scylun hergan hefaenricaes uard
metudæs maecti end his modgidanc
uerc uuldurfadur sue he uundra gihuaes
eci dryctin or astelidæ
he aerist scop aelda barnum
heben til hrofe haleg scepen.
tha middungeard moncynnæs uard
eci dryctin æfter tiadæ
firum foldu frea allmectig 
Nu scilun herga hefenricæs uard
metudæs mehti and his modgithanc
uerc uuldurfadur sue he uundra gihuæs
eci dryctin or astelidæ.
he ærist scop ældu barnum
hefen to hrofæ halig sceppend
tha middingard moncynnæs uard
eci dryctin æfter tiadæ
firum foldu frea allmehtig


^^EOP^^


Clannesse who so kyndly cowþe comende
& rekken vp alle þe resounz þat ho by ri3t askez,
Fayre formez my3t he fynde in for[þ]ering his speche
& in þe contrare kark & combraunce huge.
For wonder wroth is þe Wy3þat wro3t alle þinges
Wyth þe freke þat in fylþe fol3es Hym after,
As renkez of relygioun þat reden & syngen
& aprochen to hys presens & prestez arn called;
Thay teen vnto his temmple & temen to hym seluen,
Reken with reuerence þay rychen His auter;
Þay hondel þer his aune body & vsen hit boþe.
If þay in clannes be clos þay cleche gret mede;
Bot if þay conterfete crafte & cortaysye wont,
As be honest vtwyth & inwith alle fylþez,
Þen ar þay synful hemself & sulped altogeder
Boþe God & His gere, & hym to greme cachen.
He is so clene in His courte, þe Kyng þat al weldez,
& honeste in His housholde & hagherlych serued
With angelez enourled in alle þat is clene,
Boþ withine & withouten in wedez ful bry3t;
Nif he nere scoymus & skyg & non scaþe louied,
Hit were a meruayl to much, hit mo3t not falle.
Kryst kydde hit Hymself in a carp onez,
Þeras He heuened a3t happez & hy3t hem her medez.
Me mynez on one amonge oþer, as Maþew recordez,
Þat þus clanness vnclosez a ful cler speche:
Þe haþel clene of his hert hapenez ful fayre,
For he schal loke on oure Lorde with a bone chere';
As so saytz, to þat sy3t seche schal he neuer
Þat any vnclannesse hatz on, auwhere abowte;
For He þat flemus vch fylþe fer fro His hert
May not byde þat burre þat hit His body ne3en.
Forþy hy3not to heuen in haterez totorne,
Ne in þe harlatez hod, & handez vnwaschen.
For what vrþly haþel þat hy3honour haldez
Wolde lyke if a ladde com lyþerly attyred,
When he were sette solempnely in a sete ryche,
Abof dukez on dece, with dayntys serued?
Þen þe harlot with haste helded to þe table,
With rent cokrez at þe kne & his clutte traschez,
& his tabarde totorne, & his totez oute,
Oþer ani on of alle þyse, he schulde be halden vtter,
With mony blame ful bygge, a boffet peraunter,
Hurled to þe halle dore & harde þeroute schowued,
& be forboden þat bor3e to bowe þider neuer,
On payne of enprysonment & puttyng in stokkez;
& þus schal he be schent for his schrowde feble,
Þa3neuer in talle ne in tuch he trespas more.
& if vnwelcum he were to a worþlych prynce, 3et hym is þe hy3e Kyng harder in her euen;
As Maþew melez in his masse of þat man ryche,
Þat made þe mukel mangerye to marie his here dere,
& sende his sonde þen to say þat þay samne schulde,
& in comly quoyntis to com to his feste:
'For my boles & my borez arn bayted & slayne,
& my fedde foulez fatted with scla3t,
My polyle þat is penne-fed & partrykez boþe,
Wyth scheldez of wylde swyn, swanez & cronez,
Al is roþeled & rosted ry3t to þe sete;
Comez cof to my corte, er hit colde worþe.'
When þay knewen his cal þat þider com schulde,
Alle excused hem by þe skyly he scape by mo3t.
On hade bo3t hym a bor3, he sayde, by hys trawþe:
'Now turne I þeder als tyd þe toun to byholde.'
Anoþer nayed also & nurned þis cawse:
'I haf 3erned & 3at 3okkez of oxen,
& for my hy3ez hem bo3t; to bowe haf I mester,
To see hem pulle in þe plow aproche me byhouez.'
'& I haf wedded a wyf,' so wer hym þe þryd;
'Excuse me at þe court, I may not com þere.'
Þus þay dro3hem adre3with daunger vchone,
Þat non passed to þe plate þa3he prayed were.
Thenne þe ludych lorde lyked ful ille,
& hade dedayn of þat dede; ful dry3ly he carpez.
He saytz: 'Now for her owne sor3e þay forsaken habbez;
More to wyte is her wrange þen any wylle gentyl.
Þenne gotz forth, my gomez, þe grete streetez,
& forsettz on vche a syde þe cete aboute;
Þe wayferande frekez, on fote & on hors,
Boþe burnez & burdez, þe better & þe wers,
Laþez hem alle luflyly to lenge at my fest,
& bryngez hem blyþly to bor3e as barounez þay were,
So þat my palays plat ful be py3t al aboute;
Þise oþer wrechez iwysse worþy no3t wern.'
Þen þay cayred & com þat þe cost waked,
Bro3ten bachlerez hem wyth þat þay by bonkez metten,
Swyerez þat swyftly swyed on blonkez,
& als fele vpon fote, of fre & of bonde.
When þay com to þe courte keppte weren þay fayre,
Sty3tled with þe stewarde, stad in þe halle,
Ful manerly with marchal mad for to sitte,
As he watz dere of degre dressed his seete.
Þenne seggez to þe souerayn sayden þerafter:
'Lo! Lorde, with your leue, at your lege heste
& at þi banne we haf bro3t, as þou beden habbez,
Mony renischsche renkez, & 3et is roum more.'
Sayde þe lorde to þo ledez, 'Laytez 3et ferre,
Ferre out in þe felde, & fechez mo gestez;
Waytez gorstez & greuez, if ani gomez lyggez;
Whatkyn folk so þer fare, fechez hem hider;
Be þay fers, be þay feble, forlotez none,
Be þay hol, be þay halt, be þay ony3ed,
& þa3þay ben boþe blynde & balterande cruppelez,
Þat my hous may holly by halkez by fylled.
For, certez, þyse ilk renkez þat me renayed habbe,
& denounced me no3t now at þis tyme,
Schul neuer sitte in my sale my soper to fele,
Ne suppe on sope of my seve, þa3þa3þay swelt schulde.'
Thenne þe sergauntez, at þat sawe, swengen þeroute,
& diden þe dede þat [watz] demed, as he deuised hade,
& with peple of alle plytez þe palays þay fyllen;
Hit weren not alle on wyuez sunez, wonen with on fader.
Wheþer þay wern worþy oþer wers, wel wern þay stowed,
Ay þe best byfore & bry3test atyred,
Þe derrest at þe hy3e dese, þat dubbed wer fayrest,
& syþen on lenþe bilooghe ledez inogh.
& ay a[s] segge[s] [serly] semed by her wedez,
So with marschal at her mete mensked þay were.
Clene men in compaynye forknowen wern lyte,
& 3et þe symplest in þat sale watz serued to þe fulle,
Boþe with menske & with mete & mynstrasy noble,
& alle þe laykez þat a lorde a3t in londe schewe.
& þay bigonne to be glad þat god drink haden.
& vch mon with his mach made hym at ese.
Now inmyddez þe mete þe mayster hym biþo3t
Þat he wolde se þe semble þat samned was þere,
& rehayte rekenly þe riche & þe pou[eren],
& cherisch hem alle with his cher, & chaufen her joye.
Þen he bowez fro his bour into þe brode halle
& to þe best on þe bench, & bede hym be myry,
Solased hem with semblaunt & syled fyrre,
Tron fro table to table & talkede ay myrþe.
Bot as he ferked ouer þe flor, he fande with his y3e,
Hit watz not for a halyday honestly arayed,
A þral þry3t in þe þrong vnþryuandely cloþed,
Ne no festiual frok, bot fyled with werkkez;
Þe gome watz vngarnyst with god men to dele.
& gremed þerwith þe grete lorde, & greue hym he þo3t.
'Say me, frende,' quoþ þe freke with a felle chere,
'Hov wan þou into þis won in wedez so fowle?
Þe abyt þat þou hatz vpon, no halyday hit menskez;
Þou, burne, for no brydale art busked in wedez.
How watz þou hardy þis hous for þyn vnhap [to] ne3e
In on so ratted a robe & rent at þe sydez?
Þow art a gome vngoderly in þat goun febele;
Þou praysed me & my place ful pouer & ful [g]nede,
Þat watz so prest to aproche my presens hereinne.
Hopez þou I be a harlot þi erigaut to prayse?'
Þat oper burne watz abayst of his broþe wordez,
& hurkelez doun with his hede, þe vrþe he biholdez;
He watz so scoumfit of his scylle, lest he skaþe hent,
Þat he ne wyst on worde what he warp schulde.
Þen þe lorde wonder loude laled & cryed,
& talkez to his tormenttourez: 'Takez hym,' he biddez,
'Byndez byhynde, at his bak, boþe two his handez,
& felle fetterez to his fete festenez bylyue;
Stik hym stifly in stokez, & stekez hym þerafter
Depe in my doungoun þer doel euer dwellez,
Greuing & gretyng & gryspyng harde
Of teþe tenfully togeder, to teche hym be quoynt.'
Thus comparisunez Kryst þe kyndom of heuen
To þis frelych feste þat fele arn to called;
For alle arn laþed luflyly, þe luþer & þe better,
Þat euer wern ful3ed in font, þat fest to haue.
Bot war þe wel, if þou wylt, þy wedez ben clene
& honest for þe halyday, lest þou harme lache,
For aproch þou to þat Prynce of parage noble,
He hates helle no more þen hem þat ar sowle.
Wich arn þenne þy wedez þou wrappez þe inne,
Þat schal schewe hem so schene schrowde of þe best?
Hit arn þy werkez, wyterly, þat þou wro3t hauez,
& lyued with þe lykyng þat ly3e in þyn hert;
Þat þo be frely & fresch fonde in þy lyue,
& fetyse of a fayr forme to fote & to honde,
& syþen alle þyn oþer lymez lapped ful clene;
Þenne may þou se þy Sauior & His sete ryche.
For fele[r] fautez may a freke forfete his blysse,
Þat he þe Souerayn ne se, þen for slauþe one;
As for bobaunce & bost & bolnande priyde
Þroly into þe deuelez þrote man þryngez bylyue.
For couetyse & colwarde & croked dedez,
For monsworne & menscla3t & to much drynk,
For þefte & for þrepyng, vnþonk may mon haue;
For roborrye & riboudrye & resounez vntrwe,
& dsyheriete & depryue dowrie of wydoez,
For marryng of maryagez & mayntnaunce of schrewez,
For traysoun & trichcherye & tyrauntyre boþe,
& for fals famacions & fayned lawez;
Man may mysse þe myrþe þat much is to prayse
For such vnþewez as þise, & þole much payne,
& in þe Creatores cort com neuermore,
Ne neuer see Hym with sy3t for such sour tournez.
Bot I haue herkned & herde of mony hy3e clerkez,
& als in resounez of ry3t red hit myseluen,
Þat þat ilk proper Prynce þat paradys weldez
Is displesed at vch a poynt þat plyes to scaþe;
Bot neuer 3et in no boke breued I herde
Þat euer He wrek so wyþerly on werk þat He made,
Ne venged for no vilte of vice ne synne,
Ne so hastyfly watz hot for hatel of His wylle,
Ne neuer so sodenly so3t vnsoundely to weng,
As for fylþe of þe flesch þat foles han vsed;
For, as I fynde, þer He for3et alle His fre þewez,
& wex wod to þe wrache for wrath at His hert.
For þe fyrste felonye þe falce fende wro3t
Whyl he watz hy3e in þe heuen houen vpon lofte,
Of alle þyse aþel aungelez attled þe fayrest:
& he vnkyndely, as a karle, kydde a reward.
He se3no3t bot hymself how semly he were,
Bot his Souerayn he forsoke & sade þyse wordez:
I schal telde vp my trone in þe tramountayne,
& by lyke to þat Lorde þat þe lyft made.'
With þis worde þat he warp, þe wrake on hym ly3t:
Dry3tyn with His dere dom hym drof to þe abyme,
In þe mesure of His mode, His metz neuer þe lasse.
Bot þer He tynt þe tyþe dool of His tour ryche:
Þa3þe feloun were so fers for his fayre wedez
& his glorious glem þat glent so bry3t,
As sone as Dry3tynez dome drof to hymseluen,
Þikke þowsandez þro þrwen þeroute,
Fellen fro þe frymament fendez ful blake,
Sweued at þe fryst swap as þe snaw þikke,
Hurled into helle-hole as þe hyue swarmez.
Fylter fenden folk forty dayez lencþe,
Er þat styngande storme stynt ne my3t;
Bot as smylt mele vnder smal siue smokez forþikke.
So fro heuen to helle þat hatel schor laste,
On vche syde of þe worlde aywhere ilyche. 3is, hit watz a brem brest & a byge wrache,
& 3et wrathed not þe Wy3; ne þe wrech sa3tled,
Ne neuer wolde, for wyl[fulnes], his worþy God knawe,
Ne pray Hym for no pite, so proud watz his wylle.
Forþy þa3þe rape were rank, þe rawþe watz lytt[el];
Þa3he be kest into kare, he kepes no better.
Bot þat oper wrake þat wex, on wy3ez hit ly3t
Þur3þe faut of a freke þat fayled in trawþe,
Adam inobedyent, ordaynt to blysse.
Þer pryuely in paradys his place watz devised,
To lyue þer in lykyng þe lenþe of a terme,
& þenne enherite þat home þat aungelez forgart;
Bot þur3þe eggyng of Eue he ete of an apple
Þat enpoysened alle peplez þat parted fro hem boþe,
For a defence þat watz dy3t of Dry3tyn Seluen,
& a payne þeron put & pertly halden.
Þe defence watz þe fryt þat þe freke towched,
& þe dom is þe deþe þat drepez vus alle;
Al in mesure & meþe watz mad þe vengiaunce,
& efte amended with a mayden þat make had neuer.
Bot in þe þryd watz forþrast al þat þryue schuld:
Þer watz malys mercyles & mawgre much scheued,
Þat watz for fylþe vpon folde þat þe folk vsed,
Þat þen wonyed in þe worlde withouten any maysterz.
Hit wern þe fayrest of forme & of face als,
Þe most & þe myriest þat maked wern euer,
Þe styfest, þe stalworþest þat stod euer on fete,
& lengest lyf in hem lent of ledez alle oþer.
For hit was þe forme foster þat þe folde bred,
Þe aþel aunceterez sunez pat Adam watz called,
To wham God hade geuen alle þat gayn were,
Alle þe blysse boute blame þat bodi my3t haue;
& þose lykkest to þe lede, þat lyued next after;
Forþy so semly to see syþen wern none.
Þer watz no law to hem layd bot loke to kynde,
& kepe to hit, & alle hit cors clanly fulfylle.
& þenne founden þay fylþe in fleschlych dedez,
& controeued agayn kynde contrare werkez,
& vsed hem vnþryftyly vchon on oþer,
& als with oþer, wylsfully, upon a wrange wyse:
So ferly fowled her flesch þat þe fende loked
How þe de3ter of þe douþe wern derelych fayre,
& fallen in fela3schyp with hem on folken wyse,
& engendered on hem jeauntez with her japez ille.
Þose wern men meþelez & ma3ty on vrþe,
Þat for her lodlych laykez alosed þay were;
He watz famed for fre þat fe3t loued best,
& ay þe bigest in bale þe best watz halden.
& þenne euelez on erþe ernestly grewen
& multyplyed monyfolde inmongez mankynde,
For þat þe ma3ty on molde so marre þise oþer
Þat þe Wy3e þat al wro3t ful wroþly bygynnez.
When He knew vche contre coruppte in hitseluen,
& vch freke forloyned fro þe ry3t wayez,
Felle temptande tene towched His hert.
As wy3e wo hym withinne, werp to Hymseluen:
'Me forþynkez ful much þat euer I mon made,
Bot I schal delyuer & do away þat doten on þis molde,
& fleme out of þe folde al þat flesch werez,
Fro þe burne to þe best, fro bryddez to fyschez;
Al schal doun & be ded & dryuen out of erþe
Þat euer I sette saule inne; & sore hit Me rwez
Þat euer I made hem Myself; bot if I may herafter,
I schal wayte to be war her wrenchez to kepe.'
Þenne in worlde watz a wy3e wonyande on lyue,
Ful redy & ful ry3twys, & rewled hym fayre,
In þe drede of Dry3tyn his dayez he vsez,
& ay glydande wyth his God, his grace watz þe more.
Hym watz þe nome Noe, as is innoghe knawen.
He had þre þryuen sunez, & þay þre wyuez:
Sem soþly þat on, þat oþer hy3t Cam,
& þe jolef Japheth watz gendered þe þryd.
Now God in nwy to Noe con speke
Wylde wrakful wordez, in His wylle greued:
'Þe ende of alle kynez flesch þat on vrþe meuez
Is fallen forþwyth My face, & forþer hit I þenk.
With her vnworþelych werk Me wlatez withinne;
Þe gore þerof Me hatz greued & þe glette nwyed.
I schal strenkle My distresse, & strye al togeder,
Boþe ledez & londe & alle þat lyf habbez.
Bot make to þe a mancioun, & þat is My wylle,
A cofer closed of tres, clanlych planed.
Wyrk wonez þerinne for wylde & for tame,
& þenne cleme hit with clay comly within[n]e,
& alle þe endentur dryuen daube withouten.
& þus of lenþe & of large þat lome þou make:
Þre hundred of cupydez þou holde to þe lenþe,
Of fyfty fayre ouerþwert forme þe brede;
& loke euen þat þyn ark haue of he3þe þrette,
& a wyndow wyd vpon[ande] wro3t vpon lo[f]te,
In þe compas of a cubit kyndely sware;
A wel dutande dor, don on þe syde;
Haf hallez þerinne & halkez ful mony,
Boþe boske[n]z & bourez & wel bounden penez.
For I schal waken vp a water to wasch alle þe worlde,
& quelle alle þat is quik with quauende flodez,
Alle þat glydez & gotz & gost of lyf habbez;
I schal wast with My wrath þat wons vpon vrþe.
Bot My forwarde with þe I festen on þis wyse,
For þou in reysoun hatz rengned & ry3twys ben euer:
Þou schal enter þis ark with þyn aþel barnez
& þy wedded wyf; with þe þou take
Þe makez of þy myry sunez; þis meyny of a3te
I schal saue of monnez saulez, & swelt þose oþer.
Of vche best þat berez lyf busk þe a cupple,
Of vche clene comly kynde enclose seuen makez,
Of vche horwed in ark halde bot a payre,
For to saue Me þe sede of alle ser kyndez.
& ay þou meng with þe malez þe mete ho-bestez,
Vche payre by payre to plese ayþer oþer;
With alle þe fode þat may be founde frette þy cofer,
For sustnaunce to yowself & also þose oþer.'
Ful grayþely gotz þis god man & dos Godez hestes,
In dry3dred & daunger þat durst do non oþer.
Wen hit watz fettled & forged & to þe fulle grayþed,
Þenn con Dry3ttyn hym dele dry3ly þyse wordez.
'Now Noe,' quoþ oure Lorde, 'art þou al redy?
Hatz þou closed þy kyst with clay alle aboute?'
'3e, Lorde, with þy leue,' sayde þe lede þenne,
Al is wro3t at Þi worde, as Þou me wyt lantez.'
'Enter in, þenn,' quoþ He, & haf þi wyf with þe,
Þy þre sunez, withouten þrep, & her þre wyuez;
Bestez, as I bedene haue, bosk þerinne als,
& when 3e arn staued, styfly stekez yow þerinne.
Fro seuen dayez ben seyed I sende out bylyue
Such a rowtande ryge þat rayne schal swyþe
Þat schal wasch alle þe worlde of werkez of fylþe;
Schal no flesch vpon folde by fonden onlyue,
Outtaken yow a3t in þis ark staued
& sed þat I wyl saue of þyse ser bestez.'
Now Noe neuer sty[n]tez, þat niy3[t] he bygynnez,
Er al wer stawed & stoken as þe steuen wolde.
Thenne sone com þe seuenþe day, when samned wern alle,
& alle woned in þe whichche, þe wylde & þe tame.
Þen bolned þe abyme, & bonkez con ryse,
Waltes out vch walle-heued in ful wode stremez;
Watz no brymme þat abod vnbrosten bylyue;
Þe mukel lauande loghe to þe lyfte rered.
Mony clustered clowde clef alle in clowtez;
Torent vch a rayn-ryfte & rusched to þe vrþe,
Fon neuer in forty dayez. & þen þe flod ryses,
Ouerwaltez vche a wod & þe wyde feldez.
For when þe water of þe welkyn with þe worlde mette,
Alle þat deth mo3t dry3e drowned þerinne.
Þer watz moon for to make when meschef was cnowen,
Þat no3t dowed bot þe deth in þe depe stremez;
Water wylger ay wax, wonez þat stryede,
Hurled into vch hous, hent þat þer dowelled.
Fryst feng to þe fly3t alle þat fle my3t;
Vuche burde with her barne þe byggyng þay leuez
& bowed to þe hy3bonk þer brentest hit wern,
& heterly to þe hy3e hyllez þay [h]aled on faste.
Bot al watz nedlez her note, for neuer cowþe stynt
Þe ro3e raynande ryg, þe raykande wawez,
Er vch boþom watz brurdful to þe bonkez eggez,
& vche a dale so depe þat demmed at þe brynkez.
Þe moste mountaynez on mor þenne watz no more dry3e,
& þeron flokked þe folke, for ferde of þe wrake.
Syþen þe wylde of þe wode on þe water flette;
Summe swymmed þeron þat saue hemself trawed,
Summe sty3e to a stud & stared to þe heuen,
Rwly wyth a loud rurd rored for drede.
Harez, herttez also, to þe hy3e runnen;
Bukkez, bausenez, & bulez to þe bonkkez hy3ed;
& alle cryed for care to þe Kyng of heuen,
Recouerer of þe Creator þay cryed vchone,
Þat amounted þe masse, þe mase His mercy watz passed,
& alle His pyte departed fro peple þat He hated.
Bi þat þe flod to her fete flo3ed & waxed,
Þen vche a segge se3wel þat synk hym byhoued.
Frendez fellen in fere & faþmed togeder,
To dry3her delful deystyne & dy3en alle samen;
Luf lokez to luf & his leue takez,
For to ende alle at onez & for euer twynne.
By forty dayez wern faren, on folde no flesch styryed
Þat þe flod nade al freten with fe3tande wa3ez;
For hit clam vche a clyffe, cubites fyftene
Ouer þe hy3est hylle þat hurkled on erþe.
Þenne mourkne in þe mudde most ful nede
Alle þat spyrakle inspranc, no sprawlyng awayled,
Saue þe haþel vnder hach & his here straunge,
Noe þat ofte neuened þe name of oure Lorde,
Hym a3tsum in þat ark, as aþel God lyked,
Þer alle ledez in lome lenged druye.
Þe arc houen watz on hy3e with hurlande gotez,
Kest to kythez vncouþe þe clowdez ful nere.
Hit waltered on þe wylde flod, went as hit lyste,
Drof vpon þe depe dam, in daunger hit semed,
Withouten mast, oþer myke, oþer myry bawelyne,
Kable, oþer capstan to clyppe to her ankrez,
Hurrok, oþer hande-helme hasped on roþer,
Oþer any sweande sayl to seche after hauen,
Bot flote forthe with þe flyt of þe felle wyndez.
Whederwarde so þe water wafte, hit rebounde;
Ofte hit roled on rounde & rered on ende;
Nyf oure Lorde hade ben her lodezmon hem had lumpen harde.
Of þe lenþe of Noe lyf to lay a lel date,
Þe sex hundreth of his age & none odde 3erez,
Of secounde monyth þe seuen[ten]þe day ry3tez,
Towalten alle þyse welle-hedez & þe water flowed;
& þryez fyfty þe flod of folwande dayez;
Vche hille watz þer hidde with y[þ]ez ful graye.
Al watz wasted þat þer wonyed þe worlde withinne,
Þ[at] euer flote, oþer flwe, oþer on fote 3ede,
That ro3ly watz þe remnaunt þat þe rac dryuez
Þat alle gendrez so joyst wern joyned wythinne
Bot quen þe Lorde of þe lyfte lyked Hymseluen
For to mynne on His mon His meth þat abydez,
Þen He wakened a wynde on watterez to blowe;
Þenne lasned þe llak þat large watz are.
Þen He stac vp þe stangez, stoped þe wellez,
Bed blynne of þe rayn: hit batede as faste;
Þenne lasned þe lo3lowkande togeder.
After harde dayez wern out an hundreth & fyfte,
As þat lyftande lome luged aboute.
Where þe wynde & þe weder warpen hit wolde,
Hit sa3tled on a softe day, synkande to grounde;
On a rasse of a rok hit rest at þe laste,
On þe mounte of Mararach of Armene hilles.
Þat oþerwayez on Ebrv hit hat þe Thanes.
Bot þa3þe kyste in þe cragez wern closed to byde, 3et fyned not þe flod ne fel to þe boþemez,
Bot þe hy3est of þe eggez vnhuled weren a lyttel,
Þat þe burne bynne borde byhelde þe bare erþe.
Þenne wafte he vpon his wyndowe, & wysed þeroute
A message fro þat meyny hem moldez to seche:
Þat watz þe rauen so ronk, þat rebel watz euer;
He watz colored as þe cole, corbyal vntrwe.
& he fongez to þe fly3t & fannez on þe wyndez,
Halez hy3e vpon hy3t to herken tyþyngez.
He croukez for comfort when carayne he fyndez
Kast vp on a clyffe þer costese lay drye;
He hade þe smelle of þe smach & smoltes þeder sone,
Fallez on þe foule flesch & fyllez his wombe,
& sone 3ederly for3ete 3isterday steuen,
How þe cheuetayn hym charged þat þe kyst 3emed.
Þe rauen raykez hym forth, þat reches ful lyttel
How alle fodez þer fare, ellez he fynde mete;
Bot þe burne bynne borde þat bod to hys come
Banned hym ful bytterly with bestes alle samen.
He sechez anoþer sondezmon, & settez on þe dou[u]e,
Bryngez þat bry3t vpon borde, blessed, & sayde:
'Wende, worþelych wy3t, vus wonez to seche;
Dryf ouer þis dymme water; if þou druye fyndez
Bryng bodworde to bot blysse to vus alle.
Þa3þat fowle be false, fre be þou euer.'
Ho wyrle out on þe weder on wyngez ful scharpe,
Dre3ly alle alonge day þat dorst neuer ly3t;
& when ho fyndez no folde her fote on to pyche,
Ho vmbekestez þe coste & þe kyst sechez.
Ho hittez on þe euentyde & on þe ark sittez;
Noe nymmes hir anon & naytly hir stauez.
Noe on anoþer day nymmez efte þe doveue,
& byddez hir bowe ouer þe borne efte bonkez to seche;
& ho skyrmez vnder skwe & skowtez aboute,
Tyl hit watz ny3e at þe na3t, & Noe þen sechez.
On ark on an euentyde houez þe dowue;
On stamyn ho stod & stylle hym abydez.
What! ho bro3t in hir beke a bronch of olyue,
Gracyously vmbegrouen al with grene leuez;
Þat watz þe syngne of sauyte þat sende hem oure Lorde,
& þe sa3tlyng of Hymself with þo sely bestez.
Þen watz þer joy on þat gyn where jumpred er dry3ed,
& much comfort in þat cofer þat watz clay-daubed.
Myryly on a fayr morn, monyth þe fyrst,
Þat fallez formast in þe 3er, & þe fyrst day,
Ledez lo3en in þat lome & loked þeroute,
How þat watterez wern woned & þe worlde dryed.
Vchon loued oure Lorde, bot lenged ay stylle
Tyl þay had tyþyng fro þe Tolke þat tyned hem þerinne.
Þen Godez glam to hem glod þat gladed hem alle,
Bede hem drawe to þe dor: delyuer hem He wolde.
Þen went þay to þe wykket, hit walt vpon sone;
Boþe þe burne & his barnez bowed þeroute,
Her wyuez walkez hem wyth & þe wylde after,
Þroly þrublande in þronge, þrowen ful þykke.
Bot Noe of vche honest kynde nem out an odde,
& heuened vp an auter & hal3ed hit fayre,
& sette a sakerfyse þeron of vch a ser kynde
Þat watz comly & clene: God kepez non oþer.
When bremly brened þose bestez, & þe breþe rysed,
Þe sauour of his sacrafyse so3t to Hym euen
Þat al spedez & spyllez; He spekes with þat ilke
In comly comfort ful clos & cortays wordez:
'Now, Noe, no more nel I neuer wary
Alle þe mukel mayny [on] molde for no mannez synnez,
For I se wel þat hit is sothe þat alle mannez wyttez
To vnþryfte arn alle þrawen with þo3t of her herttez,
& ay hatz ben, & wyl be 3et; fro her barnage
Al is þe mynde of þe man to malyce enclyned.
Forþy schal I neuer schende so schortly at ones
As dysstrye al for manez synne, dayez of þis erþe.
Bot waxez now & wendez forth & worþez to monye,
Multyplyez on þis molde, & menske yow bytyde.
Sesounez schal yow neuer sese of sede ne of heruest,
Ne hete, ne no harde forst, vmbre ne dro3þe,
Ne þe swetnesse of somer, ne þe sadde wynter,
Ne þe ny3t, ne þe day, ne þe newe 3erez,
Bot euer renne restlez: rengnez 3e þerinne.'
Þerwyth He blessez vch a best, & byta3t hem þis erþe.
Þen watz a skylly skyualde, quen scaped alle þe wylde,
Vche fowle to þe fly3t þat fyþerez my3t serue,
Vche fysch to þe flod þat fynne couþe nayte.
Vche beste to þe bent þat þat bytes on erbez;
Wylde wormez to her won wryþez in þe erþe,
Þe fox & þe folmarde to þe fryth wyndez,
Herttes to hy3e heþe, harez to gorstez,
& lyounez & lebardez to þe lake-ryftes:
Hernez & hauekez to þe hy3e rochez,
Þe hole-foted fowle to þe flod hy3ez,
& vche best at a brayde þer hym best lykez;
Þe fowre frekez of þe folde fongez þe empyre.
Lo! suche a wrakful wo for wlatsum dedez
Parformed þe hy3e Fader on folke þat He made;
Þat He chysly hade cherisched He chastysed ful hardee,
In devoydynge þe vylanye þat venkquyst His þewez.
Forþy war þe now, wy3e þat worschyp desyres
In His comlych courte þat Kyng is of blysse,
In þe fylþe of þe flesch þat þou be founden neuer,
Tyl any water in þe worlde to wasche þe fayly.
For is no segge vnder sunne so seme of his craftez,
If he be sulped in synne, þat syttez vnclene;
On spec of spote may spede to mysse
Of þe sy3te of þe Souerayn þat syttez so hy3e;
For þat schewe me schale in þo schyre howsez,
As þe beryl bornyst byhouez be clene.
Þat is sounde on vche a syde & no sem habes,
Withouten maskle oþer mote, as margerye-perle.
Syþen þe Souerayn in sete so sore forþo3t
Þat euer He man vpon molde merked to lyuy,
For he in fylþe watz fallen, felly He uenged,
Quen fourferde alle þe flesch þat He formed hade.
Hym rwed þat He hem vprerde & ra3t hem lyflode;
& efte þat He hem vndyd, hard hit Hym þo3t.
For quen þe swemande sor3e so3t to His hert,
He knyt a couenaunde cortaysly with monkynde þere,
In þe mesure of His mode & meþe of His wylle,
Þat He schulde neuer for no syt smyte al at onez,
As to quelle alle quykez for qued þat my3t falle,
Whyl of þe lenþe of þe londe lastez þe terme.
Þat ilke skyl for no scaþe ascaped Hym neuer.
Wheder wonderly He wrak on wykked men after,
Ful felly for þat ilk faute forferde a kyth ryche,
In þe anger of His ire, þat ar3ed mony;
& al watz for þis ilk euel, þat vnhappen glette,
Þe venym & þe vylanye & þe vycios fylþe
Þat bysulpez mannez saule in vnsounde hert,
Þat he his Saueour ne see with sy3t of his y3en.
Alle illez He hates as helle þat alle stynkkez;
Bot non nuyez Hym on na3t ne neuer vpon dayez
As harlottrye vnhonest, heþyng of seluen:
Þat schamez for no schrewedschyp, schent mot he worþe.
Bot sauyour, mon, in þyself, þa3þou a sotte lyuie,
Þa3þou bere þyself babel, byþenk þe sumtyme
Wheþer He þat stykked vche a stare in vche steppe y3e, 3if Hymsel[f] be bore blynde hit is a brod wonder;
& He þat fetly in face fettled alle eres,
If he hatz losed þe lysten hit lyftez meruayle:
Trave þou neuer þat tale, vntrwe þou hit fyndez.
Þer is no dede so derne þat dittez His y3en;
Þer is no wy3e in his werk so war ne so stylle
Þat hit ne þrawez to Hym þr[o] er he hit þo3t haue.
For He is þe gropande God, þe grounde of alle dedez,
Rypande of vche a ring þe reynyez & hert.
& þere He fyndez al fayre a freke wythinne,
Þat hert honest & hol, þat haþel He honourez,
Sendez hym a sad sy3t: to se His auen face,
& harde honysez þise oþer, & of His erde flemez.
Bot of þe dome of þe douþe for dedez of schame,
He is so skoymos of þat skaþe, He scarrez bylyue;
He may not dry3e to draw allyt, bot drepez in hast:
& þat watz schewed schortly by a scaþe onez.
Olde Abraham in erde onez he syttez
Euen byfore his hous-dore, vnder an oke grene;
Bry3t blykked þe bem of þe brode heuen;
In þe hy3e hete þerof Abraham bidez:
He watz schunt to þe schadow vnder schyre leuez.
Þenne watz he war on þe waye of wlonk Wy3ez þrynne;
If þay wer farande & fre & fayre to beholde
Hit is eþe to leue by þe last ende.
For þe lede þat þer laye þe leuez anvnder,
When he hade of Hem sy3t he hy3ez bylyue,
& as to God þe goodmon gos Hem agaynez
& haylsed Hem in onhede, & sayde: 'Hende Lorde, 3if euer Þy mon vpon molde merit disserued,
Lenge a lyttel with Þy lede, I lo3ly biseche;
Passe neuer fro Þi pouere, 3if I hit pray durst,
Er Þou haf biden with Þi burne & vnder bo3e restted,
& I schal wynne Yow wy3t of water a lyttel,
& fast aboute schal I fare Your fette wer waschene.
Resttez here on þis rote & I schal rachche after
& brynge a morsel of bred to banne Your hertte.'
'Fare forthe,' quoþ þe Frekez, '& fech as þou seggez;
By bole of þis brode tre We byde þe here.'
Þenne orppedly into his hous he hy3ed to Sare,
Commaunded hir to be cof & quyk at þis onez:
'Þre mettez of mele menge & ma kakez;
Vnder askez ful hote happe hem byliue;
Quyl I fete sumquat fat, þou þe fyr bete,
Prestly at þis ilke poynte sum polment to make.'
He cached to his covhous & a calf bryngez,
Þat watz tender & not to3e, bed tyrue of þe hyde,
& sayde to his seruaunt þat hit seþe faste;
& he deruely at his dome dy3t hit bylyue.
Þe burne to be bare-heued buskez hym þenne,
Clechez to a clene cloþe & kestez on þe grene,
Þrwe þryftyly þeron þo þre þerue kakez,
& bryngez butter wythal & by þe bred settez;
Mete messez of mylke he merkkez bytwene,
Syþen potage & polment in plater honest.
As sewer in a god assyse he serued Hem fayre,
Wyth sadde semblaunt & swete of such as he hade;
& God as a glad gest mad god chere
Þat watz fayn of his frende, & his fest praysed.
Abraham, al hodlez, with armez vp-folden,
Mynystred mete byfore þo Men þat my3tes al weldez.
Þenne Þay sayden as Þay sete samen alle þrynne,
When þe mete watz remued & Þay of mensk speken,
'I schal efte hereaway, Abram,' Þay sayden,
'3et er þy lyuez ly3t leþe vpon erþe,
& þenne schal Sare consayue & a sun bere,
Þat schal be Abrahamez ayre & after hym wynne
With wele & wyth worschyp þe worþely peple
Þat schal halde in heritage þat I haf men 3ark[ed].'
Þenne þe burde byhynde þe dor for busmar la3ed;
& sayde sothly to hirself Sare þe madde:
'May þou traw for tykle þat þou tonne mo3tez,
& I so hy3e out of age, & also my lorde?'
For soþely, as says þe wryt, he wern of sadde elde,
Boþe þe wy3e & his wyf, such werk watz hem fayled
Fro mony a brod day byfore; ho barayn ay byene,
Þat selue Sare, withouten sede into þat same tyme.
Þenne sayde oure Syre þer He sete: 'Se! so Sare la3es,
Not trawande þe tale þat I þe to schewed.
Hopez ho o3t may be harde My hondez to work?
& 3et I avow verayly þe avaunt þat I made;
I schal 3eply a3ayn & 3elde þat I hy3t,
& sothely send to Sare a soun & an hayre.'
Þenne swenged forth Sare & swer by hir trawþe
Þat for lot þat Þay laused ho la3ed neuer.
'Now innoghe: hit is not so,' þenne nurned þe Dry3tyn,
'For þou la3ed alo3, bot let we hit one.'
With þat Þay ros vp radly, as Þay rayke schulde,
& setten toward Sodamas Her sy3t alle at onez;
For þat cite þerbysyde watz sette in a vale,
No mylez fro Mambre mo þen tweyne,
Whereso wonyed þis ilke wy3, þat wendez with oure Lorde
For to tent Hym with tale & teche Hym þe gate.
Þen glydez forth God; þe godmon Hym fol3ez;
Abraham heldez Hem wyth, Hem to conueye
In towarde þe cety of Sodamas þat synned had þenne
In þe faute of þis fylþe. Þe Fader hem þretes,
& sayde þus to þe segg þat sued Hym after:
'How my3t I hyde Myn hert fro Habraham þe trwe,
Þat I ne dyscouered to his corse My counsayl so dere,
Syþen he is chosen to be chef chyldryn fader,
Þat so folk schal falle fro to flete alle þe worlde,
& vche blod in þat burne blessed schal worþe?
Me bos telle to þat tolk þe tene of My wylle,
& alle Myn atlyng to Abraham vnhaspe bilyue.
The grete soun of Sodamas synkkez in Myn erez,
& þe gult of Gomorre garez Me to wrath.
I schal ly3t into þat led & loke Myseluen
[If] þay haf don as þe dyne dryuez on lofte.
Þay han lerned a lyst þat lykez me ille,
Þat þay han founden in her flesch of fautez þe werst:
Vch male matz his mach a man as hymseluen,
& fylter folyly in fere on femmalez wyse.
I compast hem a kynde crafte & kende hit hem derne,
& amed hit in Myn ordenaunce oddely dere,
& dy3t drwry þerinne, doole alþer-swettest,
& þe play of paramorez I portrayed Myseluen,
& made þerto a maner myriest of oþer:
When two true togeder had ty3ed hemseluen,
Bytwene a male & his make such merþe schulde conne,
Welny3e pure paradys mo3t preue no better;
Ellez þay mo3t honestly ayþer oþer welde,
At a stylle stollen steuen, vnstered wyth sy3t,
Luf-lowe hem bytwene lasched so hote
Þat alle þe meschefez on mold mo3t hit not sleke.
Now haf þay skyfted My skyl & scorned natwre,
& henttez hem in heþyng an vsage vnclene.
Hem to smyte for þat smod smartly I þenk,
Þat wy3ez schal be by hem war, worlde withouten ende.'
Þenne ar3ed Abraham & alle his mod chaunge[d],
For hope of þe harde hate þat hy3t hatz oure Lorde.
Al sykande he sayde: 'Sir, with Yor leue,
Schal synful & saklez suffer al on payne?
Weþer euer hit lyke my Lorde to lyfte such domez
Þat þe wykked & þe worþy schal on wrake suffer,
& weye vpon þe worre half þat wrathed Þe neuer?
Þat watz neuer Þy won þat wro3tez vus alle.
Now fyfty fyn frendez wer founde in 3onde toune,
In þe cety of Sodamas & also Gomorre,
Þat neuer lakked Þy laue, bot loued ay trauþe,
& re3tful wern & resounable & redy Þe to serue,
Schal þay falle in þe faute þat oþer frekez wro3t,
& joyne to her juggement, her juise to haue?
Þat nas neuer Þyn note, vnneuened hit worþe,
Þat art so gaynly a God & of goste mylde.'
'Nay, for fyfty,' quoþ þe Fader, '& þy fayre speche,
& þay be founden in þat folk of her fylþe clene,
I schal forgyue alle þe gylt þur3My grace one,
& let hem smolt al unsmyten smoþely at onez.'
'Aa! blessed be Þow,' quoþ þe burne, 'so boner & þewed,
& al haldez in Þy honde, þe heuen & þe erþe;
Bot, for I haf þis talke tatz to non ille 3if I mele a lyttel more þat mul am & askez.
What if fyue faylen of fyfty þe noumbre,
& þe remnaunt be reken, how restes Þy wylle?'
'And fyue wont of fyfty,' quoþ God, 'I schal for3ete alle
& wythhalde My honde for hortyng on lede.'
'& quat if faurty be fre & fauty þyse oþer:
Schalt Þow schortly al schende & schape non oþer?'
'Nay, þa3faurty forfete, 3et fryst I a whyle,
& voyde away My vengaunce, þa3Me vyl þynk.'
Þen Abraham obeched Hym & lo3ly Him þonkkez:
'Now sayned be Þou, Sauiour, so symple in Þy wrath!
I am bot erþe ful euel & vsle so blake,
For to mele wyth such a Mayster as my3tez hatz alle.
Bot I haue bygonnen wyth my God, & He hit gayn þynkez; 3if I forloyne as a fol Þy fraunchyse may serue.
What if þretty þryuande be þrad in 3on tounez,
What schal I leue of my Lorde, [i]f He hem leþe wolde?'
Þenne þe godlych God gef hym onsware:
'3et for þretty in þrong I schal My þro steke,
& spare spakly of spyt in space of My þewez,
& My rankor refrayne four þy reken wordez.'
'What for twenty,' quoþ þe tolke, 'vntwynez Þou hem þenne?'
'Nay, 3if þou 3ernez hit 3et, 3ark I hem grace;
If þat twenty be trwe, I tene hem no more,
Bot relece alle þat regioun of her ronk werkkez.'
'Now, aþel Lorde,' quoþ Abraham, 'onez a speche,
& I schal schape no more þo schalkkez to helpe.
If ten trysty in toune be tan in Þi werkkez,
Wylt Þou mese Þy mode & menddyng abyde?'
'I graunt,' quoþ þe grete God, 'Graunt mercy,' þat oþer;
& þenne arest þe renk & ra3t no fyrre.
& Godde glydez His gate by þose grene wayez,
& he conueyen Hym con with cast of his y3e;
& als he loked along þereas oure Lorde passed, 3et he cryed Hym after with careful steuen:
'Meke Mayster, on Þy mon to mynne if Þe lyked,
Loth lengez in 3on leede þat is my lef broþer;
He syttez þer in Sodomis, þy seruaunt so pouere,
Among þo mansed men þat han Þe much greued. 3if Þou tynez þat toun, tempre Þyn yre,
As Þy mersy may malte, Þy meke to spare.'
Þen he wendez, wendez his way, wepande for care,
Towarde þe mere of Mambre, wepande for sorewe;
& þere in longyng al ny3t he lengez in wones,
Whyl þe Souerayn to Sodamas sende to spye.
His sondes into Sodamas watz sende in þat tyme,
In þat ilk euentyde, by aungels tweyne,
Meuand meuande mekely togeder as myry men 3onge,
As Loot in a loge dor lened hym alone,
In a porche of þat place py3t to þe 3ates,
Þat watz ryal & ryche so watz þe renkes seluen.
As he stared into þe strete þer stout men played,
He sy3e þer swey in asent swete men tweyne;
Bolde burnez wer þay boþe with berdles chynnez,
Ryol rollande fax to raw sylk lyke,
Of ble as þe brere-flour whereso þe bare scheweed.
Ful clene watz þe countenaunce of her cler y3en;
Wlonk whit watz her wede & wel hit hem semed.
Of alle feturez ful fyn & fautlez boþe;
Watz non autly in ouþer, for aungels hit wern,
& þat þe 3ep vnder3ede þat in þe 3ate syttez;
He ros vp ful radly & ran hem to mete,
& lo3e he loutez hem to, Loth, to þe grounde,
& syþen soberly: 'Syrez, I yow byseche
Þat 3e wolde ly3t at my loge & lenge þerinne.
Comez to your knaues kote, I craue at þis onez;
I schal fette yow a fatte your fette for to wasche;
I norne yow bot for on ny3t ne3e me to lenge,
& in þe myry mornyng 3e may your waye take.'
& þay nay þat þay nolde ne3no howsez,
Bot stylly þer in þe strete as þay stadde wern
Þay wolde lenge þe long na3t & logge þeroute:
Hit watz hous inno3e to hem þe heuen vpon lofte.
Loth laþed so longe wyth luflych wordez
Þat þay hym graunted to go & gru3t no lenger.
Þe bolde to his byggyng bryngez hem bylyue,
Þat [watz] ryally arayed, for he watz ryche euer.
Þe wy3ez wern welcom as þe wyf couþe;
His two dere do3terez deuoutly hem haylsed,
Þat wer maydenez ful meke, maryed not 3et,
& þay wer semly & swete, & swyþe wel arayed.
Loth þenne ful ly3tly lokez hym aboute,
& his men amonestes mete for to dy3t:
'Bot þenkkez on hit be þrefte what þynk so 3e make,
For wyth no sour no no salt seruez hym neuer.'
Bot 3et I wene þat þe wyf hit wroth to dyspyt,
& sayde softely to hirself: 'Þis vn[s]auere hyne
Louez no salt in her sauce; 3et hit no skyl were
Þat oþer burne be boute, þa3boþe be nyse.'
Þenne ho sauerez with salt her seuez vchone,
Agayne þe bone of þe burne þat hit forboden hade,
& als ho scelt hem in scorne þat wel her skyl knewen.
Why watz ho, wrech, so wod? Ho wrathed oure Lorde.
Þenne seten þay at þe soper, wern serued bylyue,
Þe gestes gay & ful glad, of glam debonere,
Welawynnely wlonk, tyl þay waschen hade,
Þe trestes tylt to þe wo3e & þe table boþe.
Fro þe seggez haden souped & seten bot a whyle,
Er euer þay bosked to bedde, þe bor3watz al vp,
Alle þat weppen my3t welde, þe wakker & þe stronger,
To vmbely3e Lothez hous þe ledez to take.
In grete flokkez of folk þay fallen to his 3atez;
As a scowte-wach scarred so þe asscry rysed;
With kene clobbez of þat clos þay clatz on þe wowez,
& wyth a schrylle scarp schout þay schewe þyse worde[z]:
'If þou louyez þy lyf, Loth, in þyse wones, 3ete vus out þose 3ong men þat 3ore-whyle here entred,
Þat we may lere hym of lof, as oure lyst biddez,
As is þe asyse of Sodomas to seggez þat passen.'
Whatt! þay sputen & speken of so spitous fylþe,
What! þay 3e3ed & 3olped of 3estande sor3e,
Þat 3et þe wynd & þe weder & þe worlde stynkes
Of þe brych þat vpbraydez þose broþelych wordez.
Þe godman glyfte with þat glam & gloped for noyse;
So scharpe schame to hym schot, he schrank at þe hert.
For he knew þe costoum þat kyþed þose wrechez,
He doted neuer for no doel so depe in his mynde.
'Allas!' sayd hym þenne Loth, & ly3tly he rysez,
& bowez forth fro þe bench into þe brode 3ates.
What! he wonded no woþe of wekked knauez,
Þat he ne passed þe port þe p[er]il to abide.
He went forthe at þe wyket & waft hit hym after,
Þat a clyket hit cle3t clos hym byhynde.
Þenne he meled to þo men mesurable wordez,
For harlotez with his hendelayk he hoped to chast:
'Oo, my frendez so fre, your fare is to strange;
Dotz away your derf dyn & derez neuer my gestes.
Avoy! hit is your vylaynye, 3e vylen yourseluen;
& 3e are jolyf gentylmen, your japez ar ille
Bot I schal kenne yow by kynde a crafte þat is better:
I haf a tresor in my telde of tow my fayre de3ter,
Þat ar maydenez vnmard for alle men 3ette;
In Sodamas, þa3I hit say, non semloker burdes;
Hit arn ronk, hit arn rype, & redy to manne;
To samen wyth þo semly þe solace is better.
I schal biteche yow þo two þat tayt arn & quoynt,
& laykez wyth hem as yow lyst, & letez my gestes one.'
Þenne þe rebaudez so ronk rerd such a noyse
Þat a3ly hurled in his erez her harlotez speche:
'Wost þou not wel þat þou wonez here a wy3e strange,
An outcomlyng, a carle? We kylle of þyn heued!
Who joyned þe be jostyse oure japez to blame,
Þat com a boy to þis bor3, þa3þou be burne ryche?'
Þus þay þrobled & þrong & þrwe vmbe his erez,
& distresed hym wonder strayt with strenkþe in þe prece,
Bot þat þe 3onge men, so 3epe, 3ornen þeroute,
Wapped vpon þe wyket & wonnen hem tylle,
& by þe hondez hym hent & horyed hym withinne,
& steken þe 3ates ston-harde wyth stalworth barrez.
Þay blwe a boffet inblande þat banned peple,
Þat þay blustered, as blynde as Bayard watz euer;
Þay lest of Lotez logging any lysoun to fynde,
Bot nyteled þer alle þe ny3t for no3t at þe last.
Þenne vch tolke ty3t hem, þat hade of tayt fayled,
& vchon roþeled to þe rest þat he reche mo3t;
Bot þay wern wakned al wrank þat þer in won lenged,
Of on þe vglokest vnhap þat euer on erd suffred.
Ruddon of þe day-rawe ros vpon v3ten,
When merk of þe mydny3t mo3t no more last.
Ful erly þose aungelez þis haþel þay ruþen,
& glopnedly on Godez halue gart hym vpryse;
Fast þe freke ferkez vp ful ferd at his hert;
Þay comaunded hym cof to cach þat he hade,
'Wyth þy wyf & þy wy3ez & þy wlonc de3tters,
For we laþe þe, sir Loth, þat þou þy lyf haue.
Cayre tid of þis kythe er combred þou worþe,
With alle þi here vpon haste, tyl þou a hil fynde;
Foundez faste on your fete; bifore your face lokes,
Bot bes neuer so bolde to blusch yow bihynde,
& loke 3e stemme no stepe, bot strechez on faste;
Til 3e reche to a reset, rest 3e neuer.
For we schal tyne þis toun & trayþely disstrye,
Wyth alle þise wy3ez so wykke wy3tly devoyde,
& alle þe londe with þise ledez we losen at onez;
Sodomas schal ful sodenly synk into grounde,
& þe grounde of Gomorre gorde into helle,
& vche a koste of þis kythe clater vpon hepes.'
Þen laled Loth: 'Lorde, what is best?
If I me fele vpon fote þat I fle mo3t,
Hov schulde I huyde me fro H[y]m þat hatz His hate kynned
In þe brath of His breth þat brennez alle þinkez?
To crepe fro my Creatour & know not wheder,
Ne wheþer His fooschip me fol3ez bifore oþer bihynde.'
Þe freke sayde: 'No foschip oure Fader hatz þe schewed,
Bot hi3ly heuened þi hele fro hem þat arn combred.
Nov wale þe a wonnyng þat þe warisch my3t,
& He schal saue hit for þy sake þat hatz vus sende hider,
For þou art oddely þyn one out of þis fylþe,
& als Abraham þyn eme hit at Himself asked.'
'Lorde, loued He worþe,' quoþ Loth, 'vpon erþe!
Þen is a cite herbisyde þat Segor hit hatte,
Here vtter on a rounde hil hit houez hit one.
I wolde, if His wylle wore, to þat won scape.'
'Þenn fare forth,' quoþ þat fre, '& fyne þou neuer,
With þose ilk þat þow wylt þat þrenge þe after,
& ay goande on your gate, wythouten agayn-tote,
For alle þis londe schal be lorne longe er þe sonne rise.'
Þe wy3e wakened his wyf & his wlonk de3teres,
& oþer two myri men þo maydenez schulde wedde;
& þay token hit as tyt & tented hit lyttel;
Þa3fast laþed hem Loth, þay le3en ful stylle.
Þe aungelez hasted þise oþer & a3ly hem þratten,
& enforsed alle fawre forth at þe 3atez:
Þo wern Loth & his lef, his luflyche de3ter;
Þer so3t no mo to sauement of cities aþel fyue.
Þise aungelez hade hem by hande out at þe 3atez,
Prechande hem þe perile, & beden hem passe fast:
'Lest 3e be taken in þe teche of tyrauntez here,
Loke 3e bowe now bi bot; bowez fast hence!'
& þay kayre ne con, & kenely flowen.
Erly, er any heuen-glem, þay to a hil comen.
Þe grete God in His greme bygynnez on lofte
To wakan wederez so wylde; þe wyndez He callez,
& þay wroþely vpwafte & wrastled togeder,
Fro fawre half of þe folde flytande loude.
Clowdez clustered bytwene kesten vp torres,
Þat þe þik þunder-þrast þirled hem ofte.
Þe rayn rueled adoun, ridlande þikke
Of felle flaunkes of fyr & flakes of soufre,
Al in smolderande smoke smachande ful ille,
Swe aboute Sodamas & hit sydez alle,
Gorde to Gomorra, þat þe grounde laused,
Abdama & Syboym, þise ceteis alle faure
Al birolled wyth þe rayn, rostted & brenned,
& ferly flayed þat folk þat in þose fees lenged.
For when þat þe Helle herde þe houndez of heuen,
He watz ferlyly fayn, vnfolded bylyue;
Þe grete barrez of þe abyme he barst vp at onez,
Þat alle þe regioun torof in riftes ful grete,
& clouen alle in lyttel cloutes þe clyffez aywhere,
As lauce leuez of þe boke þat lepes in twynne.
Þe brethe of þe brynston bi þat hit blende were,
Al þo citees & her sydes sunkken to helle.
Rydelles wern þo grete rowtes of renkkes withinne,
When þay wern war of þe wrake þat no wy3e achaped;
Such a 3omerly 3arm of 3ellyng þer rysed,
Þerof clatered þe cloudes, þat Kryst my3t haf rawþe.
Þe segge herde þat soun to Segor þat 3ede,
& þe wenches hym wyth þat by þe way fol3ed;
Ferly ferde watz her flesch þat flowen ay ilyche,
Trynande ay a hy3e trot, þat torne neuer dorsten.
Loth & þo luly-whit, his lefly two de3ter,
Ay fol3ed here face, bifore her boþe y3en;
Bot þe balleful burde, þat neuer bode keped,
Blusched byhynden her bak þat bale for to herkken.
Hit watz lusty Lothes wyf þat ouer he[r] lyfte schulder
Ones ho bluschet to þe bur3e, bot bod ho no lenger
Þat ho nas stadde a stiffe ston, a stalworth image,
Al so salt as ani se, & so ho 3et standez.
Þay slypped bi & sy3e hir not þat wern hir samen-feres,
Tyl þay in Segor wern sette, & sayned our Lorde;
Wyth ly3t louez vplyfte þay loued Hym swyþe,
Þat so His seruauntes wolde see & saue of such woþe.
Al watz dampped & don & drowned by þenne;
Þe ledez of þat lyttel toun wern lopen out for drede
Into þat malscrande mere, marred bylyue,
Þat no3t saued watz bot Segor, þat sat on a lawe.
Þe þre ledez þerin, Loth & his de3ter;
For his make watz myst, þat on þe mount lenged
In a stonen statue þat salt sauor habbes,
For two fautes þat þe fol watz founde in mistrauþe:
On, ho serued at þe soper salt bifore Dry3tyn,
& syþen, ho blusched hir bihynde, þa3hir forboden were;
For on ho standes a ston, & salt for þat oþer,
& alle lyst on hir lik þat arn on launde bestes.
Abraham ful erly watz vp on þe morne,
Þat alle na3t much niye hade no mon in his hert,
Al in longing for Loth leyen in a wache;
Þer he lafte hade oure Lorde he is on lofte wonnen;
He sende toward Sodomas þe sy3t of his y3en,
Þat euer hade ben an erde of erþe þe swettest,
As aparaunt to paradis, þat plantted þe Dry3tyn;
Nov is hit plunged in a pit like of pich fylled.
Suche a roþun of a reche ros fro þe blake,
Askez vpe in þe arye & vsellez þer flowen,
As a fornes ful of flot þat vpon fyr boyles
When bry3t brennande brondez ar bet þeranvnder.
Þis watz a uengaunce violent þat voyded &thor


^^EOP^^


Appolinus his leve tok,
To God and al the lond betok
With al the poeple long and brod,
That he no lenger there abod.
The king and queene sorwe made,
Bot yit somdiel thei weren glade
Of such thing as thei herden tho:
And thus betwen the wel and wo
To schip he goth, his wif with childe,
The which was evere meke and mylde
And wolde noght departe him fro,
Such love was betwen hem tuo.
Lichorida for hire office
Was take, which was a norrice,
To wende with this yonge wif,
To whom was schape a woful lif.
Withinne a time, as it betidde,
Whan thei were in the see amidde,
Out of the north they sihe a cloude;
The storm aros, the wyndes loude
Thei blewen many a dredful blast,
The welkne was al overcast,
The derke nyht the sonne hath under,
Ther was a gret tempeste of thunder:
The mone and ek the sterres bothe
In blake cloudes thei hem clothe,
Wherof here brihte lok thei hyde.
This yonge ladi wepte and cride,
To whom no confort myhte availe;
Of childe sche began travaile,
Wher sche lay in a caban clos:
Hire woful lord fro hire aros,
And that was longe er eny morwe,
So that in anguisse and in sorwe
Sche was delivered al be nyhte
And ded in every mannes syhte;
Bot natheles for al this wo
A maide child was bore tho. 
     Appolinus whan he this knew,
For sorwe a swoune he overthrew,
That noman wiste in him no lif.
And whanne he wok, he seide, "Ha, wif,
Mi lust, mi joie, my desir,
Mi welthe and my recoverir,
Why schal I live, and thou schalt dye?
Ha, thou fortune, I thee deffie,
Nou hast thou do to me thi werste.
Ha, herte, why ne wolt thou berste,
That forth with hire I myhte passe?
Mi peines weren wel the lasse."
In such wepinge and in such cry
His dede wif, which lay him by,
A thousend sithes he hire kiste;
Was nevere man that sih ne wiste
A sorwe unto his sorwe lich;
For evere among, upon the lich
He fell swounende, as he that soghte
His oghne deth, which he besoghte
Unto the goddes alle above
With many a pitous word of love;
Bot suche wordes as tho were
Yit herde nevere mannes ere,
Bot only thilke whiche he seide.
The maister schipman cam and preide
With othre suche as be therinne,
And sein that he mai nothing winne
Ayein the deth, bot thei him rede,
He be wel war and tak hiede,
The see be weie of his nature
Receive mai no creature
Withinne himself as forto holde,
The which is ded: forthi thei wolde,
As thei conseilen al aboute,
The dede body casten oute.
For betre it is, thei seiden alle,
That it of hire so befalle,
Than if thei scholden alle spille. 
     The king, which understod here wille
And knew here conseil that was trewe,
Began ayein his sorwe newe
With pitous herte, and thus to seie:
"It is al reson that ye preie.
I am," quod he, "bot on al one,
So wolde I noght for mi persone
There felle such adversité.
Bot whan it mai no betre be,
Doth thanne thus upon my word,
Let make a cofre strong of bord,
That it be ferm with led and pich."
Anon was mad a cofre sich,
Al redy broght unto his hond;
And whanne he sih and redy fond
This cofre mad and wel enclowed,
The dede bodi was besowed
In cloth of gold and leid therinne.
And for he wolde unto hir winne
Upon som cooste a sepulture,
Under hire heved in aventure
Of gold he leide sommes grete
And of jeueals a strong beyete
Forth with a lettre, and seide thus: 
     "I, king of Tyr Appollinus,
Do alle maner men to wite,
That hiere and se this lettre write,
That helpeles withoute red
Hier lith a kinges doghter ded:
And who that happeth hir to finde,
For charité tak in his mynde,
And do so that sche be begrave
With this tresor, which he schal have."
Thus whan the lettre was full spoke,
Thei have anon the cofre stoke,
And bounden it with yren faste,
That it may with the wawes laste,
And stoppen it be such a weie,
That it schal be withinne dreie,
So that no water myhte it grieve.
And thus in hope and good believe
Of that the corps schal wel aryve,
Thei caste it over bord als blyve. 
     The schip forth on the wawes wente;
The prince hath changed his entente,
And seith he wol noght come at Tyr
As thanne, bot al his desir
Is ferst to seilen unto Tharse.
The wyndy storm began to skarse,
The sonne arist, the weder cliereth,
The schipman which behinde stiereth
Whan that he sih the wyndes saghte,
Towardes Tharse his cours he straghte. 
     Bot now to mi matiere ayein,
To telle as olde bokes sein,
This dede corps of which ye knowe
With wynd and water was forthrowe
Now hier, now ther, til ate laste
At Ephesim the see upcaste
The cofre and al that was therinne.
Of gret merveile now beginne
Mai hiere who that sitteth stille;
That God wol save mai noght spille.
Riht as the corps was throwe alonde,
Ther cam walkende upon the stronde
A worthi clerc, a surgien,
And ek a gret phisicien,
Of al that lond the wisest on,
Which hihte Maister Cerymon;
Ther were of his disciples some.
This maister to the cofre is come,
He peiseth ther was somwhat in,
And bad hem bere it to his in,
And goth himselve forth withal.
Al that schal falle, falle schal;
They comen hom and tarie noght;
This cofre is into chambre broght,
Which that thei finde faste stoke,
Bot thei with craft it have unloke.
Thei loken in, where as thei founde
A bodi ded, which was bewounde
In cloth of gold, as I seide er,
The tresor ek thei founden ther
Forth with the lettre which thei rede.
And tho thei token betre hiede;
Unsowed was the bodi sone,
And he, which knew what is to done,
This noble clerk, with alle haste
Began the veines forto taste,
And sih hire age was of youthe,
And with the craftes whiche he couthe
He soghte and fond a signe of lif.
With that this worthi kinges wif
Honestely thei token oute,
And maden fyres al aboute;
Thei leide hire on a couche softe,
And with a scheete warmed ofte
Hire colde brest began to hete,
Hire herte also to flacke and bete.
This maister hath hire every joignt
With certein oile and balsme enoignt,
And putte a liquour in hire mouth,
Which is to fewe clerkes couth,
So that sche coevereth ate laste:
And ferst hire yhen up sche caste,
And whan sche more of strengthe cawhte,
Hire armes bothe forth sche strawhte,
Hield up hire hond and pitously
Sche spak and seide, "Ha, wher am I?
Where is my lord, what world is this?"
As sche that wot noght hou it is.
Bot Cerymon the worthi leche
Ansuerde anon upon hire speche
And seith, "Ma dame, yee ben hiere,
Where yee be sauf, as yee schal hiere
Hierafterward; forthi as nou
Mi conseil is, conforteth you:
For trusteth wel withoute faile,
Ther is nothing which schal you faile,
That oghte of reson to be do."


^^EOP^^


Foweles in the frith,
The fisses in the flod,
And I mon waxe wod;
Mulch sorwe I walke with
For best of bon and blod.


^^EOP^^


He that doth wend her,
Let him lend her.


^^EOP^^


  I syng of a mayden
    That is makeles;
Kyng of alle kynges
    To here Sone sche ches. 
  He cam also stylle
    There his moder was
As dew in Aprylle
    That fallyt on the gras; 
  He cam also stylle
    To his moderes bowr
As dew in Aprille
    That fallyt on the flour; 
  He cam also stylle
    There his moder lay
As dew in Aprille
    That fallyt on the spray; 
  Moder and maydyn
    Was never non but sche;
Wel may swych a lady
    Godes moder be.
 


^^EOP^^


  Lyth and lystyn, gentilmen,
    All that nowe be here;
Of Litell Johnn, that was the knighees man,
    Goode myrth ye shall here. 
  It was upon a mery day
    That yonge men wolde go shete;
Lytell Johnn fet his bowe anone,
    And sayde he wolde them mete. 
  Thre tymes Litell Johnn shet aboute,
    And alwey he slet the wande;
The proude sherif of Notingham
    By the markes can stande. 
  The sherif swore a full greate othe:
    "By hym that dyede on a tre,
This man is the best arschére
    That ever yet sawe I me. 
  "Say me nowe, wight yonge man,
    What is nowe thy name?
In what countre were thou borne,
    And where is thy wonynge wane?" 
  "In Holdernes, sir, I was borne,
    I-wys al of my dame;
Men cal me Reynolde Grenelef
    Whan I am at home." 
  "Sey me, Reynolde Grenelefe,
    Wolde thou dwell with me?
And every yere I woll the gyve
    Twenty marke to thy fee." 
  "I have a maister," sayde Litell Johnn,
    "A curteys knight is he;
May ye leve gete of hym,
    The better may it be." 
  The sherif gate Litell John
    Twelve monethes of the knight;
Therfore he gave him right anone
    A gode hors and a wight. 
  Nowe is Litell John the sherifes man,
    God lende vs well to spede!
But alwey thought Lytell John
    To quyte hym wele his mede. 
  "Nowe so God me helpe," sayde Litell John,
    "And by my true leutye,
I shall be the worst servaunt to hym
    That ever yet had he." 
  It fell upon a Wednesday
    The sherif on huntynge was gone,
And Litel John lay in his bed,
    And was foriete at home. 
  Therfore he was fastinge
    Til it was past the none;
"Gode sir stuarde, I pray to the,
    Gyve me my dynere," saide Litell John. 
  "It is longe for Grenelefe
    Fastinge thus for to be;
Therfor I pray the, sir stuarde,
    Mi dyner gif me." 
  "Shalt thou never ete ne drynke," saide the stuarde,
    "Tyll my lorde be come to towne:"
"I make myn avowe to God," saide Litell John,
    "I had lever to crake thy crowne." 
  The boteler was full uncurteys,
    There he stode on flore;
He start to the botery
    And shet fast the dore. 
  Lytell Johnn gave the boteler suche a tap
    His backe went nere in two;
Though he lived an hundred ier,
    The wors shuld he go. 
  He sporned the dore with his fote;
    It went open wel and fyne;
And there he made large lyveray,
    Bothe of ale and of wyne. 
  "Sith ye wol nat dyne," sayde Litell John,
    "I shall gyve you to drinke;
And though ye lyve an hundred wynter,
    On Lytel Johnn ye shall thinke." 
  Litell John ete, and Litel John drank,
    The while that he wolde;
The sherife had in his kechyn a coke,
    A stoute man and a bolde. 
  "I make myn avowe to God," saide the coke,
    "Thou arte a shrewde hynde
In ani hous for to dwel,
    For to aske thus to dyne." 
  And there he lent Litell John
    Gode strokis thre;
"I make myn avowe to God," sayde Lytell John,
    "These strokis lyked well me. 
  "Thou arte a bolde man and hardy,
    And so thinketh me;
And or I pas fro this place
    Assayed better shalt thou be." 
  Lytell Johnn drew a ful gode sworde,
    The coke toke another in hande;
They thought no thynge for to fle,
    But stifly for to stande. 
  There they faught sore togedere
    Two myle way and well more;
Myght neyther other harme done,
    The mountnaunce of an owre. 
  "I make myn avowe to God," sayde Litell Johnn,
    "And by my true lewté,
Thou art one of the best sworde-men
    That ever yit sawe I me. 
  "Cowdest thou shote as well in a bowe,
    To grene wode thou shuldest with me,
And two times in the yere thy clothinge
    Chaunged shulde be; 
  "And every yere of Robyn Hode
    Twenty merke to thy fe:"
"Put up thy swerde," saide the coke,
    "And felowes woll we be." 
  Thanne he fet to Lytell Johnn
    The nowmbles of a do,
Gode brede, and full gode wyne,
    They ete and drank theretoo. 
  And when they had dronkyn well,
    Theyre trouthes togeder they plight
That they wolde be with Robyn
    That ylke same nyght. 
  They dyd them to the tresoure-hows,
    As fast as they myght gone;
The lokkes, that were of full gode stele,
    They brake them everichone. 
  They toke away the silver vessell,
    And all that thei might get;
Pecis, masars, ne sponis,
    Wolde thei not forget. 
  Also they toke the gode pens,
    Thre hundred pounde and more,
And did them streyte to Robyn Hode,
    Under the grene wode hore. 
  "God the save, my dere mayster,
    And Criste the save and se!"
And thanne sayde Robyn to Litel Johnn,
    Welcome myght thou be. 
  "Also be that fayre yeman
    Thou bryngest there with the;
What tydynges fro Notyngham?
    Lytill Johnn, tell thou me." 
  "Well the gretith the proude sheryf,
    And sendeth the here by me
His coke and his silver vessell,
    And thre hundred pounde and thre." 
  "I make myne avowe to God," sayde Robyn,
    "And to the Trenyté,
It was never by his gode wyll
    This gode is come to me." 
  Lytyll Johnn there hym bethought
    On a shrewde wyle;
Fyve myle in the forest he ran,
    Hym happed all his wyll. 
  Than he met the proude sheref,
    Huntynge with houndes and horne;
Lytell Johnn coude of curtesye,
    And knelyd hym beforne. 
  "God the save, my dere mayster,
    And Criste the save and se!"
"Reynolde Grenelefe," sayde the shryef,
    "Where hast thou nowe be?" 
  "I have be in this forest;
    A fayre syght can I se;
It was one of the fayrest syghtes
    That ever yet sawe I me. 
  "Yonder I sawe a ryght fayre harte,
    His coloure is of grene;
Seven score of dere upon a herde
    Be with hym all bydene. 
  "Their tyndes are so sharpe, maister,
    Of sexty, and well mo,
That I durst not shote for drede,
    Lest they wolde me slo." 
  "I make myn avowe to God," sayde the shyref,
    "That syght wolde I fayne se:"
"Buske you thyderwarde, mi dere mayster,
    Anone, and wende with me." 
  The sherif rode, and Litell Johnn
    Of fote he was full smerte,
And whane they came before Robyn,
    "Lo, sir, here is the mayster-herte." 
  Still stode the proude sherief,
    A sory man was he;
"Wo the worthe, Raynolde Grenelefe,
    Thou hast betrayed nowe me." 
  "I make myn avowe to God," sayde Litell Johnn,
    "Mayster, ye be to blame;
I was mysserved of my dynere
    Whan I was with you at home." 
  Sone he was to souper sette,
    And served well with silver white,
And whan the sherif sawe his vessell,
    For sorowe he myght nat ete. 
  "Make glad chere," sayde Robyn Hode,
    "Sherif, for charité,
And for the love of Litill Johnn
    Thy lyfe I graunt to the." 
  Whan they had souped well,
    The day was al gone;
Robyn commaunded Litell Johnn
    To drawe of his hosen and his shone; 
  His kirtell and his cote of pie,
    That was fured well and fine,
And toke hym a grene mantel,
    To lap his body therin. 
  Robyn commaundyd his wight yonge men,
    Under the grene-wode tree,
They shulde lye in that same sute,
    That the sherif myght them see. 
  All nyght lay the proude sherif
    In his breche and in his schert;
No wonder it was, in grene wode,
    Though his sydes gan to smerte. 
  "Makeglade chere," sayde Robyn Hode,
    "Sheref, for charité;
For this is our ordre i-wys,
    Under the grene-wode tree." 
  "This is harder order," sayde the sherief,
    "Than any ankir or frere;
For all the golde in mery Englonde
    I wolde nat longe dwell her." 
  "All this twelve monthes," sayde Robin,
    "Thou shalt dwell with me;
I shall the teche, proude sherif,
    An outlawe for to be." 
  "Or I be here another nyght," sayde the sherif,
    "Robyn, nowe pray I the,
Smyte of mijn hede rather to-morowe,
    And I forgyve it the. 
  "Lat me go," than sayde the sherif.
    "For saynte charité,
And I woll be the beste frende
    That ever yet had ye." 
  "Thou shalt swere me an othe," sayde Robyn,
    "On my bright bronde;
Shalt thou never awayte me scathe,
    By water ne by lande. 
  "And if thou fynde any of my men,
    By nyght or by day,
Upon thyn othe thou shalt swere
    To helpe them that thou may." 
  Nowe hathe the sherif sworne his othe,
    And home he began to gone;
He was as full of grene wode
    As ever was hepe of stone.
 
 


^^EOP^^


Bewailing in my chamber thus allone,
    Despeired of all joye and remedye,
For-tirit of my thoght, and wo begone,
    Unto the wyndow gan I walk in hye,
    To se the warld and folk that went forby;
As for the tyme, though I of mirthis fude
Myght have no more, to luke it did me gude. 
  Now was there maid fast by the touris wall
    A gardyn faire, and in the corneris set
Ane herbere grene:—with wandis long and small
    Railit about; and so with treis set
    Was all the place, and hawthorn hegis knet,
That lyf was none walking there forby,
That myght within scarse ony wight aspye; 
  So thik the bewis and the leves grene
    Beschadit all the aleyes that there were.
And myddis every herbere myght be sene
    The scharpe grene suete jenepere,
    Growing so faire with branchis here and there,
That, as it semyt to a lyf without,
The bewis spred the herbere all about; 
  And on the smalle grene twistis sat
    The lytill suete nyghtingale, and song
So loud and clere, the ympnis consecrat
    Off lufis use, now soft, now lowd among,
    That all the gardyng and the wallis rong
Ryght of thaire song and of the copill next
Off thaire suete armony, and lo the text: 
  "Worschippe, ye that loveris bene, this May,
    For of your blisse the kalendis are begonne,
And sing with us, 'Away, winter, away!
    Cum, somer, cum, the suete sesoun and sonne!'
    Awake for schame! that have your hevynnis wonne,
And amorously lift up your hedis all,
Thank lufe that list you to his merci call." 
  Quhen thai this song had song a lytill thrawe,
    Thai stent a quhile, and therewith unaffraid,
As I beheld and kest myn eyne a-lawe,
    From beugh to beugh thay hippit and thai plaid,
    And freschly in thaire birdis kynd arraid
Thaire fetheris new, and fret thame in the sonne,
And thankit lufe, that had thaire makis wonne. 
  This was the plane ditee of thaire note,
    And there-with-all unto my self I thoght,
"Quhat lyf is this that makis birdis dote?
    Quhat may this be, how cummyth it of ought?
    Quhat nedith it to be so dere ybought?
It is nothing, trowe I, bot feynit chere,
And that men list to counterfeten chere." 
  Eft wald I think; "O Lord, quhat may this be?
    That Lufe is of so noble myght and kynde,
Lufing his folk, and suich prosperitee
    Is it of him, as we in bukis fynd?
    May he oure hertes setten and unbynd?
Hath he upon oure hertis suich maistrye?
Or all this is bot feynyt fantasye! 
  "For gif he be of so grete excellence,
    That he of every wight hath cure and charge,
Quhat have I gilt to him or doon offense,
    That I am thrall, and birdis gone at large,
    Sen him to serve he myght set my corage?
And gif he be noght so, than may I seyne,
'Quhat makis folk to jangill of him in veyne?' 
  "Can I noght elles fynd, bot gif that he
    Be lord, and as a god may lyve and regne,
To bynd and louse, and maken thrallis free,
    Than wold I pray his blisfull grace benigne,
    To hable me unto his service digne;
And evermore for to be one of tho
Him trewly for to serve in wele and wo." 
  And there-with kest I doun myn eye ageyne,
    Quhare as I sawe, walking under the toure,
Full secretly, new cummyn hir to pleyne,
    The fairest or the freschest yonge floure
    That ever I sawe, me thoght, before that houre,
For quhich sodayn abate, anon astert
The blude of all my body to my hert. 
  And though I stude abaisit tho a lyte,
    No wonder was; for-quhy my wittis all
Were so overcom with plesance and delyte,
    Onely throu latting of myn eyen fall,
    That sudaynly my hert became hir thrall
For ever, of free will; for of manace
There was no takyn in hir suete face. 
  And in my hede I drewe ryght hastily,
    And eft-sones I lent it forth ageyne,
And sawe hir walk, that verray womanly,
    With no wight mo, bot onely wommen tueyne.
    Than gan I studye in my-self, and seyne,
"A! suete, ar ye a warldly creature,
Or hevinly thing in likenesse of nature? 
  "Or ar ye god Cupidis owin princesse,
    And cummyn are to louse me out of band?
Or ar ye verray Nature the goddesse,
    That have depaynted with your hevinly hand
    This gardyn full of flouris, as they stand?
Quhat sall I think, allace! quhat reverence
Sall I minister to your excellence? 
  "Gif ye a goddesse be, and that ye like
    To do me payne, I may it noght astert;
Gif ye be warldly wight, that dooth me sike,
    Quhy lest God mak you so, my derrest hert,
    To do a sely prisoner thus smert,
That lufis yow all, and wote of noght bot wo?
And therefor, merci, suete! sen it is so." 
  Quhen I a lytill thrawe had maid my moon,
    Bewailling myn infortune and my chance,
Unknawing how or quhat was best to doon,
    So ferre I fallen was in lufis dance,
    That sodeynly my wit, my contenance,
My hert, my will, my nature, and my mynd,
Was changit clene ryght in an-othir kynd. 
  Off hir array the form gif I sall write
    Toward, hir goldin haire and rich atyre
In fret-wise couchit were with perllis quhite
    And grete balas lemyng as the fyre,
    With mony ane emeraut and faire saphire;
And on hir hede a chaplet fresch of hewe,
Off plumys partit rede, and quhite, and blewe; 
  Full of quaking spangis bryght as gold,
    Forgit of schap like to the amorettis,
So new, so fresch, so plesant to behold,
    The plumys eke like to the floure-jonettis,
    And othir of schap like to the round crokettis,
And, above all this, there was, wele I wote,
Beautee eneuch to mak a world to dote. 
  About hir nek, quhite as the fyre amaille,
    A gudely cheyne of smale orfeverye,
Quhareby there hang a ruby, without faille,
    Lyke to ane herte schapin verily,
    That, as a sperk of lowe, so wantonly
Semyt birnyng upon hir quhyte throte;
Now gif there was gud partye, God it wote! 
  And forto walk that fresche Mayes morowe,
    An huke sche had upon hir tissew quhite,
That gudeliare had noght bene sene toforowe,
    As I suppose; and girt sche was a lyte.
    Thus halflyng louse for haste, to suich delyte
It was to see hir youth in gudelihede,
That for rudenes to speke thereof I drede. 
  In hir was youth, beautee, with humble aport,
    Bountee, richesse, and wommanly facture,
(God better wote than my pen can report)
    Wisedome, largesse, estate, and connyng sure.
    In every poynt so guydit hir mesure,
In word, in dede, in schap, in contenance,
That nature myght no more hir childe avance. 
  Throw quhich anon I knew and understude
    Wele, that sche was a warldly creature;
On quhom to rest myn eye, so mich gude
    It did my wofull hert, I yow assure,
    That it was to me joye without mesure;
And, at the last, my luke unto the hevin
I threwe furthwith, and said thir versis sevin: 
  "O Venus clere! of goddis stellifyit!
    To quhom I yelde homage and sacrifise,
Fro this day forth your grace be magnifyit,
    That me ressavit have in suich a wise,
    To lyve under your law and do servise;
Now help me furth, and for your merci lede
My herte to rest, that dëis nere for drede."


^^EOP^^


Wyatt resteth here, that quick could never rest;
Whose heavenly gifts increased by disdain,
And virtue sank the deeper in his breast;
Such profit he by envy could obtain. 
A head where wisdom mysteries did frame,
Whose hammers beat still in that lively brain
As on a stithy where that some work of fame
Was daily wrought, to turn to Britain's gain. 
A visage stern and mild, where both did grow,
Vice to contemn, in virtue to rejoice;
Amid great storms, whom grace assured so
To live upright and smile at fortune's choice. 
A hand that taught what might be said in rhyme;
That reft Chaucer the glory of his wit:
A mark, the which (unparfited, for time)
Some may approach, but never none shall hit. 
A tongue that served in foreign realms his king;
Whose courteous talk to virtue did enflame
Each noble heart; a worthy guide to bring
Our English youth by travail unto fame. 
An eye whose judgment none affect could blind,
Friends to allure, and foes to reconcile;
Whose piercing look did represent a mind
With virtue fraught, reposed, void of guile. 
A heart where dread was never so impress'd,
To hide the thought that might the truth advance;
In neither fortune loft, nor yet repress'd,
To swell in wealth, or yield unto mischance. 
A valiant corps, where force and beauty met;
Happy, alas, too happy, but for foes!
Lived, and ran the race, that Nature set:
Of manhood's shape, where she the mould did lose. 
But to the heavens that simple soul is fled,
Which left with such as covet Christ to know
Witness of faith that never shall be dead,
Sent for our health, but not received so.
Thus, for our guilt, this jewel have we lost;
The earth his bones, the heavens possess his ghost.


^^EOP^^




From Chapter XLII




The good Dame Mercy with Dame Charyte
My body buryed full ryght humbly
In a fayre temple of olde antyquyte,
Where was for me a dyryge devoutely
And with many a masse full ryght solempnely;
And over my grave, to be in memory,
Remembraunce made this lytell epytaphy: 
"O erthe, on erthe it is a wonders cace
That thou arte blynde and wyll not the knowe.
Though upon erthe thou hast thy dwellynge-place,
Yet erthe at laste must nedes the overthrowe.
Thou thynkest the to be none erthe I trowe;
For yf thou dydest, thou woldest than apply
To forsake pleasure and to lerne to dy. 
"O erthe, of erthe why arte thou so proude?
Now what thou arte call to remembraunce.
Open thyn eres unto my songe aloude.
Is not thy beauté, strength, and puyssaunce,
Though it be cladde with clothes of plesaunce,
Very erthe and also wormes fode,
Whan erthe to erthe shall so tourne the blode? 
"The vyle carkes set upon a fyre
Dooth often haunte the synne of lechery,
Fulfyllynge the foule carnall desyre.
Thus erthe with erthe is corrupte mervaylously;
And erthe on erthe wyll nothynge puryfye
Tyll erthe to erthe be nere subverted.
For erthe with erthe is so perverted. 
"O mortall folke! you may beholde and se
Howe I lye here, sometyme a myghty knyght;
The end of joye and all prosperyte
Is dethe at last, through his course and myght;
After the day there cometh the derke night;
For though the day be never so longe,
At last the belles ryngeth to evensonge. 
"And my selfe called La Graunde Amoure,
Sekynge adventure in the worldly glory,
For to attayne the ryches and honoure,
Did thynke full lytell that I sholde here ly,
Tyll dethe dyde marke me full ryght pryvely.
Lo what I am! and whereto you must!
Lyke as I am so shall you be all dust. 
"Than in your mynde inwardely dyspyse
The bryttle worlde, so full of doublenes,
With the vyle flesshe, and ryght sone aryse
Out of your slepe of mortall hevynes;
Subdue the devill with grace and mekenes,
That after your lyfe frayle and transytory,
You may then lyve in joye perdurably."


^^EOP^^


Pacience is a poynt, Þa3 hit displese ofte.
When heuy herttes ben hurt wyth heÞyng oÞer elles,
Suffraunce may aswag[en] hem & Þe swleme leÞe,
For ho quelles vche a qued & quenches malyce;
For quoso suffer cowÞe syt, sele wolde fol3e,
& quo for Þro may no3t Þole, Þe Þikker he sufferes.
Þen is better to abyde Þe bur vmbestoundes
Þen ay Þrow forth my Þro, Þa3 me Þynk ylle.
I herde on a halyday, at a hy3e masse,
How Mathew melede Þat his Mayster His meyny con teche.
A3t happes He hem hy3t & vcheon a mede,
Sunderlupes, for hit dissert, vpon a ser wyse:
Thay arn happen Þat han in hert pouerte,
For hores is Þe heuen-ryche to holde for euer;
Þay ar happen also Þat haunte mekenesse,
For Þay schal welde Þis worlde & alle her wylle haue;
Thay ar happen also Þat for her harme wepes,
For Þay schal comfort encroche in kythes ful mony;
Þay ar happen also Þat hungeres after ry3t,
For Þay schal frely be refete ful of alle gode;
Thay ar happen also Þat han in hert rauÞe,
For mercy in alle maneres her mede schal worÞe;
Þay ar happen also Þat arn of hert clene,
For Þay her Sauyour in sete schal se with her y3en;
Thay ar happen also Þat halden her pese,
For Þay Þe gracious Godes sunes schal godly be called;
Þay ar happen also Þat con her hert stere,
For hores is Þe heuen-ryche, as I er sayde.
These arn Þe happes alle a3t Þat vus bihy3t weren,
If we Þyse ladyes wolde lof in lyknyng of Þewes:
Dame Pouert, Dame Pitee, Dame Penaunce Þe Þrydde,
Dame Mekenesse, Dame Mercy, & miry Clannesse,
& Þenne Dame Pes, & Pacyence put in Þerafter.
He were happen Þat hade one; alle were Þe better.
Bot [s]yn I am put to a poynt Þat pouerte hatte,
I schal me poruay pacyence & play me with boÞe,
For in Þe tyxte Þere Þyse two arn in teme layde,
Hit arn fettled in on forme, Þe forme & Þe laste,
& by quest of her quoyntyse enquylen on mede.
& als, in myn vpynyoun, hit arn of on kynde:
For Þeras pouert hir proferes ho nyl be put vtter,
Bot lenge wheresoeuer hir lyst, lyke oÞer greme;
& Þereas pouert enpresses, Þa3 mon pyne Þynk,
Much, maugre his mun, he mot nede suffer;
Thus pouerte & pacyence arn nedes playferes.
SyÞen I am sette with hem samen, suffer me byhoues;
Þenne is me ly3tloker hit lyke & her lotes prayse,
Þenne wyÞer wyth & be wroth & Þe wers haue. 3if me be dy3t a destyne due to haue,
What dowes me Þe dedayn, oÞer dispit make?
OÞer 3if my lege lorde lyst on lyue me to bidde
OÞer to ryde oÞer to renne to Rome in his ernde,
What grayÞed me Þe grychchyng bot grame more seche?
Much 3if he me ne made, maugref my chekes,
& Þenne Þrat moste I Þole & vnÞonk to mede,
Þe had bowed to his bode bongre my hyure.
Did not Jonas in Jude suche jape sumwhyle?
To sette hym to sewrte, vnsounde he hym feches.
Wyl 3e tary a lyttel tyne & tent me a whyle,
I schal wysse yow Þerwyth as holy wryt telles.
Hit bitydde sumtyme in Þe termes of Jude,
Jonas joyned watz Þerinne Jentyle prophete;
Goddes glam to hym glod Þat hym vnglad made,
With a roghlych rurd rowned in his ere:
'Rys radly,' He says, '& rayke forth euen;
Nym Þe way to Nynyue wythouten oÞer speche,
& in Þat cete My sa3es soghe alle aboute,
Þat in Þat place, at Þe poynt, I put in Þi hert.
For iwysse hit arn so wykke Þat in Þat won dowellez
& her malys is so much, I may not abide,
Bot venge Me on her vilanye & venym bilyue;
Now swe3e Me Þider swyftly & say Me Þis arende.'
When Þat steuen watz stynt Þat stown[e]d his mynde,
Al he wrathed in his wyt, & wyÞerly he Þo3t:
'If I bowe to His bode & bryng hem Þis tale,
& I be nummen in Nuniue, my nyes begynes:
He telles me Þose traytoures arn typped schrewes;
I com wyth Þose tyÞynges, Þay ta me bylyue,
Pynez me in a prysoun, put me in stokkes,
WryÞe me in a warlok, wrast out myn y3en.
Þis is a meruayl message a man for to preche
Amonge enmyes so mony & mansed fendes,
Bot if my gaynlych God such gref to me wolde,
Fo[r] desert of sum sake Þat I slayn were.
At alle peryles,' quoÞ Þe prophete, 'I aproche hit no nerre.
I wyl me sum oÞer waye Þat He ne wayte after;
I schal tee into Tarce & tary Þere a whyle,
& ly3tly when I am lest He letes me alone.'
Þenne he ryses radly & raykes bilyue,
Jonas toward port Japh, ay janglande for tene
Þat he nolde Þole for noÞyng non of Þose pynes,
Þa3 Þe Fader Þat hym formed were fale of his hele.
'Oure Syre syttes,' he says, 'on sege so hy3e
In His g[lo]wande glorye, & gloumbes ful lyttel
Þa3 I be nummen in Nunniue & naked dispoyled,
On rode rwly torent with rybaudes mony.'
Þus he passes to Þat port his passage to seche,
Fyndes he a fayr schyp to Þe fare redy,
Maches hym with Þe maryneres, makes her paye
For to towe hym into Tarce as tyd as Þay my3t.
Then he tron on Þo tres, & Þay her tramme ruchen,
Cachen vp Þe crossayl, cables Þay fasten,
Wi3t at Þe wyndas we3en her ankres,
Spende spak to Þe sprete Þe spare bawelyne,
Gederen to Þe gyde-ropes, Þe grete cloÞ falles,
Þay layden in on laddeborde, & Þe lofe wynnes,
Þe blyÞe breÞe at her bak Þe bosum he fyndes;
He swenges me Þys swete schip swefte fro Þe hauen.
Watz neuer so joyful a Jue as Jonas watz Þenne,
Þat Þe daunger of Dry3tyn so derfly ascaped;
He wende wel Þat Þat Wy3 Þat al Þe world planted
Hade no ma3t in Þat mere no man for to greue.
Lo, Þe wytles wrechche! For he wolde no3t suffer,
Now hatz he put hym in plyt of peril wel more.
Hit watz a wenyng vnwar Þat welt in his mynde,
Þa3 he were so3t fro Samarye, Þat God se3 no fyrre. 3ise, He blusched ful brode: Þat burde hym by sure;
Þat ofte kyd hym Þe carpe Þat kyng sayde,
Dyngne Dauid on des Þat demed Þis speche
In a psalme Þat he set Þe sauter withinne:
'O folez in folk, felez oÞerwhyle
& vnderstondes vmbestounde, Þa3 he be stape fole,
Hope 3e Þat He heres not Þat eres alle made?
Hit may not be Þat He is blynde Þat bigged vche y3e.'
Bot he dredes no dynt Þat dotes for elde.
For he watz fer in Þe flod foundande to Tarce,
Bot I trow ful tyd ouertan Þat he were,
So Þat schomely to schort he schote of his ame.
For Þe Welder of wyt Þat wot alle Þynges, 
Þat ay wakes & waytes, at wylle hatz He sly3tes.
He calde on Þat ilk crafte He carf with His hondes;
Þay wakened wel Þe wroÞeloker for wroÞely He cleped:
'Ewrus & Aquiloun Þat on est sittes
Blowes boÞe at My bode vpon blo watteres.'
Þenne watz no tom Þer bytwene His tale & her dede,
So bayn wer Þay boÞe two His bone for to wyrk.
Anon out of Þe norÞ-est Þe noys bigynes,
When boÞe breÞes con blowe vpon blo watteres.
Ro3 rakkes Þer ros with rudnyng anvnder;
Þe see sou3ed ful sore, gret selly to here;
Þe wyndes on Þe wonne water so wrastel togeder
Þat Þe wawes ful wode waltered so hi3e
& efte busched to Þe abyme, Þat breed fysches
Durst nowhere for ro3 arest at Þe bothem.
When Þe breth & Þe brok & Þe bote metten,
Hit watz a joyles gyn Þat Jonas watz inne,
For hit reled on roun vpon Þe ro3e yÞes.
Þe bur ber to hit baft, Þat braste alle her gere,
Þen hurled on a hepe Þe helme & Þe sterne;
Furst tomurte mony rop & Þe mast after;
Þe sayl sweyed on Þe see, Þenne suppe bihoued
Þe coge of Þe [co]lde water, & Þenne Þe cry ryses. 3et coruen Þay Þe cordes & kest al Þeroute;
Mony ladde Þer forth lep to laue & to kest,
Scopen out Þe scaÞel water Þat fayn scape wolde,
For be monnes lode neuer so luÞer, Þe lyf is ay swete.
Þer watz busy ouer borde bale to kest,
Her bagges & her feÞer-beddes & her bry3t wedes,
Her kysttes & her coferes, her caraldes alle,
& al to ly3ten Þat lome, 3if leÞe wolde schape.
Bot euer watz ilyche loud Þe lot of Þe wyndes,
& euer wroÞer Þe water & wodder Þe stremes.
Þen Þo wery forwro3t wyst no bote,
Bot vchon glewed on his god Þat gayned hym beste:
Summe to Vernagu Þer vouched avowes solemne,
Summe to Diana deuout & derf Nepturne,
To Mahoun & to Mergot, Þe mone & Þe sunne,
& vche lede as he loued & layde had his hert.
Þenne bispeke Þe spakest, dispayred wel nere:
'I leue here be sum losynger, sum lawles wrech,
Þat hatz greued his god & gotz here amonge vus.
Lo, al synkes in his synne & for his sake marres.
I lovue Þat we lay lotes on ledes vchone,
& whoso lympes Þe losse, lay hym Þeroute;
& quen Þe gulty is gon, what may gome trawe
Bot He Þat rules Þe rak may rwe on Þose oÞer?'
Þis watz sette in asent, & sembled Þay were,
Her3ed out of vche hyrne to hent Þat falles.
A lodesmon ly3tly lep vnder hachches,
For to layte mo ledes & hem to lote bryng.
Bot hym fayled no freke Þat he fynde my3t,
Saf Jonas Þe Jwe, Þat jowked in derne.
He watz flowen for ferde of Þe flode lotes
Into Þe boÞem of Þe bot, & on a brede lyggede,
Onhelde by Þe hurrok, for Þe heuen wrache,
Slypped vpon a sloumbe-selepe, & sloberande he routes.
Þe freke hym frunt with his fot & bede hym ferk vp:
Þer Ragnel in his rakentes hym rere of his dremes!
Bi Þe haspede he hentes hym Þenne,
& bro3t hym vp by Þe brest & vpon borde sette,
Arayned hym ful runyschly what raysoun he hade
In such sla3tes of sor3e to slepe so faste.
Sone haf Þay her sortes sette & serelych deled,
& ay Þe lote vpon laste lymped on Jonas.
Þenne ascryed Þay hym sckete & asked ful loude:
'What Þe deuel hatz Þou don, doted wrech?
What seches Þou on see, synful schrewe,
With Þy lastes so luÞer to lose vus vchone?
Hatz Þou, gome, no gouernour ne god on to calle,
Þat Þou Þus slydes on slepe when Þou slayn worÞes?
Of what londe art Þou lent, what laytes Þou here,
Whyder in worlde Þat Þou wylt, & what is Þyn arnde?
Lo, Þy dom is Þe dy3t, for Þy dedes ille.
Do gyf glory to Þy godde, er Þou glyde hens.'
'I am an Ebru,' quoÞ he, 'of Israyl borne;
Þat Wy3e I worchyp, iwysse, Þat wro3t alle Þynges,
Alle Þe worlde with Þe welkyn, Þe wynde & Þe sternes,
& alle Þat wonez Þer withinne, at a worde one.
Alle Þis meschef for me is made at Þys tyme,
For I haf greued my God & gulty am founden;
ForÞy berez me to Þe borde & baÞeÞes me Þeroute,
Er gete 3e no happe, I hope forsoÞe.'
He ossed hym by vnnynges Þat Þay vndernomen
Þat he watz flawen fro Þe face of frelych Dry3tyn:
Þenne such a ferde on hem fel & flayed hem withinne
Þat Þay ruyt hym to rowwe, & letten Þe rynk one.
HaÞeles hy3ed in haste with ores ful longe,
Syn her sayl watz hem aslypped, on sydez to rowe,
Hef & hale vpon hy3t to helpen hymseluen,
Bot al watz nedles note: Þat nolde not bityde.
In bluber of Þe blo flod bursten her ores.
Þenne hade Þay no3t in her honde Þat hem help my3t;
Þenne nas no coumfort to keuer, ne counsel non oÞer,
Bot Jonas into his juis jugge bylyue.
Fryst Þay prayen to Þe Prynce Þat prophetes seruen
Þat He gef hem Þe grace to greuen Hym neuer,
Þat Þay in balelez blod Þer blenden her handez,
Þa3 Þat haÞel wer His Þat Þay here quelled.
Tyd by top & bi to Þay token hym synne;
Into Þat lodlych lo3e Þay luche hym sone.
He watz no tytter outtulde Þat tempest ne sessed:
Þe se sa3tled Þerwith as sone as ho mo3t.
Þenne Þa3 her takel were torne Þat totered on yÞes,
Styffe stremes & stre3t hem strayned a whyle,
Þat drof hem dry3lych adoun Þe depe to serue,
Tyl a swetter ful swyÞe hem swe3ed to bonk.
Þer watz louyng on lofte, when Þay Þe londe wonnen,
To oure mercyable God, on Moyses wyse,
With sacrafyse vpset, & solempne vowes,
& graunted Hym vn to be God & graythly non oÞer.
Þa3 Þay be jolef for joye, Jonas 3et dredes;
Þa3 he nolde suffer no sore, his seele is on anter;
For whatso worÞed of Þat wy3e fro he in water dipped,
Hit were a wonder to wene, 3if holy wryt nere.
Now is Jonas Þe Jwe jugged to drowne;
Of Þat schended schyp men schowued hym sone.
A wylde walterande whal, as Wyrde Þen schaped,
Þat watz beten fro Þe abyme, bi Þat bot flotte,
& watz war of Þat wy3e Þat Þe water so3te,
& swyftely swenged hym to swepe, & his swol3 opened;
Þe folk 3et haldande his fete, Þe fysch hym tyd hentes;
Withouten towche of any tothe he tult in his Þrote.
Thenne he swengez & swayues to Þe se boÞem,
Bi mony rokkez ful ro3e & rydelande strondes,
Wyth Þe mon in his mawe malskred in drede,
As lyttel wonder hit watz, 3if he wo dre3ed,
For nade Þe hy3e Heuen-Kyng, Þur3 His honde my3t,
Warded Þis wrech man in warlowes guttez,
What lede mo3t lyue bi lawe of any kynde,
Þat any lyf my3t be lent so longe hym withinne?
Bot he watz sokored by Þat Syre Þat syttes so hi3e,
Þa3 were wanlez of wele in wombe of Þat fissche,
& also dryuen Þur3 Þe depe & in derk walterez.
Lorde, colde watz his cumfort, & his care huge,
For he knew vche a cace & kark Þat hym lymped,
How fro Þe bot into Þe blober watz with a best lachched,
& Þrwe in at hit Þrote withouten Þret more,
As mote in at a munster dor, so mukel wern his chawlez.
He glydes in by Þe giles Þur3 glaym ande glette,
Relande in by a rop, a rode Þat hym Þo3t,
Ay hele ouer hed hourlande aboute,
Til he blunt in a blok as brod as a halle;
& Þer he festnes Þe fete & fathmez aboute,
& stod vp in his stomak Þat stank as Þe deuel.
Þer in saym & in sor3e Þat sauoured as helle,
Þer watz bylded his bour Þat wyl no bale suffer.
& Þenne he lurkkes & laytes where watz le best,
In vche a nok of his nauel, bot nowhere he fyndez
No rest ne recouerer, bot ramel ande myre,
In wych gut so euer he gotz, bot euer is God swete;
& Þer he lenged at Þe last, & to Þe Lede called:
'Now, Prynce, of Þy prophete pite Þou haue.
Þa3 I be fol & fykel & falce of my hert,
Dewoyde now Þy vengaunce, Þur3 vertu of rauthe;
Tha3 I be gulty of gyle, as gaule of prophetes,
Þou art God, & alle gowdez ar grayÞely Þyn owen.
Haf now mercy of Þy man & his mysdedes,
& preue Þe ly3tly a Lorde in londe & in water.'
With Þat he hitte to a hyrne & helde hym Þerinne,
Þer no defoule of no fylÞe watz fest hym abute;
Þer he sete also sounde, saf for merk one,
As in Þe bulk of Þe bote Þer he byfore sleped.
So in a bouel of Þat best he bidez on lyue,
Þre dayes & Þ[r]e ny3t, ay Þenkande on Dry3tyn,
His my3t & His merci, His mesure Þenne.
Now he knawez Hym in care Þat couÞe not in sele.
Ande euer walteres Þis whal bi wyldren depe,
Þur3 mony a regioun ful ro3e, Þur3 ronk of his wylle;
For Þat mote in his mawe mad hym, I trowe,
Þa3 hit lyttel were hym wyth, to wamel at his hert;
Ande as sayled Þe segge, ay sykerly he herde
Þe bygge borne on his bak & bete on his sydes.
Þen a prayer ful prest Þe prophete Þer maked;
On Þis wyse, as I wene, his wordez were mony:
'Lorde, to Þe haf I cleped in carez ful stronge;
Out of Þe hole Þou me herde of hellen wombe;
I calde, & Þou knew myn vncler steuen.
Þou diptez me of Þe depe se into Þe dymme hert,
Þe grete flem of Þy flod folded me vmbe;
Alle Þe gotez of Þy guferes & groundelez powlez,
& Þy stryuande stremez of stryndez so mony,
In on daschande dam dryuez me ouer.
& 3et I say as I seet in Þe se boÞem:
"Careful am I, kest out fro Þy cler y3en
& deseuered fro Þy sy3t; 3et surely I hope
Efte to trede on Þy temple & teme to Þyseluen."
I am wrapped in water to my wo stoundez;
Þe abyme byndes Þe body Þat I byde inne;
Þe pure poplande hourle playes on my heued;
To laste mere of vche a mount, Man, am I fallen;
Þe barrez of vche a bonk ful bigly me haldes,
Þat I may lachche no lont, & Þou my lyf weldes.
Þou schal releue me, Renk, whil Þy ry3t slepez,
Þur3 my3t of Þy mercy Þat mukel is to tryste.
For when Þ'acces of anguych watz hid in my sawle,
Þenne I remembred me ry3t of my rych Lorde,
Prayande Him for pete His prophete to here,
Þat into His holy hous myn orisoun mo3t entre.
I haf meled with Þy maystres mony longe day,
Bot now I wot wyterly Þat Þose vnwyse ledes
Þat affyen hym in vanyte & in vayne Þynges
For Þink Þat mountes to no3t her mercy forsaken;
Bot I dewoutly awowe, Þat verray betz halden,
Soberly to do Þe sacrafyse when I schal saue worÞe,
& offer Þe for my hele a ful hol gyfte,
& halde goud Þat Þou me hetes: haf here my trauthe.'
Thenne oure Fader to Þe fysch ferslych biddez
Þat he hym sput spakly vpon spare drye.
Þer whal wendez at His wylle & a warÞe fyndez,
& Þer he brakez vp Þe buyrne as bede hym oure Lorde.
Þenne he swepe to Þe sonde in sluchched cloÞes:
Hit may wel be Þat mester were his mantyle to wasche.
Þe bonk Þat he blosched to & bode hym bisyde
Wern of Þe regiounes ry3t Þat he renayed hade.
Þenne a wynde of Goddez worde efte Þe wy3e bruxlez:
'Nylt Þou neuer to Nuniue bi no kynnez wayez?'
'3isse, Lorde,' quoÞ Þe lede, 'lene me Þy grace
For to go at Þi gre: me gaynez [n]on oÞer.'
'Ris, aproche Þen to prech, lo, Þe place here.
Lo, My lore is in Þe loke, lauce hit Þerinne.'
Þenne Þe renk radly ros as he my3t,
& to Niniue Þat na3t he ne3ed ful euen;
Hit watz a cete ful syde & selly of brede;
On to Þrenge ÞerÞur3e watz Þre dayes dede.
Þat on journay ful joynt Jonas hym 3ede,
Er euer he warpped any worde to wy3e Þat he mette,
& Þenne he cryed so cler Þat kenne my3t alle
Þe trwe tenor of his teme; he tolde on Þis wyse:
'3et schal forty dayez fully fare to an ende,
& Þenne schal Niniue be nomen & to no3t worÞe;
Truly Þis ilk toun schal tylte to grounde;
Vp-so-doun schal 3e dumpe depe to Þe abyme,
To be swol3ed swyftly wyth Þe swart erÞe,
& alle Þat lyuyes hereinne lose Þe swete.'
Þis speche sprang in Þat space & spradde alle aboute,
To borges & to bacheleres Þat in Þat bur3 lenged;
Such a hidor hem hent & a hatel drede,
Þat al chaunged her chere & chylled at Þe hert.
Þe segge sesed not 3et, bot sayde euer ilyche:
'Þe verray vengaunce of God schal voyde Þis place!'
Þenne Þe peple pitosly pleyned ful stylle,
& for Þe drede of Dry3tyn doured in hert;
Heter hayrez Þay hent Þat asperly bited,
& Þose Þay bounden to her bak & to her bare sydez,
Dropped dust on her hede, & dymly biso3ten
Þat Þat penaunce plesed Him Þat playnez on her wronge.
& ay he cryes in Þat kyth tyl Þe kyng herde,
& he radly vpros & ran fro his chayer,
His ryche robe he torof of his rigge naked,
& of a hep of askes he hitte in Þe myddez.
He askez heterly a hayre & hasped hym vmbe,
Sewed a sekke Þerabof, & syked ful colde;
Þer he dased in Þat duste, with droppande teres,
Wepande ful wonderly alle his wrange dedes.
Þenne sayde he to his serjauntes: 'Samnes yow bilyue;
Do dryue out a decre, demed of myseluen,
Þat alle Þe bodyes Þat ben withinne Þis bor3 quyk,
BoÞe burnes & bestes, burdez & childer,
Vch prynce, vche prest, & prelates alle,
Alle faste frely for her falce werkes;
Sesez childer of her sok, soghe hem so neuer,
Ne best bite on no brom, ne no bent nauÞer,
Passe to no pasture, ne pike non erbes,
Ne non oxe to no hay, ne no horse to water.
Al schal crye, forclemmed, with alle oure clere strenÞe;
Þe rurd schal ryse to Hym Þat rawÞe schal haue;
What wote oÞer wyte may 3if Þe Wy3e lykes,
Þat is hende in Þe hy3t of His gentryse?
I wot His my3t is so much, Þa3 He be myssepayed,
Þat in His mylde amesyng He mercy may fynde.
& if we leuen Þe layk of oure layth synnes,
& stylle steppen in Þe sty3e He sty3tlez Hymseluen,
He wyl wende of His wodschip & His wrath leue,
& forgif vus Þis gult, 3if we Hym God leuen.'
Þenne al leued on His lawe & laften her synnes,
Parformed alle Þe penaunce Þat Þe prynce radde;
& God Þur3 His godnesse forgef as He sayde;
Þa3 He oÞer bihy3t, withhelde His vengaunce.
Muche sor3e Þenne satteled vpon segge Jonas;
He wex as wroth as Þe wynde towarde oure Lorde.
So hatz anger onhit his hert, [h]e callez
A prayer to Þe hy3e Prynce, for pyne, on Þys wyse:
'I biseche Þe, Syre, now Þou self jugge;
Watz not Þis ilk my worde Þat worÞen is nouÞe,
Þat I kest in my cuntre, when Þou Þy carp sendez
Þat I schulde tee to Þys toun Þi talent to preche?
Wel knew I Þi cortaysye, Þy quoynt soffraunce,
Þy bounte of debonerte & Þy bene grace,
Þy longe abydyng wyth lur, Þy late vengaunce;
& ay Þy mercy is mete, be mysse neuer so huge.
I wyst wel, when I hade worded quatsoeuer I cowÞe
To manace alle Þise mody men Þat in Þis mote dowellez,
Wyth a prayer & a pyne Þay my3t her pese gete,
& Þerfore I wolde haf flowen fer into Tarce.
Now, Lorde, lach out my lyf, hit lastes to longe.
Bed me bilyue my bale-stour & bryng me on ende,
For me were swetter to swelt as swyÞe, as me Þynk,
Þen lede lenger Þi lore Þat Þus me les makez.'
Þe soun of oure Souerayn Þen swey in his ere,
Þat vpbraydes Þis burne vpon a breme wyse:
'Herk, renk, is Þis ry3t so ronkly to wrath
For any dede Þat I haf don oÞer demed Þe 3et?'
Jonas al joyles & janglande vpryses,
& haldez out on est half of Þe hy3e place,
& farandely on a felde he fettelez hym to bide,
For to wayte on Þat won what schulde worÞe after.
Þer he busked hym a bour, Þe best Þat he my3t,
Of hay & of euer-ferne & erbez a fewe,
For hit watz playn in Þat place for plyande greuez,
For to schylde fro Þe schene oÞer any schade keste.
He bowed vnder his lyttel boÞe, his bak to Þe sunne,
& Þer he swowed & slept sadly al ny3t,
Þe whyle God of His grace ded growe of Þat soyle
Þe fayrest bynde hym abof Þat euer burne wyste.
When Þe dawande day Dry3tyn con sende,
Þenne wakened Þe wy3 vnder wodbynde,
Loked alofte on Þe lef Þat lylled grene;
Such a lefsel of lof neuer lede hade,
For hit watz brod at Þe boÞem, bo3ted on lofte,
Happed vpon ayÞer half, a hous as hit were,
A nos on Þe norÞ syde & nowhere non ellez,
Bot al schet in a scha3e Þat schaded ful cole.
Þe gome gly3t on Þe grene graciouse leues,
Þat euer wayued a wynde so wyÞe & so cole;
Þe schyre sunne hit vmbeschon, Þa3 no schafte my3t
Þe mountaunce of a lyttel mote vpon Þat man schyne.
Þenne watz Þe gome so glad of his gay logge,
Lys loltrande Þerinne lokande to toune;
So blyÞe of his wodbynde he balteres Þervnde[r],
Þat of no diete Þat day Þe deuel haf he ro3t.
& euer he la3ed as he loked Þe loge alle aboute,
& wysched hit were in his kyth Þer he wony schulde,
On he3e vpon Effraym oÞer Ermonnes hillez:
'Iwysse, a worÞloker won to welde I neuer keped.'
& quen hit ne3ed to na3t nappe hym bihoued;
He slydez on a sloumbe-slep sloghe vnder leues,
Whil God wayned a worme Þat wrot vpe Þe rote,
& wyddered watz Þe wodbynde bi Þat Þe wy3e wakned;
& syÞen He warnez Þe west to waken ful softe,
& sayez vnte Zeferus Þat he syfle warme,
Þat Þer quikken no cloude bifore Þe cler sunne,
& ho schal busch vp ful brode & brenne as a candel.
Þen wakened Þe wy3e of his wyl dremes,
& blusched to his wodbynde Þat broÞely watz marred,
Al welwed & wasted Þo worÞelych leues;
Þe schyre sunne hade hem schent er euer Þe schalk wyst.
& Þen hef vp Þe hete & heterly brenned;
Þe warm wynde of Þe weste, wertes he swyÞez.
Þe man marred on Þe molde Þat mo3t hym not hyde
His wodbynde watz away, he weped for sor3e;
With hatel anger & hot, heterly he callez:
'A, Þou Maker of man, what maystery Þe Þynkez
Þus Þy freke to forfare forbi alle oÞer?
With alle meschef Þat Þou may, neuer Þou me sparez;
I keuered me a cumfort Þat now is ca3t fro me,
My wodbynde so wlonk Þat wered my heued.
Bot now I se Þou art sette my solace to reue;
Why ne dy3ttez Þou me to di3e? I dure to longe.' 3et oure Lorde to Þe lede laused a speche:
'Is Þis ry3twys, Þou renk, alle Þy ronk noyse,
So wroth for a wodbynde to wax so sone?
Why art Þou so waymot, wy3e, for so lyttel?'
'Hit is not lyttel,' quoÞ Þe lede, 'bot lykker to ry3t;
I wolde I were of Þis worlde wrapped in moldez.'
'Þenne byÞenk Þe, mon, if Þe forÞynk sore,
If I wolde help My hondewerk, haf Þou no wonder;
Þou art waxen so wroth for Þy wodbynde,
& trauayledez neuer to tent hit Þe tyme of an howre,
Bot at a wap hit here wax & away at anoÞer,
& 3et lykez Þe so luÞer, Þi lyf woldez Þou tyne.
Þenne wyte not Me for Þe werk, Þat I hit wolde help,
& rwe on Þo redles Þat remen for synne;
Fyrst I made hem Myself of materes Myn one,
& syÞen I loked hem ful longe & hem on lode hade.
& if I My trauayl schulde tyne of termes so longe,
& type doun 3onder toun when hit turned were,
Þe sor of such a swete place burde synk to My hert,
So mony malicious mon as mournez Þerinne.
& of Þat soumme 3et arn summe, such sottez formadde,
As lyttel barnez on barme Þat neuer bale wro3t,
& wymmen vnwytte Þat wale ne couÞe
Þat on hande fro Þat oÞer, fo[r] alle Þis hy3e worlde.
Bitwene Þe stele & Þe stayre disserne no3t cunen,
What rule renes in roun bitwene Þe ry3t hande
& his lyfte, Þa3 his lyf schulde lost be Þerfor;
& als Þer ben doumbe bestez in Þe bur3 mony,
Þat may not synne in no syt hemseluen to greue.
Why schulde I wrath wyth hem, syÞen wy3ez wyl torne,
& cum & cnawe Me for Kyng & My carpe leue?
Wer I as hastif a[s] Þou heere, were harme lumpen;
CouÞe I not Þole bot as Þou, Þer Þryued ful fewe.
I may not be so mal[i]cious & mylde be halden,
For malyse is no3[t] to mayntyne boute mercy withinne.'
Be no3t so gryndel, godman, bot go forth Þy wayes,
Be preue & be pacient in payne & in joye;
For he Þat is to rakel to renden his cloÞez
Mot efte sitte with more vnsounde to sewe hem togeder.
ForÞy when pouerte me enprecez & paynez inno3e
Ful softly with suffraunce sa3ttel me bihouez;
ForÞy penaunce & payne topreue hit in sy3t
Þat pacience is a nobel poynt, Þa3 hit displese ofte.
Amen.


^^EOP^^


In a somer sesun, whon softe was the sonne,
I schop me into a shroud, as I a scheep were;
In habite as an hermite unholy of werkes
Wente I wyde in this world wondres to here;
Bote in a Mayes morwnynge on Malverne hulles
Me bifel a ferly, of fairie, me-thoughte. 
I was wery, forwandred, and wente me to reste
Undur a brod banke bi a bourne side;
And as I lay and leonede and lokede on the watres,
I slumbrede in a slepynge, hit swyed so murie.
Thenne gon I meeten a mervelous sweven,
That I was in a wildernesse, wuste I never where;
And as I beheold into the est an heigh to the sonne,
I sauh a tour on a toft, tryelyche i-maket;
A deop dale bineothe, a dungun ther-inne,
With deop dich and derk and dredful of sighte.
A feir feld full of folk fond I ther bitwene,
Of alle maner of men, the mene and the riche,
Worchinge and wandringe as the world asketh. 
Summe putten hem to the plough, pleiden ful seldene,
In settynge and in sowynge swonken ful harde,
And wonnen that theos wasturs with glotonye distruen.
And summe putten hem to pruide, apparaylden hem ther-after,
In cuntenaunce of clothinge comen disgisid.
To preyeres and to penaunce putten hem monye,
For love of ur Lord liveden ful streite,
In hope for to have hevene-riche blisse;
As ancres and hermytes that holdeth hem in heore celles,
Coveyte not in cuntré to cairen aboute,
For non likerous lyflode heore licam to plese.
And summe chosen chaffare to cheeven the bettre,
As hit semeth to ure sighte that suche men thryveth;
And summe, murthhes to maken as munstrals cunne,
And gete gold with here gle, giltles, I trowe.
Bote japers and jangelers, Judas children,
Founden hem fantasyes and fooles hem maaden,
And habbeth wit at heore wille to worchen yif hem luste.
That Poul precheth of hem, I dar not preoven heere; Qui loquitur turpiloquium he is Luciferes hyne. 
Bidders and beggers faste aboute eoden,
Til heor bagges and heore balies weren bretful i-crommet;
Feyneden hem for heore foode, foughten atte ale;
In glotonye, God wot, gon heo to bedde,
And ryseth up with ribaudye this roberdes knaves;
Sleep and sleughthe suweth hem evere. 
Pilgrimes and palmers plihten hem togederes
For to seche Seint Jame and seintes at Roome;
Wenten forth in heore wey with mony wyse tales,
And hedden leve to lyen al heore lyf aftir.
Ermytes on an hep with hokide staves,
Wenten to Walsyngham and here wenchis after;
Grete lobres and longe that loth weore to swynke
Clotheden hem in copes to beo knowen for bretheren;
And summe schopen hem to hermytes heore ese to have. 
I fond there freres, all the foure ordres,
Prechinge the peple for profyt of heore wombes,
Glosynge the Gospel as hem good liketh,
For covetyse of copes construeth hit ille;
For monye of this maistres mowen clothen hem at lyking,
For moneye and heore marchaundie meeten togedere;
Seththe Charité hath be chapmon, and cheef to schriven lordes,
Mony ferlyes han bifalle in a fewe yeres.
But Holychirche and heo holde bet togedere,
The moste mischeef on molde is mountyng up faste. 
Ther prechede a pardoner, as he a prest were,
And brought forth a bulle with bisschopes seles,
And seide that himself mighte asoylen hem alle
Of falsnesse and fastinge and of vouwes i-broken.
The lewede men levide him wel and likede his speche,
And comen up knelynge to kissen his bulle;
He bonchede hem with his brevet and blered heore eiyen,
And raughte with his ragemon ringes and broches.
Thus ye yiveth oure gold glotonis to helpen!
And leveth hit to losels that lecherie haunten.
Weore the bisschop i-blesset and worth bothe his eres,
His sel shulde not be sent to deceyve the peple.
It is not al bi the bisschop that the boye precheth,
Bote the parisch prest and the pardoner parte the selver
That the pore peple of the parisch schulde have yif that heo ne weore,
Persones and parisch prestes playneth to heore bisschops,
That heore parisch hath ben pore seththe the pestilence tyme,
To have a lycence and leve at Londun to dwelle,
To singe ther for simonye, for selver is swete. 
Ther hovide an hundret in houves of selke,
Serjauns hit semide to serven atte barre;
Pleden for pens and poundes the lawe,
Not for love of ur Lord unloseth heore lippes ones,
Thou mightest beter meten the myst on Malverne hulles
Then geten a mom of heore mouth til moneye weore schewed! 
I saugh ther bisschops bolde and bachilers of divyne
Bicoome clerkes of acounte the king for to serven.
Erchedekenes and denis, that dignité haven
To preche the peple and pore men to feede,
Beon lopen to Londun, bi leve of heore bisschopes,
To ben clerkes of the Kynges Benche the cuntré to schende 
Barouns and burgeis and bonde-men also
I saugh in that semblé, as ye schul heren aftur,
Bakers, bochers, and breusters monye,
Wollene-websteris, and weveris of lynen,
Taillours, tanneris, and tokkeris bothe,
Masons, minours, and mony other craftes,
Dykers, and delvers, that don heore dedes ille,
And driveth forth the longe day with "Deu vous save, Dam Emme!"
Cookes and heore knaves cryen "Hote pies, hote!
"Goode gees and grys! Go we dyne, go we!"
Taverners to hem tolde the same tale,
With wyn of Oseye and win of Gaskoyne,
Of the Ryn and of the Rochel, the rost to defye,
Al this I saugh slepynge and seve sithes more.


^^EOP^^


     "O, maister deere, and fadir reverent!
     Mi maister Chaucer, flour of eloquence,
Mirour of fructuous entendement,
     O, universel fadir in science!
     Allas! that thou thyn excellent prudence
       In thi bed mortel mightist naght byqwethe;
       What eiled Deth? Allas! whi wolde he sle the? 
     "O Deth! thou didest naght harme singuleer
     In slaghtere of him; but al this land it smertith;
But nathelees, yit hast thou no power
     His name sle; his hy vertu astertith
     Unslayn fro the, which ay us lyfly hertyth,
       With bookes of his ornat endytyng,
       That is to al this land enlumynyng. 
     "Hast thou nat eeke my maister Gower slayn,
     Whos vertu I am insufficient
For to descreyve? I woot wel in certayn,
     For to sleen al this world thou haast yment;
     But syn our lorde Crist was obedient
       To the, in feith I can no ferther seye;
       His creatures mosten the obeye." 
     Simple is my goost, and scars my letterure,
     Unto your excellence for to write
Myn inward love, and yit in aventure
     Wyle I me putte, thogh I can but lyte.
     Mi dere maistir—God his soule quyte!—
       And fadir, Chaucer, fayn wolde han me taght;
       But I was dul, and lerned lite or naght. 
     Allas! my worthi maister honorable,
     This landes verray tresor and richesse,
Deth, by thi deth, hath harme irreparable
     Unto us doon; hir vengeable duresse
     Despoiled hath this land of the swetnesse
       Of rethorik; for un-to Tullius
       Was never man so lyk a-monges us. 
     Also, who was hier in philosophie
     To Aristotle, in our tonge, but thow?
The steppes of Virgile in poesie
     Thow filwedist eeke. Men wot wel y-now
     That combre-world that the, my maistir, slow.
       Wold I slayn were! Deth was to hastyf
       To renne on the, and reve the thi lyf. 
     She myghte han taried hir vengeance awhile,
     Til that sum man had egal to the be.
Nay, lat be that! sche knew wel that this yle
     May never man forth brynge lyk to the,
     And hir office needes do mot she;
       God bad hir so, I truste as for thi beste;
       O maister, maister, God thi soule reste!


^^EOP^^


siþen þe sege and þe assaut watz sesed at troye
þe bor3 brittened and brent to brondez and askez
þe tulk þat þe trammes of tresoun þer wro3t
watz tried for his tricherie þe trewest on erþe
hit watz ennias þe athel and his highe kynde
þat siþen depreced prouinces and patrounes bicome
welne3e of al þe wele in þe west iles
fro riche romulus to rome ricchis hym swyþe
with gret bobbaunce þat bur3e he biges vpon fyrst
and neuenes hit his aune nome as hit now hat
ticius to tuskan and teldes bigynnes
langaberde in lumbardie lyftes vp homes
and fer ouer þe french flod felix brutus
on mony bonkkes ful brode bretayn he settez
wyth wynne
where werre and wrake and wonder
bi syþez hatz wont þerinne
and oft boþe blysse and blunder
ful skete hatz skyfted synne 
ande quen þis bretayn watz bigged bi þis burn rych
bolde bredden þerinne baret þat lofden
in mony turned tyme tene þat wro3ten
mo ferlyes on þis folde han fallen here oft
þen in any oþer þat I wot syn þat ilk tyme
bot of alle þat here bult of bretaygne kynges
ay watz arthur þe hendest as I haf herde telle [fol. 91]
forþi an aunter in erde I attle to schawe
þat a selly in si3t summe men hit holden
and an outtrage awenture of arthurez wonderez
if 3e wyl lysten þis laye bot on littel quile
I schal telle hit as tit as I in toun herde
with tonge
as hit is stad and stoken
in stori stif and stronge
with lel letteres loken
in londe so hatz ben longe 
þis kyng lay at camylot vpon kryst masse
with mony luflych lorde ledez of þe best
rekenly of þe rounde table alle þo rich breþer
with rych reuel ory3t and rechles merþes
þer tournayed tulkes by tymez ful mony
justed ful jolile þise gentyle kni3tes
syþen kayred to þe court caroles to make
for þer þe fest watz ilyche ful fiften dayes
with alle þe mete and þe mirþe þat men couþe avyse
such glaumande gle glorious to here
dere dyn vpon day daunsyng on ny3tes
al watz hap vpon he3e in hallez and chambrez
with lordez and ladies as leuest him þo3t
with all þe wele of þe worlde þay woned þer samen
þe most kyd kny3tez vnder krystes seluen
and þe louelokkest ladies þat euer lif haden
and he þe comlokest kyng þat þe court haldes
for al watz þis fayre folk in her first age
on sille
þe hapnest vnder heuen
kyng hy3est mon of wylle
hit werere now gret nye to neuen
so hardy a here on hille 
wyle nw 3er watz so 3ep þat hit watz nwe cummen
þat day doubble on þe dece watz þe douth serued
fro þe kyng watz cummen with kny3tes into þe halle
þe chauntre of þe chapel cheued to an ende
loude crye watz þer kest of clerkez and oþer [fol. 92r]
nowel nayted onewe neuened ful ofte
and syþen riche forth runnen to reche hondeselle 3e3ed 3eres3iftes on hi3 3elde hem bi hond
debated busyly aboute þo giftes
ladies la3ed ful loude þo3 þay lost haden
and he þat wan watz not wrothe þat may 3e wel trawe
alle þis mirþe þay maden to þe mete tyme
when þay had waschen worþyly þay wenten to sete
þe best burne ay abof as hit best semed
whene guenore ful gay grayþed in þe myddes
dressed on þe dere des dubbed al aboute
smal sendal bisides a selure hir ouer
of tryed tolouse and tars tapites innoghe
þat were enbrawded and beten wyth þe best gemmes
þat my3t be preued of prys wyth penyes to bye
in daye
þe comlokest to discry
þer glent with y3en gray
a semloker þat euer he sy3e
soth mo3t no mon say 
bot arthure wolde not ete til al were serued
he watz so joly of his joyfnes and sumquat childgered
his lif liked hym ly3t he louied þe lasse
auþer to lenge lye or to longe sitte
so bisied him his 3onge blod and his brayn wylde
and also an oþer maner meued him eke
þat he þur3 nobelay had nomen he wolde neuer ete
vpon such a dere day er hym deuised were
of sum auenturus þyng an vncouþe tale
of sum mayn meruayle þat he my3t trawe
of of alderes of armes of oþer auenturus
oþer sum segg hym biso3t of sum siker kny3t
to joyne wyth hym in iustyng in joparde to lay
lede lif for lyf leue vchon oþer
as fortune wolde fulsun hom þe fayrer to haue
þis watz kynges countenaunce where he in court were
at vch farand fest among his fre meny
in halle
þerfore of face so fere
he sti3tlez stif in stalle
ful 3ep in þat nw 3ere
much mirthe he mas with alle 
þus þer stondes in stale þe stif kyng hisseluen
talkkande bifore þe hy3e table of trifles ful hende
þere gode gawan watz grayþed gwenore bisyde
and agrauayn a la dure mayn on þat oþer syde sittes
boþe þe kynges sistersunes and ful siker kni3tes
bischop bawdewyn abof biginez þe table
and ywan vryn son ette wit hymseluen
þise were di3t on þe des and derworþly serued
and siþen mony siker segge at þe sidbordez
þen þe first cors come with crakkyng of trumpes
wyth mony baner ful bry3t þat þerbi henged
nwe nakryn noyse with þe noble pipes
wylde werbles and wy3t wakned lote
þat mony hert ful hi3e hef at her towches
dayntes dryuen þerwyth of ful dere metes
foysoun of þe fresche and on so fele disches
þat pine to fynde þe place þe peple biforne
for to sette þe syluen' þat sere sewes halden
on clothe
iche lede as he loued hymselue
þer laght withouten loþe
ay two had disches twelue
good ber and bry3t wyn boþe 
now wyl I of hor seruise say yow no more
for vch wy3e may wel wit no wont þat þer were
an oþer noyse ful newe ne3ed biliue
þat þe lude my3t haf leue liflode to cach
for vneþe watz þe noyce not a whyle sesed
and þe fyrst cource in þe court kyndely serued
þer hales in at þe halle dor an aghlich mayster
on þe most on þe molde on mesure hyghe
fro þe swyre to þe swange so sware and so þik
and his lyndes and his lymes so longe and so grete
half etayn in erde I hope þat he were
bot mon most I algate mynn hym to bene
and þat þe myriest in his muckel þat my3t ride
for of bak and of brest al were his bodi sturne
bot his wombe and his wast were worthily smale
and alle his fetures fol3ande in forme þat he hade
ful clene
for wonder of his hwe men hade
set in his semblaunt sene
he ferde as freke were fade
and oueral enker grene 
ande al grayþed in grene þis gome and his wedes
a strayt cote ful stre3t þat stek on his sides
a mere mantile abof mensked with inne
with pelure pured apert þe pane ful clene
with blyþe blaunner ful bry3t and his hod boþe
þat watz la3t fro his lokkez and layde on his schulderes
heme wel haled hose of þat same grene
þat spenet on his sparlyr and clene spures vnder
of bry3t golde vpon silk bordes barred ful ryche
and scholes vnder schankes þere þe schalk rides
and alle his vesture uerayly watz clene verdure
boþe þe barres of his belt and oþer blyþe stones
þat were richely rayled in his aray clene
aboutte hymself and his sadel vpon silk werkez
þat were to tor for to telle of tryfles þe halue
þat were enbrauded abof wyth bryddes and fly3es
with gay gaudi of grene þe golde ay inmyddes
þe pendauntes of his payttrure pe proude cropure
his molaynes and alle þe metail anamayld was þenne
þe steropes þat he stod on stayned of þe same
and his arsounz al after and his aþel scurtes
þat euer glemered and glent al of grene stones
þe fole þat he ferkkes on fyn of þat ilke
sertayn
a grene hors gret and þikke
a stede ful stif to strayne
in brawden brydel quik
to þe gome he watz ful gayn 
wel gay watz þis gome gered in grene
and þe here of his hed of his hors swete
fayre fannand fax vmbefoldes his schulderes
a much berd as as a busk ouer his brest henges
þat wyth his hi3lich here þat of his hed reches
watz euesed al vmbetorne abof his elbowes
þat half his armes þervnder were halched in þe wyse
of a kyngez capados þat closes his swyre
þe mane of þat mayn hors much to hit lyke
wel cresped and cemmed wyth knottes ful mony
folden in wyth fildore aboute þe fayre grene
ay a herle of þe here anoþer of golde
þe tayl and his toppyng twynnen of a sute
and bounden boþe wyth a bande of a bry3t grene
dubbed wyth ful dere stonez as þe dok lasted
syþen þrawen wyth a þwong a þwarle knot alofte
þer mony bellez ful bry3t of brende golde rungen
such a fole vpon folde ne freke þat hym rydes
watz neuer sene in þat sale wyth sy3t er þat tyme
with y3e
he loked as layt so ly3t
so sayd al þat hym sy3e
hit semed as no mon my3t
vnder his dynttez dry3e 
wheþer hade he no helme ne hawbrgh nauþer
ne no pysan ne no plate þat pented to armes
ne no schafte ne no schelde to schwue ne to smyte
bot in his on honde he hade a holyn bobbe
þat is grattest in grene when greuez ar bare
and an ax in his oþer a hoge and vnmete
a spetos sparþe to expoun in spelle quoso my3t
þe hede of an eln3erde þe large lenkþe hade
þe grayn al of grene stele and of golde hewen
þe bit burnyst bry3t with a brod egge
as wel schapen to schere as scharp rasores
þe stele of a stif staf þe sturne hit bi grypte [fol. 94r]
þat watz wounden wyth yrn to þe wandez ende
and al bigrauen with grene in gracios werkes
a lace lapped aboute þat louked at þe hede
and so after þe halme halched ful ofte
wyth tryed tasselez þerto tacched innoghe
on botounz of þe bry3t grene brayden ful ryche
þis haþel heldez hym in and þe halle entres
driuande to þe he3e dece dut he no woþe
haylsed he neuer one bot he3e he ouer loked
þe fyrst word þat he warp wher is he sayd
þe gouernour of þis gyng gladly I wolde
se þat segg in sy3t and with hymself speke
raysoun
to kny3tez he kest his y3e
and reled hym vp and doun
he stemmed and con studie
quo walt þer most renoun 
ther watz lokyng on lenþe þe lude to beholde
for vch mon had meruayle quat hit mene my3t
þat a haþel and a horse my3t such a hwe lach
as growe grene as þe gres and grener hit semed
þen grene aumayl on golde lowande bry3ter
al studied þat þer stod and stalked hym nerre
wyth al þe wonder of þe worlde what he worch schulde
for fele sellyez had þay sen bot such neuer are
forþi for fantoum and fayry3e þe folk þere hit demed
þerfore to answare watz ar3e mony aþel freke
and al stouned at his steuen and stonstil seten
in a swoghe sylence þur3 þe sale riche
as al were slypped vpon slepe so slaked hor lotez
in hy3e
I deme hit not al for doute
bot sum for cortaysye
bot let hym þat al schulde loute
cast vnto þat wy3e 
þenn arþour bifore þe hi3 dece þat auenture byholdez
and rekenly hym reuerenced for rad was he neuer
and sayde wy3e welcum iwys to þis place
þe hede of þis ostel arthour I hat
li3t luflych adoun and lenge I þe praye
and quat so þy wylle is we schal wyt after
nay as help me quoþ þe haþel he þat on hy3e syttes
to wone any quyle in þis won hit watz not myn ernde
bot for þe los of þe lede is lyft vp so hy3e
and þy bur3 and þy burnes best ar holden
stifest vnder stel gere on stedes to ryde
þe wy3test and þe worþyest of þe worldes kynde
preue for to play wyth in oþer pure laykez
and here is kydde cortaysye as I haf herd carp
and þat hatz wayned me hider iwyis at þis tyme 3e may be seker bi þis braunch þat I bere here
þat I passe as in pes and no ply3t seche
for had I founded in fere in fe3tyng wyse
I haue a hauberghe at home and a helme boþe
a schelde and a scharp spere schinande bry3t
ande oþer weppenes to welde I wene wel als
bot for I wolde no were my wedez ar softer
bot if þou be so bold as alle burnez tellen
þou wyl grant me godly þe gomen þat I ask
bi ry3t
arthour con onsware
and sayd sir cortays kny3t
if þou craue batayl bare
here faylez þou not to fy3t 
nay frayst I no fy3t in fayth I þe telle
hit arn aboute on þis bench bot berdlez chylder
if I were hasped in armes on a he3e stede
here is no mon me to mach for my3tez fo wayke
forþy I craue in þis court a crystemas gomen
for hit is 3ol and nwe 3er and here ar 3ep mony
if any so hardy in þis hous holdez hymseluen
be so bolde in his blod brayn in hys hede
þat dar stifly strike a strok for an oþer
I schal gif hym of my gyft þys giserne ryche
þis ax þat is heue innogh to hondele as hym lykes
and I schal bide þe fyrst bur as bare as I sitte
if any freke be so felle to fonde þat I telle
lepe ly3tly me to and lach þis weppen
I quit clayme hit for euer kepe hit as his auen
and I schal stonde hym a strok stif on þis flet
ellez þou wyl di3t me þe dom to dele hym an oþer
barlay
and 3et gif hym respite
a twelmonyth and a day
now hy3e and let se tite
dar any herinne o3t say 
if he hem stowned vpon fyrst stiller were þanne
alle þe heredmen in halle þe hy3 and þe lo3e
þe renk on his rounce hym ruched in his sadel
and runischly his rede y3en he reled aboute
bende his bresed bro3ez blycande grene
wayued his berde for to wayte quo so wolde ryse
when non wolde kepe hym with carp he co3ed ful hy3e
ande rimed hym ful richly and ry3t hym to speke
what is þis arthures hous quoþ þe haþel þenne
þat al þe rous rennes of þur3 ryalmes so mony
where is now your sourquydrye and your conquestes
your gry dellayk and your greme and your grete wordes
now is þe reuel and þe renoun of þe rounde table
ouerwalt wyth a worde of on wy3es speche
for al dares for drede withoute dynt schewed
wyth þis he la3es so loude þat þe lorde greued
þe blod schot for scham into his schyre face
and lere
he wex as wroth as wynde
so did alle þat þer were
þe kyng as kene bi kynde
þen stod þat stif mon nere 
ande sayde haþel by heuen þyn askyng is nys
and as þou foly hatz frayst fynde þe behoues
I know no gome þat is gast of þy grete wordes
gif me now þy geserne vpon godez halue
and I schal bayþen þy bone þat þou boden habbes [fol. 95]
ly3tly lepez he hym to and la3t at his honde
þen feersly þat oþer freke vpon fote ly3tis
now hatz arthure his axe and þe halme grypez
and sturnely sturez hit aboute þat stryke wyth hit þo3t
þe stif mon hym bifore stod vpon hy3t
herre þen ani in þe hous by þe hede and more
wyth sturne schere þer he stod he stroked his berde
and wyth a countenaunce dry3e he dro3 doun his cote
no more mate ne dismayd for hyns mayn dintez
þen any burne vpon bench hade bro3t hym to drynk
of wyne
gawan þat sate bi þe quene
to þe kyng he can enclyne
I beseche now with sa3ez sene
þis melly mot be myne 
wolde 3e worþilych lorde quoþ gawan to þe kyng
bid me bo3e fro þis benche and stonde by yow þere
þat I wythoute vylanye my3t voyde þis table
and þat my legge lady lyked not ille
I wolde com to your counseyl bifore your cort ryche
for me þink hit not semly as hit is soþ knawen
þer such an askyng is heuened so hy3e in your sale
þa3 3e 3ourself be talenttyf to take hit to yourseluen
whil mony so bolde yow aboute vpon bench sytten
þat vnder heuen I hope non ha3erer of wylle
ne better bodyes on bent þer baret is rered
I am þe wakkest I wot and of wyt feblest
and lest lur of my lyf quo laytes þe soþe
bot for as much as 3e ar myn em I am only to prayse
no bounte bot your blod I in my bode knowe
and syþen þis note is so nys þat no3t hit yow falles
and I haue frayned hit at yow fyrst foldez hit to me
and if I carp not comlyly let alle þis cort rych
bout blame
ryche togeder con roun
and syþen þay redden alle same
to ryd þe kyng wyth croun
and gif gawan þe game 
þen commaunded þe kyng þe kny3t for to ryse
and he ful radly vpros and ruchched hym fayre
kneled doun bifore þe kyng and cachez þat weppen
and he luflyly hit hym laft and lyfte vp his honde
and gef hym goddez blessyng and gladly hym biddes
þat his hert and his honde schulde hardi be boþe
kepe þe cosyn quoþ þe kyng þat þou on kyrf sette
and if þou redez hym ry3t redly I trowe
þat þou schal byden þe bur þat he schal bede after
gawan gotz to þe gome with giserne in honde
and he baldly hym bydez he bayst neuer þe helder
þen carppez to sir gawan þe kny3t in þe grene
refourme we oure forwardes er we fyrre passe
fyrst I eþe þe haþel how þat þou hattes
þat þou me telle truly as I tryst may
in god fayth quoþ þe goode kny3t gawan I hatte
þat bede þe þis buffet quat so bifallez after
and at þis tyme twelmonyth take at þe an oþer
wyth what weppen fo þou wylt and wyth no wy3 ellez
on lyue
þat oþer onswarez agayn
sir gawan so mot I þryue
as I am ferly fayn
þis dint þat þou schal dryue 
bigog quoþ þe grene kny3t sir gawan me lykes
þat I schal fange at þy fust þat I haf frayst here
and þou hatz redily rehersed bi resoun ful trwe
clanly al þe couenaunt þat I þe kynge asked
saf þat þou schal siker me segge bi þi trawþe
þat þou schal seche me þiself where so þou hopes
I may be funde vpon folde and foch þe such wages
as þou deles me to day bifore þis douþe ryche
where schulde I wale þe quoþ gauan where is þy plate
I wot neuer where þou wonyes bi hym þat me wro3t
ne I know not þe kny3t by cort ne þi name
bot teche me truly þerto and telle me how þou hattes
and I schal ware alle my wyt to wynne me þeder
and þat I swere þe for soþe and by my seker traweþ
þat is innogh in nwe 3er hit nedes no more
quoþ þe gome in þe grene to gawan þe hende 3if I þe telle trwly quen I þe tape haue
and þou me smoþely hatz smyten smartly I þe teche
of my hous and my home and myn owen nome
þen may þou frayst my fare and forwardez holde
and if I spende no speche þenne spedez þou þe better
for þou may leng in þy londe and layt no fyrre
bot slokes
ta now þy grymme tole to þe
and let se how þou cnokez
gladly sir for soþe
quoþ gawan his ax he strokes 
þe grene kny3t vpon grounde grayþely hym dresses
a littel lut with þe hede þe lere he discouerez
his longe louelych lokkez he layd ouer his croun
let þe naked nec to þe note schewe
gauan gripped to his ax and gederes hit on hy3t
þe kay fot on þe folde he before sette
let him doun ly3tly ly3t on þe naked
þat þe scharp of þe schalk schyndered þe bones
and schrank þur3 þe schyire grece and scade hit in twynne
þat þe bit of þe broun stel bot on þe grounde
þe fayre hede fro þe halce hit to þe erþe
þat fele hit foyned wyth her fete þere hit forth roled
þe blod brayd fro þe body þat blykked on þe grene
and nawþer faltered ne fel þe freke neuer þe helder
bot styþly he start forth vpon styf schonkes
and ruyschly he ra3t out þere as renkkez stoden
la3t to his lufly hed and lyft hit vp sone
and syþen bo3ez to his blonk þe brydel he cachchez
steppez into stelbawe and strydez alofte
and his hede by þe here in his honde haldez
and as sadly þe segge hym in his sadel sette
as non vnhap had hym ayled þa3 hedlez ho we
in stedde
he brayde his bluk aboute
þat vgly bodi þat bledde
moni on of hym had doute
bi þat his resounz were redde 
for þe hede in his honde he haldez vp euen
toward þe derrest on þe dece he dressez þe face
and hit lyfte vp þe y3e lyddez and loked ful brode
and meled þus much with his muthe as 3e may now here
loke gawan þou be grayþe to go as þou hettez
and layte as lelly til þou me lude fynde
as þou hatz hette in þis halle herande þise kny3tes
to þe grene chapel þou chose I charge þe to fotte
such a dunt as þou hatz dalt disserued þou habbez
to be 3ederly 3olden on nw 3eres morn
þe kny3t of þe grene chapel men knowen me mony
forþi me for to fynde if þou fraystez faylez þou neuer
þerfore com oþer recreaunt be calde þe behoueus
with a runisch rout þe raynez he tornez
halled out at þe hal dor his hed in his hande
þat þe fyr of þe flynt fla3e fro fole houes
to quat kyth he becom knwe non þere
neuer more þen þay wyste from queþen he watz wonnen
what þenne
þe kyng and gawen þare
at þat grene þay la3e and grenne 3et breued watz hit ful bare
a meruayl among þo menne 
þa3 arþer þe hende kyng at hert hade wonder
he let no semblaunt be sene bot sayde ful hy3e
to þe comlych quene wyth cortays speche
dere dame to day demay yow neuer
wel bycommes such craft vpon cristmasse
laykyng of enterludez to la3e and to syng
among þise kynde caroles of kny3tez and ladyez
neuer þe lece to my mete I may me wel dres
for I haf sen a selly I may not forsake
he glent vpon sir gawen and gaynly he sayde
now sir heng vp þyn ax þat hatz innogh hewen
and hit watz don abof þe dece on doser to henge
þer alle men for meruayl my3t on hit loke
and bi trwe tytel þerof to telle þe wonder
þenne þay bo3ed to a borde þise burnes togeder
þe kyng and þe gode kny3t and kene men hem serued
of alle dayntyez double as derrest my3t falle
wyth alle maner of mete and mynstralcie boþe
wyth wele walt þay þat day til worþed an ende
in londe
now þenk wel sir gawan
for woþe þat þou ne wonde
þis auenture for to frayn
þat þou hatz tan on honde 
this hanselle hatz arthur of auenturus on fyrst
in 3onge 3er for he 3erned 3elpyng to here
tha3 hym wordez were wane when þay to sete wenten
now ar þay stoken of sturne werk staf ful her hond
gawan watz glad to begynne þose gomnez in halle
bot þa3 þe ende be heuy haf 3e no wonder
for þa3 men ben mery in mynde quen þay han mayn drynk
a 3ere 3ernes ful 3erne and 3eldez neuer lyke
þe forme to þe fynisment foldez ful selden
forþi þis 3ol ouer3ede and þe 3ere after
and vche sesoun serlepes sued after oþer
after crystenmasse com þe crabbed lentoun
þat fraystez flesch wyth þe fysche and fode more symple
bot þenne þe weder of þe worlde wyth wynter hit þrepez
colde clengez adoun cloudez vplyften
schyre schedez þe rayn in schowrez ful warme
fallez vpon fayre flat flowrez þere schewen
boþe groundez and þe greuez grene ar her wedez
bryddez busken to bylde and bremlych syngen
for solace of þe softe somer þat sues þerafter
bi bonk
and blossumez bolne to blowe
bi rawez rych and ronk
þen notez noble inno3e
ar herde in wod so wlonk 
after þe sesoun of somer wyth þe soft wyndez
quen zeferus syflez hymself on sedez and erbez
wela wynne is þe wort þat waxes þeroute
when þe donkande dewe dropez of þe leuez
to bide a blysful blusch of þe bry3t sunne
bot þen hy3es heruest and hardenes hym sone
warnez hym for þe wynter to wax ful rype
he dryues wyth dro3t þe dust for to ryse
fro þe face of þe folde to fly3e ful hy3e
wroþe wynde of þe welkyn wrastelez with þe sunne
þe leuez lancen fro þe lynde and ly3ten on þe grounde
and al grayes þe gres þat grene watz ere
þenne al rypez and rotez þat ros vpon fyrst
and þus 3irnez þe 3ere in 3isterdayez mony
and wynter wyndez a3ayn as þe worlde askez
no sage
til me3elmas mone
watz cumen wyth wynter wage
þen þenkkez gawan ful sone
of his anious uyage  3et quyl alhalday with arþer he lenges
and he made a fare on þat fest for þe frekez sake
with much reuel and ryche of þe rounde table
kny3tez ful cortays and comlych ladies
al for luf of þat lede in longynge þay were
bot neuer þe lece ne þe later þay neuened bot merþe
mony ioylez for þat ientyle iapez þer maden
for aftter mete with mournyng he melez to his eme
and spekez of his passage and pertly he sayde
now lege lorde of my lyf leue I yow ask 3e knowe þe cost of þis cace kepe I no more
to telle yow tenez þerof neuer bot trifel
bot I am boun to þe bur barely to morne
to sech þe gome of þe grene as god wyl me wysse
þenne þe best of þe bur3 bo3ed togeder
aywan and errik and oþer ful mony
sir doddinanal de sauage þe duk of clarence
launcelot and lyonel and lucan þe gode
sir boos and sir byduer big men boþe
and mony oþer menskful with mador de la port
alle þis compayny of court com þe kyng nerre
for to counseyl þe kny3t with care at her hert
þere watz much derue doel driuen in þe sale
þat so worþe as wawan schulde wende on þat ernde
to dry3e a delful dynt and dele no more
wyth bronde
þe kny3t mad ay god chere
and sayde quat schuld I wonde
of destines derf and dere
what may mon do bot fonde 
he dowellez þer al þat day and dressez on þe morn
askez erly hys armez and alle were þay bro3t
fyrst a tule tapit ty3t ouer þe flet
and miche watz þe gyld gere þat glent þeralofte
þe stif mon steppez þeron and þe stel hondelez
dubbed in a dublet of a dere tars
and syþen a crafty capados closed aloft
þat wyth a bry3t blaunner was bounden withinne
þenne set þay þe sabatounz vpon þe segge fotez
his legez lapped in stel with luflych greuez
with polaynez piched þerto policed ful clene
aboute his knez knaged wyth knotez of golde
queme quyssewes þen þat coyntlych closed
his thik þrawen þy3ez with þwonges to tachched
and syþen þe brawden bryne of bry3t stel ryngez
vmbeweued þat wy3 vpon wlonk stuffe
and wel bornyst brace vpon his boþe armes
with gode cowters and gay and glouez of plate
and alle þe godlych gere þat hym gayn schulde
þat tyde
wyth ryche cote armure
his gold sporez spend with pryde
gurde wyth a bront ful sure
with silk sayn vmbe his syde 
when he watz hasped in armes his harnays watz ryche
þe lest lachet ouer loupe lemed of golde
so harnayst as he watz he herknez his masse
offred and honoured at þe he3e auter
syþen he comez to þe kyng and to his cort ferez
lachez lufly his leue at lordez and ladyez
and þay hym kyst and conueyed bikende hym to kryst
bi þat watz gryngolet grayth and gurde with a sadel
þat glemed ful gayly with mony golde frenges
ayquere naylet ful nwe for þat note ryched
þe brydel barred aboute with bry3t golde bounden
þe apparayl of þe payttrure and of þe proude skyrtez
þe cropore and þe couertor acorded wyth þe arsounez
and al watz rayled on red ryche golde naylez
þat al glytered and glent as glem of þe sunne
þenne hentes he þe helme and hastily hit kysses
þat watz stapled stifly and stoffed wythinne
hit watz hy3e on his hede hasped bihynde
wyth a ly3tly vrysoun ouer þe auentayle
enbrawden and bounden wyth þe best gemmez
on brode sylkyn borde and bryddez on semez
as papiayez paynted peruyng bitwene
tortors and trulofez entayled so þyk
as mony burde þeraboute had ben seuen wynter
in toune
þe cercle watz more o prys
þat vmbeclypped hys croun
of diamauntez a deuys
þat boþe were bry3t and broun 
then þay schewed hym þe schelde þat was of schyr goulez
wyth þe pentangel depaynt of pure golde hwez
he braydez hit by þe bauderyk aboute þe hals kestes
þat bisemed þe segge semlyly fayre
and quy þe pentangel apendez to þat prynce noble
I am in tent yow to telle þof tary hyt me schulde
hit is a syngne þat salamon set sumquyle
in bytoknyng of trawþe bi tytle þat hit habbez
for hit is a figure þat haldez fyue poyntez
and vche lyne vmbelappez and loukez in oþer
and ayquere hit is emdelez and englych hit callen
oueral as I here þe endeles knot
forþy hit acordez to þis kny3t and to his cler armez
for ay faythful in fyue and sere fyue syþez
gawan watz for gode knawen and as golde pured
voyded of vche vylany wyth verertuez ennourned
in mote
forþy þe pentangel nwe
he ber in schelde and cote
as tulk of tale most trwe
and gentylest kny3t of lote 
fyrst he watz funden fautlez in his fyue wyttez
and efte fayled neuer þe freke in his fyue fyngres
and alle his afyaunce vpon folde watz in þe fyue woundez
þat cryst ka3t on þe croys as þe crede tellez
and quere soeuer þys mon in melly watz stad
his þro þo3t watz in þat þur3 alle oþer þyngez
þat alle his forsnes he fong at þe fyue joyez
þat þe hende heuen quene had of hir chylde
at þis cause þe kny3t comlyche hade
in þe inore half of his schelde hir ymage depaynted
þat quen he blusched þerto his belde neuer payred
þe fyft fyue þat I finde þat þe frek vsed
watz fraunchyse and fela3schyp forbe al þyng
his clannes and his cortaysye croked were neuer
and pite þat passez alle poyntez þyse pure fyue
were harder happed on þat haþel þen on any oþer
now alle þese fyue syþez for soþe were fetled on þis kny3t
and vchone halched in oþer þat non ende hade
and fyched vpon fyue poyntez þat fayld neuer
ne samned neuer in no syde ne sundred nouþer
withouten ende at any noke I quere fynde
whereeuer þe gomen bygan or glod to an ende
þerfore on his schene schelde schapen watz þe knot
ryally wyth red golde vpon rede gowlez
þat is þe pure pentaungel wyth þe peple called
with lore
now grayþed is gawan gay
and la3t his launce ry3t þore
and gef hem alle goud day
he wende for euermore 
he sperred þe sted with þe spurez and sprong on his way
so stif þat þe stonfyr stroke out þerafter
al þat sey þat semly syked in hert
and sayde soþly al same segges til oþer
carande for þat comly bi kryst hit is scaþe
þat þou leude schal be lost þat art of lyf noble
to fynde hys fere vpon folde in fayth is not eþe
warloker to haf wro3t had more wyt bene
and haf dy3t 3onder dere a duk to haue worþed
a lowande leder of ledez in londe hym wel semez
and so had better haf ben þen britned to no3t
hadet wyth an aluisch mon for angardez pryde
who knew euer any kyng such counsel to take
as kny3tez in cauelounz on crystmasse gomnez
wel much watz þe warme water þat waltered of y3en
when þat semly syre so3t fro þo wonez
þad daye
he made non abode
bot wy3tly went hys way
mony wylsum way he rode
þe bok as I herde say 
now ridez þis renk þur3 þe ryalme of logres
sir gauan on godez halue þa3 hym no gomen þo3t
oft leudlez alone he lengez on ny3tez
þer he fonde no3t hym byfore þe fare þat he lyked
hade he no fere bot his fole bi frythez and dounez
ne no gome bot god bi gate wyth to karp
til þat he ne3ed ful noghe into þe norþe walez
alle þe iles of anglesay on lyft half he haldez
and farez ouer þe fordez by þe forlondez
ouer at þe holy hede til he hade eft bonk
in þe wyldrenesse of wyrale wonde þer bot lyte
þat auþer god oþer gome wyth goud hert louied
and ay he frayned as he ferde at frekez þat he met
if þay hade herde any karp of a kny3t grene
in any grounde þeraboute of þe grene clapel
and al nykked hym wyth nay þat neuer in her lyue
þay se3e neuer no segge þat watz of suche hwez
of grene
þe kny3t tok gates straunge
in mony a bonk vnbene
his cher ful oft con chaunge
þat chapel er he my3t sene 
mony klyf he ouerclambe in contrayez straunge
fer floten fro his frendez fremedly he rydez
at vche warþe oþer water þer þe wy3e passed
he fonde a foo hym byfore bot ferly hit were
and þat so foule and so felle þat fe3t hym byhode
fo mony meruayl bi mount þer þe mon fyndez
hit were to tore for to telle of þe tenþe dole
sumwhyle wyth wormez he werrez and with wolues als
sumwhyle wyth wodwos þat woned in þe knarrez
boþe wyth bullez and berez and borez oþerquyle
and etaynez þat hym anelede of þe he3e felle
nade he ben du3ty and dry3e and dry3tyn had serued
douteles he hade ben ded and dreped ful ofte
for werre wrathed hym not so much þat wynter was wors
when þe colde cler water fro þe cloudez schadden
and fres er hit falle my3t to þe fale erþe
ner slayn wyth þe slete he sleped in his yrnes
mo ny3tez þen innoghe in naked rokkez
þer as claterande fro þe crest þe colde borne rennez
and henged he3e ouer his hede in hard ysse ikkles
þus in peryl and payne and plytes ful harde
bi contray cayrez þis kny3t tyl krystmasse euen
al one
þe kny3t wel þat tyde
to mary made his mone
þat ho hym red to ryde
and wysse hym to sum wone 
bi a mounte on þe morne meryly he rydes
into a forest ful dep þat ferly watz wylde
hi3e hillez on vche a halue and holtwodez vnder
of hore okez ful hoge a hundreth togeder
þe hasel and þe ha3þorne were harled al samen
with ro3e raged mosse rayled aywhere
with mony bryddez vnblyþe vpon bare twyges
þat pitosly þer piped for pyne of þe colde
þe gome vpon gryngolet glydez hem vnder
þur3 mony misy and myre mon al hym one
carande for his costes lest he ne keuer schulde
to se þe seruy of þat syre þat on þat self ny3t
of a burde watz borne oure baret to quelle
and þerfore sykyng he sayde I beseche þe lorde
and mary þat is myldest moder so dere
of sum herber þer he3ly I my3t here masse
ande þy matynez to morne mekely I ask
and þerto prestly I pray my pater and aue
and crede
he rode in his prayere
and cryed for his mysdede
he sayned hym in syþes sere
and sayde cros kryst me spede 
nade he sayned hymself segge bot þrye
er he watz war in þe wod of a won in a mote
abof a launde on a lawe loken vnder bo3ez
of mony borelych bole aboute bi þe diches
a castel þe comlokest þat euer kny3t a3te
pyched on a prayere a park al aboute
with a pyked palays pynned ful þik
þat vmbete3e mony tre mo þen two myle
þat holde on þat on syde þe haþel auysed
as hit schemered and schon þur3 þe schyre okez
þenne hatz he hendly of his helme and he3ly he þonkez
jesus and say gilyan þat gentyle ar boþe
þat cortaysly hade hym kydde and his cry herkened
now bone hostel coþe þe burne I beseche yow 3ette
þenne gederez he to gryngolet with þe gilt helez
and he ful chauncely hatz chosen to þe chef gate
þat bro3t bremly þe burne to þe bryge ende
in haste
þe bryge watz breme vpbrayde
þe 3atez wer stoken faste
þe wallez were wel arayed
hit dut no wyndez blaste 
þe burne bode on bonk þat on blonk houed
of þe depe double dich þat drof to þe place
þe walle wod in þe water wonderly depe
ande eft a ful huge he3t hit haled vpon lofte
of harde hewen ston vp to þe tablez
enbaned vnder þe abataylment in þe best lawe
and syþen garytez ful gaye gered bitwene
wyth mony luflych loupe þat louked ful clene
a better barbican þat burne blusched vpon neuer
and innermore he behelde þat halle ful hy3e
towre telded bytwene trochet ful þik
fayre fylyolez þat fy3ed and ferlyly long
with coroun coprounes craftyly sle3e
chalk whyt chymnees þer ches he inno3e
vpon bastel rouez þat blenked ful quyte
so mony pynakle payntet watz poudred ayquere
among þe castel carnelez clambred so þik
þat pared out of papure purely hit semed
þe fre freke on þe fole hit fayr innghe þo3t
if he my3t keuer to com þe cloyster wythinne
to herber in þat hostel whyl halyday lested
auinant
he calde and sone þer com
a porter pure plesaunt
on þe wal his ernd he nome
and haylsed þe kny3t erraunt 
gode sir quoþ gawan woldez þou go myn ernde
to þe he3 lorde of þis hous herber to craue 3e peter quoþ þe porter and purely I trowoe
þat 3e be wy3e welcum to won quyle yow lykez
þen 3ede þe wy3e a3ayn swyþe
and folke frely hym wyth to fonge þe kny3t
þay let doun þe grete dra3t and derely out 3eden
and kneled doun on her knes vpon þe colde erþe
to welcum þis ilk wy3 as worþy hom þo3t
þay 3olden hym þe brode 3ate 3arked vp wyde
and he hem raysed rekenly and rod ouer þe brygge
sere seggez hym sesed by sadel quel he ly3t
and syþen stabeled his stede stif men inno3e
kny3tez and swyerez comen doun þenne
for to bryng þis buurne wyth blys into halle
quen he hef vp his helme þer hi3ed innoghe
for to hent hit at his honde þe hende to seruen
his bronde and his blasoun boþe þay token
þen haylsed he ful hendly þo haþelez vchone
and mony proud mon þer presed þat prynce to honour
alle hasped in his he3 wede to halle þay hym wonnen
þer fayre fyre vpon flet fersly brenned
þenne þe lorde of þe lede loutez fro his chambre
for to mete wyth menske þe mon on þe flor
he sayde 3e are welcum to welde as yow lykez
þat here is al is yowre awen to haue at yowre wylle
and welde
graunt mercy quoþ gawayn
þer kryst hit yow for3elde
as frekez þat semed fayn
ayþer oþer in armez con felde 
gawayn gly3t on þe gome þat godly hym gret
and þu3t hit a bolde burne þat þe bur3 a3te
a hoge haþel for þe nonez and of hyghe eldee
brode bry3t watz his berde and al beuer hwed
sturne stif on þe stryþþe on stalworth schonkez
felle face as þe fyre and fre of hys speche
and wel hym semed for soþe as þe segge þu3t
to lede a lortschyp in lee of leudez ful gode
þe lorde hym charred to a chambre and clesly cumaundez
to delyuer hym a leude hym lo3ly to serue
and þere were boun at his bode burnez inno3e
þat bro3t hym to a bry3t boure þer beddyng watz noble
of cortynes of clene sylk wyth cler golde hemmez
and couertorez ful curious with comlych panez
of bry3t blaunmer aboue enbrawded bisydez
rudelez rennande on ropez red golde ryngez
tapitez ty3t to þe wo3e of tuly and tars
and vnder fete on þe flet of fol3ande sute
þer he watz dispoyled wyth spechez of myerþe
þe burn of his bruny and of his bry3t wedez
ryche robes ful rad renkkez hem bro3ten
for to charge and to chaunge and chose of þe best
sone as he on hent and happed þerinne
þat sete on hyn semly wyth saylande skyrtez
þe ver by his uisage verayly hit semed
welne3 to vche haþel alle on hwes
lowande and lufly alle his lymmez vnder
þat a comloker kny3t neuer kryst made
hem þo3t
wheþen in worlde he were
hit semed as he my3t
be prynce withouten pere
in felde þer felle men fy3t 
a cheyer byfore þe chemne þer charcole brenned
watz grayþed for sir gawan grayþely with cloþez
whyssynes vpon queldepoyntes þa koynt wer boþe
and þenne a mere mantyle watz on þat mon cast
of a broun bleeaunt enbrauded ful ryche
and fayre furred wythinne with fellez of þe best
alle of ermyn in erde his hode of þe same
and he sete in þat settel semlych ryche
and achaufed hym cefly and þenne his cher mended
sone watz telded vp a tapit on trestez ful fayre
clad wyth a clene cloþe þat cler quyt schewed
sanap and salure and syluerin sponez
þe wy3e wesche at his wylle and went to his mete
seggez hym serued semly inno3e
wyth sere sewes and sete sesounde of þe best
double felde as hit fallez and fele kyn fischez
summe baken in bred summe brad on þe gledez
summe soþen summe in sewe sauered with spyces
and ay sawes so sle3ez þat þe segge lyked
þe freke calde hit a fest ful frely and ofte
ful hendely quen alle þe haþeles rehayted hym at onez
as hende
þis penaunce now 3e take
and eft hit schal amende
þat mon much merþe con make
for wyn in his hed þat wende 
þenne watz spyed and spured vpon spare wyse
bi preue poyntez of þat prynce put to hymseluen
þat he beknew cortaysly of þe court þat he were
þat aþel arþure þe hende haldez hym one
þat is þe ryche ryal kyng of þe rounde table
and hit watz Wawen hymself þat in þat won syttez
comen to þat krystmasse as case hym þen lymped
when þe lorde hade lerned þat he þe leude hade
loude la3ed he þerat so lef hit hym þo3t
and alle þe men in þat mote maden much joye
to apere in his presense prestly þat tyme
þat alle prys and prowes and pured þewes
apendes to hys persoun and praysed is euer
byfore alle men vpon molde his mensk is þe most
vch segge ful softly sayde to his fere
now schal we semlych se sle3tez of þewez
and þe teccheles termes of talkyng noble
wich spede is in speche vnspurd may we lerne
syn we haf fonged þat fyne fader of nurture
god hatz geuen vus his grace godly for soþe
þat such a gest as gawan grauntez vus to haue
when burnez blyþe of his burþe schal sitte
and synge
in menyng of manerez mere
þis burne now schal vus bryng
I hope þat may hym here
schal lerne of luf talkyng 
bi þat þe diner watz done and þe dere vp
hit watz ne3 at þe niy3t ne3ed þe tyme
claplaynez to þe chapeles chosen þe gate
rungen ful rychely ry3t as þay schulden
to þe hersum euensong of þe hy3e tyde
þe lorde loutes þerto and þe lady als
into a comly closet coyntly ho entrez
gawan glydez ful gay and gos þeder sone
þe lorde laches hym by þe lappe and ledez hym to sytte
and couþly hym knowez and callez hym his nome
and sayde he watz þe welcomest wy3e of þe worlde
and he hym þonkked þroly and ayþer halched oþer
and seten soberly samen þe seruise quyle
þenne lyst þe lady to loke on þe kny3t
þenne com ho of hir closet with mony cler burdez
ho watz þe fayrest in felle of flesche and of lyre
and of compas and colour and costes of alle oþer
and wener þen wenore as þe wy3e þo3t
he ches þur3 þe chaunsel to cheryche þat hende
an oþer lady hir lad bi þe lyft honde
þat watz alder þen ho an auncian hit semed
and he3ly honowred with haþelez aboute
bot vnlyke on to loke þo ladyes were
for if þe 3onge watz 3ep 3ol3e watz þat oþer
riche red on þat on rayled ayquere
rugh ronkled chekez þat oþer on rolled
kerchofes of þat on wyth mony cler perlez
hir brest and hir bry3t þrote bare displayed
schon schyrer þen snawe þat scheder on hillez
þat oþer wyth a gorger watz gered ouer þe swyre
chymbled ouer hir blake chyn with mylk quyte vayles
hir frount folden in sylk enfoubled ayquere
toret and treleted with tryflez aboute
þat no3t watz bare of þat burde bot þe blake bro3es
þe tweyne y3en and þe nase þe naked lyppez
and þose were soure to se and sellyly blered
a mensk lady on molde mon may hir calle
for gode
hir body watz schort and þik
hir buttokez bay and brode
more lykkerwys on to lyk
watz þat scho hade on lode 
when gawayn gly3t on þat gay þat graciously loked
wyth leue la3t of þe lorde he went hem a3aynes
þe alder he haylses heldande ful lowe
þe loueloker he lappez a lyttel in armez
he kysses hir comlyly and kny3tly he melez
þay kallen hym of aquoyntaunce and he hit quyk askez
to be her seruant sothly if hemself lyked
þay tan hym bytwene hem wyth talkyng hym leden
to chambre to chemne and chefly þay asken
spycez þat vnsparely men speded hom to bryng
and þe wynnelych wyne þerwith vche tyme
þe lorde luflych aloft lepez ful ofte
mynned merthe to be made vpon mony syþez
hent he3ly of his hode and on a spere henged
and wayned hom to wynne þe worchip þerof
þat most myrþe my3t meue þat crystenmas whyle
and I schal fonde bi my fayth to fylter wyth þe best
er me wont þe wedez with help of my frendez
þus wyth la3ande lotez þe lorde hit tayt makez
for to glade sir gawayn with gomnez in halle
þat ny3t
til þat hit watz tyme
þe kyng comaundet ly3t
sir gawen his leue con nyme
and to his bed hym di3t 
on þe morne as vch mon mynez þat tyme
þat dry3tyn for oure destyne to de3e watz borne
wele waxez in vche a won in worlde for his sake
so did hit þere on þat day þur3 dayntes mony
boþe at mes and at mele messes ful quaynt
derf men vpon dece drest of þe best
þe olde auncian wyf he3est ho syttez
þe lorde lufly her by lent as I trowe
gawan and þe gay burde togeder þay seten
euen inmyddez as þe messe metely come
and syþen þur3 al þe sale as hem best semed
bi vche grome at his degre grayþely watz serued
þer watz mete þer watz myrþe þer watz much ioye
þat for to telle þerof hit me tene were
and to poynte hit 3et I pyned me parauenture
bot 3et I wot þat wawen and þe wale burde
such comfort of her compaynye ca3ten togeder
þur3 her dere dalyaunce of her derne wordez
wyth clene cortays carp closed fro fylþe
and hor play watz passande vche prynce gomen
in vayres
trumpez and nakerys
much pypyng þer repayres
vche mon tented hys
and þay two tented þayres 
much dut watz þer dryuen þat day and þat oþer
and þe þryd as þro þronge in þerafter
þe ioye of sayn jonez day watz gentyle to here
and watz þe last of þe layk leudez þer þo3ten
þer wer gestes to go vpon þe gray morne
forþy wonderly þay woke and þe wyn dronken
daunsed ful dre3ly wyth dere carolez
at þe last when hit watz late þay lachen her leue
vchon to wende on his way þat watz wy3e stronge
gawan gef hym god day þe godmon hym lachchez
ledes hym to his awen chambre þe hymne bysyde
and þere he dra3ez hym on dry3e and derely hym þonkkez
of þe wynne worschip and he hym wayued hade
as to honour his hous on þat hy3e tyde
and enbelyse his bur3 with his bele chere
iwysse sir quyl I leue me worþez þe better
þat gawayn hatz ben my gest at goddez awen fest
grant nerci sir quoþ gawayn in god fayth hit is yowrez
al þe honour is your awen þe he3e kyng yow 3elde
and I am wy3e at your wylle to worch youre hest
as I am halden þerto in hy3e and in lo3e
bi ri3t
þe lorde fast can hym payne
to holde lenger þe kny3t
to hym answrez gawayn
bi non way þat he my3t 
then frayned þe freke ful fayre at himseluen
quat derue dede had hym dryuen at þat dere tyme
so kenly fro þe kyngez kourt to kayre al his one
er þe halidayez holly were halet out of toun
for soþe sir quoþ þe segge 3e sayn bot þe trawþe
a he3e ernde and a hasty me hade fro þo wonez
for I am sumned myselfe to sech to a place
I wot in worlde whederwarde to wende hit to fynde
I nolde bot if I hit negh my3t on nw 3eres morne
for alle þe londe inwyth logres so me oure lorde help
forþy sir þis enquest I require yow here
þat 3e me telle with trawþe if euer 3e tale herde
of þe grene chapel quere hit on grounde stondez
and of þe kny3t þat hit kepes of colour of grene
þer watz stabled bi statut a steuen vus bytwene
to mete þat mon at þat mere 3if I my3t last
and of þat ilk nw 3ere bot neked now wontez
and I wolde loke on þat lede if god me let wolde
gladloker bi goddez sun þen any god welde
forþi iwysse bi 3owre wylle wende me bihoues
naf I now to busy bot bare þre dayez
and me als fayn to falle feye as fayly of myyn ernde
þenne la3ande quoþ þe lorde now leng þe byhoues
for I schal teche yow to þa terme bi þe tymez ende
þe grene chapayle vpon grounde greue yow no more
bot 3e schal be in yowre bed burne at þyn ese
quyle forth dayez and ferk on þe fyrst of þe 3ere
and cum to þat merk at mydmorn to make quat yow likez
in spenne
dowellez whyle new 3eres daye
and rys and raykez þenne
mon schal yow sette in waye
hit is not two myle henne 
þenne watz gawan ful glad and gomenly he la3ed
now I þonk yow þryuandely þur3 alle oþer þynge
now acheued is my chaunce I schal at your wylle
dowelle and ellez do quat 3e demen
þenne sesed hym þe syre and set hym bysyde
let þe ladiez be fette to lyke hem þe better
þer watz seme solace by hemself stille
þe lorde let for luf lotez so myry
as wy3 þat wolde of his wyte ne wyst quat he my3t
þenne he carped to þe kny3t criande loude 3e han demed to do þe dede þat I bidde
wyl 3e halde þis hes here at þys onez 3e sir for soþe sayd þe segge trwe
whyl I byde in 3owre bor3e be bayn to 3owe hest
for 3e haf trauayled quoþ þe tulk towen fro ferre
and syþen waked me wyth 3e arn not wel waryst
nauþer of sostnaunce ne of slepe soþly I knowe 3e schal lenge in your lofte and ly3e in your ese
to morn quyle þe messequyle and to mete wende
when 3e wyl wyth my wyf þat wyth yow schal sitte
and comfort yow with compayny til I to cort torne 3e lende
and I schal erly ryse
on huntyng wyl I wende
gauayn grantez alle þyse
hym heldande as þe hende  3et firre quoþ þe freke a forwarde we make
quat soeuer I wynne in þe wod hit worþez to yourez
and quat chek so 3e acheue chaunge me þerforne
swete swap we so sware with trawþe
queþer leude so lymp lere oþer better
bi god quoþ gawayn þe gode I grant þertylle
and þat yow lyst for to layke lef hit me þynkes
who bryngez vus þis beuerage þis bargayn is maked
so sayde þe lorde of þat lede þay la3ed vchone
þay dronken and daylyeden and dalten vnty3tel
þise lordez and ladyez quyle þat hem lyked
and syþen with frenkysch fare and fele fayre lotez
þay stoden and stemed and stylly speken
kysten ful comlyly and ka3ten her leue
with mony leude ful ly3t and lemande torches
vche burne to his bed watz bro3t at þe laste
ful softe
to bed 3et er þay 3ede
recorded couenauntez ofte
þe olde lorde of þat leude
cowþe wel halde layk alofte 
ful erly bifore þe day þe folk vprysen
gestes þat go wolde hor gromez þay calden
and þay busken vp bilyue blonkkez to sadel
tyffen he takles trussen her males
richen hem þe rychest to ryde alle arayde
lepen vp ly3tly lachen her brydeles
vche wy3e on his way þer hym wel lyked
þe leue lorde of þe londe watz not þe last
arayed for þe rydyng with renkkez ful mony
ete a sop hastyly when he hade herde masse
with bugle to bent felde he buskez bylyue
by þat þat any dayly3t lemed vpon erþe
he with his haþeles on hy3e horsses weren
þenne þise cacheres þat couþe cowpled hor houndez
vnclosed þe kenel dore and calde hem þeroute
blwe bygly in buglez þre bare mote
braches bayed þerfore and breme noyse maked
and þay chastysed and charred on chasyng þat went
a hundreth of hunteres as I haf herde telle
of þe best
to trystors vewters 3od
couples huntes of kest
þer ros for blastez gode
gret rurd in þat forest 
at þe fyrst quethe of þe quest quaked þe wylde
der drof in þe dale doted for drede
hi3ed to þe hy3e bot heterly þay were
restayed with þe stablye þat stoutly ascryed
þay let þe herttez haf þe gate with þe hy3e hedes
þe breme bukkez also with hor brode paumez
for þe fre lorde hade defende in fermysoun tyme
þat þer schulde no mon meue to þe male dere
þe hindez were halden in with hay and war
þe does dryuen with gret dyn to þe depe sladez
þer my3t mon se as þay slypte slentyng of arwes
at vche wende vnder wande wapped a flone
þat bigly bote on þe broun with ful brode hedez
what þay brayen and bleden bi bonkkez þay de3en
and ay rachches in a res radly hem fol3es
hunterez wyth hy3e horne hasted hem after
wyth such a crakkande kry as klyffes haden brusten
what wylde so atwaped wy3es þat schotten
watz al toraced and rent at þe resayt
bi þay were tened at þe hy3e and taysed to þe wattrez
þe ledez were so lerned at þe lo3e trysteres
and þe grehoundez so grete þat geten hem bylyue
and hem tofylched as fast as frekez my3t loke
þer ry3t
þe lorde for blys abloy
ful oft con launce and ly3t
and drof þat day wyth joy
thus to þe derk ny3t 
þus laykez þis lorde by lynde wodez euez
and gawayn þe god mon in gay bed lygez
lurkkez quyl þe dayly3t lemed on þe wowes
vnder couertour ful clere cortyned aboute
and as in slomeryng he slode sle3ly he herde
a littel dyn at his dor and derfly vpon
and he heuez vp his hed out of þe cloþes [fol. 107r]
a corner of þe cortyn he ca3t vp a lyttel
and waytez warly þiderwarde quat hit be my3t
hit watz þe ladi loflyest to beholde
þat dro3 þe dor after hir ful dernly and stylle
and bo3ed towarde &t


^^EOP^^


  Seynt Stevene was a clerk in Kyng Herowdes halle,
And servyd him of bred and cloth, as every kyng befalle. 
  Stevyn out of kechone cam, wyth boris hed on honde;
He saw a sterre was fayr and bryght over Bedlem stonde. 
  He kyst adoun the boris hed and went in to the halle:
"I forsak the, Kyng Herowdes, and thi werkes alle." 
  "I forsak the, Kyng Herowdes, and thi werkes alle;
Ther is a chyld in Bedlem born is beter than we alle." 
  "Quat eylyt the, Stevene? quat is the befalle?
Lakkyt the eyther mete or drynk in Kyng Herowdes halle?" 
  "Lakit me neyther mete ne drynk in Kyng Herowdes halle;
Ther is a chyld in Bedlem born is beter than we alle." 
  "Quat eylyt the, Stevyn? Art thu wod, or thu gynnyst to brede?
Lakkyt the eyther gold or fe, or ony ryche wede?" 
  "Lakyt me neyther gold ne fe, ne non ryche wede;
Ther is a chyld in Bedlem born xal helpyn us at our nede." 
  "That is al so soth, Stevyn, al so soth, iwys.
As this capoun crowe xal that lyth here in myn dysh." 
  That word was not so sone seyd, that word in that halle,
The capoun crew Cristus natus est! among the lordes alle. 
  "Rysyt up, myn turmentowres, be to and al be on,
And ledyt Stevyn out of this toun, and stonyt hym wyth ston!" 
  Tokyn he Stevene, and stonyd hym in the way,
And therfore is his evyn on Crystes owyn day.
 
 


^^EOP^^


  Thus chydand with her drerie destenye,
   Weiping, scho woik the nicht fra end to end;
Bot all in vane; hir dule, hir cairfull cry,
    Micht not remeid, nor yit hir murning mend.
    Ane lipper lady rais, and till hir wend,
And said, "Quhy spurnis thow aganis the wall,
To sla thyself, and mend nathing at all? 
  "Sen thy weiping dowbillis bot thy wo,
    I counsall the mak vertew of ane neid;
  To leir to clap thy clapper to and fro,
      And leir efter the law of lipper leid."
      Thair was na buit, bot furth with thame scho yeid,
  Fra place to place, quhill cauld and hounger sair
  Compellit hir to be ane rank beggair. 
    That samin tyme of Troy the garnisoun,
      Quhilk had to chiftane worthie Troylus,
  Throw jeopardie of weir had strikken down
      Knichtis of Grece in number marvellous:
      With greit tryumphe and laude victorious
  Agane to Troy richt royallie they raid,
  The way quhair Cresseid with the lipper baid. 
    Seing that companie, thai come all with ane stevin;
      Thay gaif ane cry, and schuik coppis gude speid;
  Said, "Worthie lordis, for Goddis lufe of hevin,
      To us lipper part of your almous deid."
      Than to thair cry nobill Troylus tuik heid,
  Having pietie, neir by the place can pas
  Quhair Cresseid sat, not witting quhat scho was. 
    Than upon him scho kest up baith her ene,
      And with ane blenk it come into his thocht
  That he sumtime hir face befoir had sene;
      But scho was in sic plye he knew hir nocht;
      Yit than hir luik into his mynd it brocht
  The sweit visage and amorous blenking
  Of fair Cresseid, sumtyme his awin darling. 
    Na wonder was, suppois in mynd that he
      Tuik hir figure sa sone, and lo! now quhy!
  The idole of ane thing in cace may be
      Sa deip imprentit in the fantasy,
      That it deludis the wittis outwardly,
  And sa appeiris in forme and lyke estait
  Within the mynd, as it was figurait. 
    Ane spark of lufe than till his hart culd spring,
      And kendlit all his bodie in ane fyre,
  With hait fevir ane sweit and trimbling
      Him tuik, quhill he was reddie to expyre;
      To beir his scheild his breist began to tyre;
  Within ane quhyle he changit mony hew,
  And, nevertheles, not ane ane uther knew. 
    For knichtlie pietie and memoriall
      Of fair Cresseid, ane gyrdill can he tak,
  Ane purs of gold, and mony gay jowall,
      And in the skirt of Cresseid doun can swak:
      Than raid away, and not ane word he spak,
  Pensive in hart, quhill he come to the toun,
  And for greit cair oft syis almaist fell doun. 
    The lipper folk to Cresseid than can draw,
      To se the equall distributioun
  Of the almous; but quhan the gold they saw,
      Ilk ane to uther prevelie can roun,
      And said, "Yone lord hes mair affectioun,
  How ever it be, unto yone lazarous,
  Than to us all; we knaw be his almous." 
    "Quhat lord is yone," (quod scho), "have ye na feill,
      Hes done to us so greit humanitie?"
  "Yes," (quod a lipper man), "I knaw him weill;
      Schir Troylus it is, gentill and fre."
      Quhen Cresseid understude that it was he,
  Stiffer than steill thair stert ane bitter stound
  Throwout hir hart, and fell doun to the ground. 
    Quhen scho, ouircome with siching sair and sad,
      With many cairfull cry and cald "Ochane!
  Now is my breist with stormie stoundis stad,
      Wrappit in wo, ane wretch full will of wane:"
      Than swounit scho oft or scho culd refrane,
  And ever in hir swouning cryit scho thus:
  "O, fals Cresseid, and trew knicht Troylus! 
    "Thy lufe, thy lawtie, and thy gentilnes
      I countit small in my prosperitie;
  Sa elevait I was in wantones,
      And clam upon the fickill quheill sa hie;
      All faith and lufe I promissit to the
  Was in the self fickill and frivolous:
  O, fals Cresseid, and trew knicht Troilus! 
    "For lufe of me thow keipt gude continence,
      Honest and chaist in conversatioun;
  Of all wemen protectour and defence
      Thou was, and helpit thair opinioun:
      My mynd in fleschelie foull affectioun
  Was inclynit to lustis lecherous:
  Fy, fals Cresseid! O, trew knicht Troylus! 
    "Lovers, be war, and tak gude heid about
      Quhome that ye lufe, for quhome ye suffer paine;
  I lat yow wit, thair is richt few thairout
      Quhome ye may traist to have trew lufe agane:
      Preif quhen ye will, your labour is in vaine;
  Thairfoir, I reid ye tak thame as ye find,
  For thay ar sad as widdercock in wind, 
    "Becaus I knaw the greit unstabilnes,
      Brukkil as glas, into my self, I say,
  Traisting in uther als greit unfaithfulnes,
      Als unconstant, and als untrew of fay;
      Thocht sum be trew, I wait richt few are thay;
  Quha findis treuth, lat him his lady ruse:
  Nane but my self, as now, I will accuse." 
    Quhen this was said, with paper scho sat doun,
      And on this maneir maid hir testament:
  "Heir I beteiche my corps and carioun
      With wormis and with taidis to be rent;
      My cop and clapper, and myne ornament,
  And all my gold, the lipper folk sall have,
  Quhen I am deid, to burie me in grave. 
    "This royall ring, set with this rubie reid,
      Quhilk Troylus in drowrie to me send,
  To him agane I leif it quhan I am deid,
      To mak my cairfull deid unto him kend:
      Thus I conclude schortlie, and mak ane end;
  My spreit I leif to Diane, quhair scho dwellis,
  To walk with hir in waist woddis and wellis. 
    "O, Diomeid! thow hes baith broche and belt
      Quhilk Troylus gave me in takning
  Of his trew lufe,"—and with that word scho swelt;
      And sone ane lipper man tuik of the ring,
      Syne buryit hir withouttin tarying:
  To Troylus furthwith the ring he bair,
  And of Cresseid the deith he can declair. 
    Quhen he had hard hir greit infirmitie,
      Hir legacie and lamentatioun,
  And how scho endit in sic povertie,
      He swelt for wo, and fell doun in ane swoun;
      For greit sorrow his hart to birst was boun:
  Siching full sadlie, said, "I can no moir;
  Scho was untrew, and wo is me thairfoir!" 
    Sum said he maid ane tomb of merbell gray,
      And wrait hir name and superscriptioun,
  And laid it on hir grave, quhair that scho lay,
      In goldin letteris, conteining this ressoun:
      "Lo, fair ladyis, Cresseid of Troyis toun,
  Sumtyme countit the flour of womanheid,
  Under this stane, late lipper, lyis deid!" 
    Now, worthie wemen, in this ballet schort,
      Made for your worschip and instructioun,
  Of cheritie I monische and exhort,
      Ming not your lufe with fals deceptioun;
      Beir in your mynd this schort conclusioun
  Of fair Cresseid, as I have said befoir:
  Sen scho is deid, I speik of hir no moir.


^^EOP^^




(Written by Martial)




My friend, the things that do attain
The happy life be these, I find:
The riches left, not got with pain,
The fruitful ground; the quiet mind; 
The equal friend; no grudge, no strife;
No charge of rule nor governance;
Without disease the healthy life;
The household of continuance; 
The mean diet, no dainty fare;
True wisdom joined with simpleness;
The night discharged of all care,
Where wine the wit may not oppress; 
The faithful wife, without debate;
Such sleeps as may beguile the night:
Content thyself with thine estate,
Neither wish death, nor fear his might.


^^EOP^^

Tell you I chyll,
If that ye wyll
A whyle be styll,
Of a comely gyll
That dwelt on a hyll:
But she is not gryll,
For she is somwhat sage
And well worne in age;
For her vysage
It would aswage
A mannes courage. 
Her lothely lere
Is nothynge clere,
But ugly of chere,
Droupy and drowsy,
Scurvy and lowsy;
Her face all bowsy,
Comely crynkled,
Woundersly wrynkled,
Lyke a rost pygges eare,
Brystled wyth here. 
Her lewde lyppes twayne,
They slaver, men sayne,
Lyke a ropy rayne,
A gummy glayre:
She is ugly fayre;
Her nose somdele hoked,
And camously croked,
Never stoppynge,
But ever droppynge;
Her skynne lose and slacke,
Grained lyke a sacke;
With a croked backe. 
Her eyen gowndy
Are full unsowndy,
For they are blered;
And she gray hered;
Jawed lyke a jetty;
A man would have pytty
To se how she is gumbed,
Fyngered and thumbed,
Gently joynted,
Gresed and annoynted
Up to the knockles;
The bones of her huckels
Lyke as they were with buckels
Togyther made fast:
Her youth is farre past:
Foted lyke a plane,
Legged lyke a crane;
And yet she wyll jet,
Lyke a jollyvet,
In her furred flocket,
And gray russet rocket,
With symper the cocket.
Her huke of Lyncole grene,
It had ben hers, I wene,
More then fourty yere;
And so doth it apere,
For the grene bare thredes
Loke lyke sere wedes,
Wyddered lyke hay,
The woll worne away;
And yet I dare saye
She thynketh herselfe gaye
Upon the holy daye,
Whan she doth her aray,
And gyrdeth in her gytes
Stytched and pranked with pletes;
Her kyrtel Brystow red,
With clothes upon her hed
That wey a sowe of led,
Wrythen in wonder wyse,
After the Sarasyns gyse
With a whym wham,
Knyt with a trym tram,
Upon her brayne pan,
Lyke an Egyptian,
Capped about:
When she goeth out
Herselfe for to shewe,
She dryveth downe the dewe
Wyth a payre of heles
As brode as two wheles;
She hobles as a gose
With her blanket hose
Over the falowe;
Her shone smered wyth talowe,
Gresed upon dyrt
That baudeth her skyrt. 
And this comely dame,
I understande, her name
Is Elynour Rummynge,
At home in her wonnynge;
And as men say
She dwelt in Sothray,
In a certayne stede
Bysyde Lederhede.
She is a tonnysh gyb;
The devyll and she be syb. 
But to make up my tale,
She breweth noppy ale,
And maketh therof port sale
To travellars, to tynkers,
To sweters, to swynkers,
And all good ale drynkers,
That wyll nothynge spare,
But drynke tyll they stare
And brynge themselfe bare,
With, "Now away the mare,
And let us sley care,
As wyse as an hare!" 
Come who so wyll
To Elynour on the hyll,
Wyth, "Fyll the cup, fyll,"
And syt there by styll,
Erly and late:
Thyther cometh Kate,
Cysly, and Sare,
With theyr legges bare,
And also theyr fete,
Hardely, full unswete;
Wyth theyr heles dagged,
Theyr kyrtelles all to-jagged,
Theyr smockes all to-ragged,
Wyth titters and tatters,
Brynge dysshes and platters,
Wyth all theyr myght runnynge
To Elynour Rummynge,
To have of her tunnynge:
She leneth them on the same.
And thus begynneth the game. 
Instede of coyne and monny,
Some brynge her a conny,
And some a pot with honny,
Some a salt, and some a spone,
Some theyr hose, some theyr shone;
Some ran a good trot
With a skellet or a pot;
Some fyll theyr pot full
Of good Lemster woll:
An huswyfe of trust,
Whan she is athrust,
Suche a webbe can spyn,
Her thryft is full thyn. 
Some go streyght thyder,
Be it slaty or slyder;
They holde the hye waye,
They care not what men say,
Be that as be maye;
Some, lothe to be espyde,
Start in at the backe syde,
Over the hedge and pale,
And all for the good ale. 
Some renne tyll they swete,
Brynge wyth them malte or whete,
And dame Elynour entrete
To byrle them of the best. 
Than cometh an other gest;
She swered by the rode of rest,
Her lyppes are so drye,
Without drynke she must dye;
Therefore fyll it by and by,
And have here a pecke of ry. 
Anone cometh another,
As drye as the other,
And wyth her doth brynge
Mele, salte, or other thynge,
Her harvest gyrdle, her weddyng rynge,
To pay for her scot
As cometh to her lot.
Som bryngeth her husbandes hood,
Because the ale is good;
Another brought her his cap
To offer to the ale-tap,
Wyth flaxe and wyth towe;
And some brought sowre dowe;
Wyth, "Hey, and wyth, Howe,
Syt we downe a-rowe,
And drynke tyll we blowe,
And pype tyrly tyrlowe!" 
Some layde to pledge
Theyr hatchet and theyr wedge,
Theyr hekell and theyr rele,
Theyr rocke, theyr spynnyng whele;
And some went so narrowe,
They layde to pledge theyr wharrowe,
Theyr rybskyn and theyr spyndell,
Theyr nedell and theyr thymbell:
Here was scant thryft
Whan they made suche shyft 
Theyr thrust was so great,
They asked never for mete,
But drynke, styll drynke,
"And let the cat wynke,
Let us washe our gommes
From the drye crommes!" 
But some than sat ryght sad
That nothynge had
There of theyre awne,
Neyther gelt nor pawne;
Suche were there menny
That had not a penny,
But, whan they should walke,
Were fayne wyth a chalke
To score on the balke,
Or score on the tayle:
God gyve it yll hayle!
For my fyngers ytche;
I have wrytten to mytche
Of this mad mummynge
Of Elynour Rummynge:
Thus endeth the gest
Of this worthy fest!  Quod Skelton, Laureat.


^^EOP^^


Were beeth they biforen us weren,
Houndes ledden and hawkes beren,
    And hadden feeld and wode?
        The riche ladies in hir bowr,
        That wereden gold in hir tressour,
    With hir brighte rode, 
Eten and drunken, and maden hem glad;
Hir lif was al with gamen ylad,
    Men kneeleden hem biforen;
        They beren hem wel swithe hye.
        And in a twinkling of an ye
    Hir soules weren forloren. 
Where is that laughing and that song,
That trailing and that proude gong,
    Tho hawkes and tho houndes?
        Al that joye is went away,
        That wele is comen to weylaway,
    To manye harde stoundes. 
Here paradis hy nomen here,
And now they lien in helle ifere;
    The fuir hit brennes evere:
        Long is “ah!” and long is “oh!”
        Long is “wy!” and long is “wo!”
    Thennes ne cometh they nevere. 
Drey here, man, thenne, if thou wilt,
A litel pine that me thee bit;
    Withdraw thine eyses ofte.
        They thy pine be unrede,
        And thou thenke on thy mede,
    It shall thee thinken softe. 
If that fend, that foule thing,
Thorou wikke roun, thorou fals egging,
    Nethere thee haveth icast, down
        Up, and be good chaunpioun!
        Stond, ne fall namore adoun
    For a litel blast. 
Thou tak the rode to thy staf,
And thenk on him that thereonne gaf
    His lif that wes so lef.
        He hit gaf for thee; thou yelde it him;
        Agein his fo that staf thou nim,
    And wrek him of that thef. 
Of righte bileve thou nim that sheld,
The whiles that thou best in that feld,
    Thin hond to strengthen fonde,
        And kep thy fo with staves ord,
        And do that traitre seyen that word.
    Biget that murie londe. 
Thereinne is day withouten night,
Withouten ende strengthe and might,
    And wreche of everich fo;
        Mid God himselven eche lif,
        And pes and rest withoute strif,
    Wele withouten wo. 
Mayden moder, hevene quene,
Thou might and const and owest to bene
    Oure sheld agein the fende:
        Help us sunne for to flen,
        That we moten they sone iseen,
    In joye withouten ende.
 
 


^^EOP^^

The number of bodies i have
is equal to the number of
gurney transfers that are
televised.
 
If we’re all “just human”  
then who is responsible?
 
A fire station drying out
from addiction. outside
the drizzling of firepower,
lowballing suns
 
it’s like a sauna in here.
the strain of a charred
bladder. bottled water
bad wiring,
 
that spark is no good
come sit with me for a
minute. my feet full of
diluted axe fluid
 
thought I heard you say
everything is medicine
but that’s just hearin
what you wanna hear
 


^^EOP^^




for TNH



There are those who will never return to us
as we knew them. Who if they return at all
visit our sleep, or daydreams, or turn up in the features
of total strangers. Or greet us face to face
in the middle of some rush hour street,
but from a great distance—and not in the full flush
of bodies that once wanted nothing more from us
than the laying of our hands upon them,
as a healer lays hands upon the afflicted.
There are those who by their absence are an affliction.
 
I imagine that sometimes in your dark bed
you still want to know why. Why the man
you were just coming to love, who liked you close
as he raced through the city at night, why
he had to swerve suddenly. Why he had to end up
on an operating table, dead. Why you of all people
had to live, to repeat this unanswerable question.
 
I could tell you about a woman good at ritual
who, hardly believing in herself, was good
at making vows the two of us could believe.
Then one day I had to drive her to an early flight.
The dawn was blinding. She was off to look for the soul
no one else could provide. But was this the way
to do it? She didn’t know. She wanted me
to tell her. Tears down her face. And I kept driving.
I can look back and say: on that day, that’s when I died.
 
Since then, you and I have had a hard time believing
anything could bring us back. And yet your brown body
breathes new life into a cotton print from the fifties,
and picks parsley from the garden for spaghetti carbonara,
 
and cues up Mozart’s French horn solo, and fills up the kitchen
with the aroma of sourdough, and gets my body to anticipate
the taste of malt as the tops of American beer cans pop:
good rituals all, because they waited out our every loss, patient
with the slow coming back to our senses, undeterred by our neglect.
As if they knew all along how much we would need them.
 


^^EOP^^

locate the closest overlooked neighborhood — 
      at its core extract all humans living underneath
life’s bootheel. replace with millennials cradling 
postcolonial guilt, but not. ignore the woman’s
      cardboard [help] sign tattered, stained & broken
like her: imagine being long-ago unseen, erased 
in between the throng, an existing non-entity. ask,
      too, if gun be an instrument what refrain whizzed
soundless amid crestfallen shadows lingering 
a decade. go from “a to z” to list the dead — too many
      to name, but try: antoine, byrd, carlos, delante ...    
no deader now than then. still a memory real, 
cold steel, shots fired — death, what did we know
      of dying? don’t forget love, a love strangling addicts
caught in a docetic whirlwind with no blue sail. 
before the corner becomes distorted remember:
      one more time inhale deep. inhale memory to include
the bad & terrible beauty just beneath the living.


^^EOP^^

My daddy understood
the richness of color and
shunned my oldest sister’s
whitewashed birth. Who the white child belong to?
He asked in the delivery ward
shaming himself as the source. 
Shadism colored my siblings’ perception.
An ideal hierarchy with light skin the pinnacle
after the paper bag test proved me cocoa dark
and of less value. 
Burned biscuit defined what I could not
erase. When they tired of sidewalk chalk
and strike ’em out 
their feigned indignation
made my smile give and give
unsuccessfully, reaching eyes
where ducts emptied silently. 
Turned my cheek
on juvenile acceptance
and sibling rivalry
reminding myself that After all, I’m the real thing
and it comforted me.


^^EOP^^

        chicago: city of ice-cold wind — elbow city of the rectangular block, where bigger thomas choked mary dalton in a drunken stupor on cottage grove, that great avenue divider between the haves & have-nots, where my uncle sydney fled after escaping an alabama chain gang a quarter after midnight &, consequently, cleaved the tennessee river (shackles & all) into another state of freedom. chicago: home of the case pocketknife, the nickel-plated snub nose, the banana-suit wearer, gold tooth & all. they migrated from alabama red dirt, from arkansas cotton fields bowlegged & pigeon-toed, & if you’ve ever resided on the west side, then you might as well been living in lil’ mississippi: natchez, vicksburg, grenada, yazoo city, booneville. chicago: home of the winding el, the circling loop, the midnight cruise down lake shore from hyde park straight to buddy guy’s  legends; all them blues in one locale. the one-night stands the city gives you — the identity it injects then sucks from your marrow; the lives gunned down. chicago: where gwendolyn brooks scribed In the Mecca featuring  pepita, our tragic protagonist: assaulted, murdered & forgotten by blue lives matter in ’68 & today nothing has changed. chicago: come sit in the corrupted light.


^^EOP^^

Beside the tree
Beside the chair
Beside the house
Beside the pit
Beside the tree stump
Coco say don’t climb / so I don’t / I sit & stare — my skin coming dark and burnt
They say: tire
I say: brown
They say: Black Black can’t take back!
& I don’t
I learnt to not ask where I’m from
I learn to listen, then not
I’m too scared they gone tell me the things about myself
              I done already buried in the dark
Beside the tree  Beside the chair     Beside the house    Beside the pit
Beside the tree stump         I sit       I sit        I sit        ’til no one even know I’m (t)here


^^EOP^^

Like a wedding ring, or the bride’s green ribbon, you shelter me.
No business but war. You remind me of a kind of heaven.
 
A cairn of rocks casting shadows in the shape of a man.
 
Thou art the table before me in the sight of my adversaries, thou dost
anoint my head: oil and rain, thou art a ghost with a girl’s mouth,
thou art not the making of my dreams—under water, under cliff,
under this long suitcase of earth and bombs. More than any mortal
could gather beneath the skirt of the sky.
 
You are never eager, nor famished, nor pale with a craving for white
clothes or my nocturnes.
 
Let your lynx approach, even tiger, even its wild outline.
 
You need no ferryman or the obolus of the dead.
If I put a coin in my mouth I taste copper, not the corpse.
They say that bodies fertilized the ground so well the trees grow
bright and tall. The bones blur. We return alive.
 


^^EOP^^




After Martin Luther King Jr.



The day they killed Martin
we could not return to New York City
our visiting senior class stuck in Huntsville
streets blazed with suffering in that small
Alabama town
in the dull shroud of morning
the whole world went crazy
devouring whatever light
that lit our half-cracked windows.


^^EOP^^




Let us descend into the blind world now.
— Dante, “The Divine Comedy”

As above, so below; as below, so above.
— Three Initiates, “The Kybalion”



A Lowcountry marsh trembles with the blood of an African
Who refused to climb out of the salt and mud of the bay
And quite literally lost his head. A hunter named Hunter
Waits for the man’s wounds to close and for him to rise
Again. Some call this festive cruelty Paradise. Pleasure.
Demby, the African made to rise and suffer another shot,
Calls it the Afterlife, the unceasing blind world of death
He welcomed expecting the end to his captivity and exile.
But there is no end to the perfecting of cruelty even now
In the Afterlife, where a hawk humped up in the high weeds
And a house on fire are a congruent sadness, a brief history
Of nature’s one duty for flesh — decay, decay, decay ... 
Sometimes, it is as if every bird in the Afterlife trills this
One song. And I forget who I am, but then I look down
At my feet shuffling in darkness and hear my name — 
Till ... Till ... Till ... And I know I am no farmer, blade
Or mule driven over some roach-ragged road to field
And fray, and sometimes I forget how I came here to After-
Life, to pleasure, to domestic violence, to drive, be
Driven, and then I look down at my hands. It is a war
That brought you this peace, a war that brought you this peace. 
And then, I heard a question: “Shall we kill all of the masters?”
And before I brokered an answer, I heard a voice say:
“Then, we must kill ourselves, first. And who will
Be left to kill the masters?” I turned to find nothing
But a boy in a tree and a girl beside him, their heads
Tolling in the wind like pecker-fretted fruit. Voice, I said,
Come now or do not come at all. And there, a man
I had seen before scratching in dust next to a drill field
With a dictionary and a strange astronomy for a face.
Ezra, is that you, I asked. “The peasants’ bent shoulders,
Odysseus and the dead bullock — call me whatever you’d like.
I come to every name like a white ox toward Pisa
And the butcher’s road. I come to Paradise dragged
By the hair ... with one day’s reading and surrendered
Temple.” You do talk funny, I said. “He do the police
In different voices,” he said. And when all the voices
sound like the police, I said, kill all the voices. And so ran.
I ran from Ezra who ran after me and demanded he be
My guide. “There is no running from the forest of men.
There is no running from men.” I’ll be damned, I said — 
But before I could finish Ezra said, “That’s right. Be damned. 
Be here taloned and tumbling the sky down in Paradise.
Here. Be in your cage and free.” But here is not the here
I seek nor sought. For that here harangues me
And I might as well be the nigger coming over
The obstacle fence, a periplum of certain disaster,
A choir of empty cups sitting loudly before the famished,
Your prince, dear Ezra, hanging by his heels in the piazza,
The sprezzatura of maggots rummaging the round heart
For its divinity and pulse. Ezra, nothing of you but the dead.
And so, I ran past the possum running through the skull
Holes of a dead man lying in the fog that licked them
Into a wet testimony, the possum testifying, too, to their death — 
Coming, going, in ruins and floating out, out, beyond
Their murders and dropped plates, out beyond the Thame-ish
Rivers and its drowning traditions. And then I looked back
And saw Ezra. He had come to his cage and could go no farther.
“Till,” he said. “Bring me up from beneath these decks,
One slaver to another.” He winked and I winked back,
Handed him the katydid buzzing in my pocket, as I had done
Before, dug a trench around him as another had done before,
Then said, “Ezra, be here in your cage and free,” and ran. 
And then I came upon a mountain and then a chasm
For which there was no bridge and so turned back
To find a possum running behind me, and I asked him,
Dear Possum, what do we do with this darkness
Between us, and the possum said nothing and ran on
Into the darkness, into the chasm and fell speaking of
The end of touch, the desire to forget desire, shadows,
The fear in a handful of dust, a woman’s mouth,
Fear I had known of and visited though now I cringed
At the thought of that violence, the violence that I brought — 
And so thought to throw myself, too, in that chasm
When a hand touched my shoulder, a voice said, “Not now,
Maybe never. On we go, dear boy, through this weather.
Let’s find us another theory of light. Or darkness.”
Then, she laughed, for it was a woman with a lit darkness
And a careful chin, glasses, her body a tin of tender.
What do you know of me, I asked. She said, “Louis,
I know of you as I know fog — that it comes on
Through the alleys and past the dead boys and girls
Who had not wanted to die in those alleys and ornament
The city’s sight. Louis,” she said. “I’ve known all your light. 
But do you know mine?” And I hadn’t, I hadn’t.
“I was a taken city burning,” she said, “a burning house
Built to heal the sick, a sick house full of healing,
The owl, moccasin, and panther — a rising
For which there has never been such risen, the total
Black. I is the total black. Flame and fox and knot
Of the what-nots you would have forgotten if not for me,
I am perfect fucking memory, no-dominion-defied,
The god-head-glitter-gussied-up-for-the-going-down.”
And though I thought I saw I had not seen. Instead
Of one body, three. Women. And who and who and who,
I asked. They laughed at my asking and said, “You
Wouldn’t know us, but we will tell you our names — 
Mother, Song, and Holy Yoke. Audre, Gwendolyn,
And Lucille. Follow us. Or heel.” And where
And where should I follow you? They did not answer,
Instead, they walked on the edge of the abyss
Laughing as if the abyss. “We are what is whatnot,
The ever shimmying out of the never-wound.
Louis, do you follow or do you fall,”
They said. “Are you short or is you tall?” 
And on and on they played, pleasured, and pigeoned
With each other, kiting sound and word between them
As I have seen lovers do, passing cigarettes and smoke
From one mouth to another, the smoke the shared body
Of a God that has no master or mastering plan
Other than abiding in darkness, abiding in both
Its coronation and crucifixion. On and on we walked.
And I followed. Beyond the bears chortling pears
From Augustine’s outstretched hand, out beyond the river
Scissoring the changing maple, its leaves ambering
Then auburn then green each time a child appeared
And touched its trunk. We stopped, watched. I asked
Who are they. And the one full of light and knives answered,
Waving at a few who journeyed to the edge of the water
But did not wade in. And why don’t they wade in,
I asked. She snickered, quieted, then said,
“Wind and foxes, what was never mine but was and was.”
As if she knew I did not understand, continued, “‘The ones
I got but did not get,’ the wild hair they could not grow
But scratches me now as it did once in a dream.
Our abortions, Louis, our ones given and gave. Dem. 
The ones given all of their years at once. And none
Or never.” And when she spoke, I saw another come
To the shore and wave at me, a boy given and gave, the crushed-
Color of late evening long after the pickers have come
In and settled near a pot of ox bones boiling in the evening
Of their own water, once again predicting the arch
And strange astronomy of the flesh and its march march
March to October and the battered soil. I mean I turned
From the one waving because I could not be beneath
The stairs of his steering and stare. Paradise,
Why do you bring me to such weather? Why
Would any man come down from his noose for this?
“Because coming down is exactly the point.
All heavens lesser and below heaven. Noose, not ...    
You came to see what has become of death ...    ”
The women spoke as one who had many tongues —
All Holy Ghost and gut of a river gabbling over the white
Stones. And where are we going, I asked.
“Where language begins, Till.
                                              Paradise. But over there.”
 
• 
                 And wasn’t this paradise that I had entered
Through the thick marsh waters out of the cane
                         The crowds fleeced of their living flesh at the far bank
                 The intubated children with their gas masks
                         Hanging from their hands and wandering
      The sand in wet hospital gowns in this their new cancer
                 Wasn’t this paradise
                        A boy headphoned and heart drunk
          Swaying at the back of the crowd mumbling to himself                         Started from the bottom now we’re here
     Started from the bottom now my whole team is fucking here

^^EOP^^

Nevermind that keeping ashes
     on the mantel feels ghoulish,
and comically impractical:
 
not just another thing,
     a miniature memento urn, to dust,
but dust to dust—
 
I dread the conversational
     Hara-kiri, not, that’s what’s left of my brother, but, he died of suicide:
 
the chasm of silence following the leap—
     so the cremains stay
in the office closet till they migrate
 
through no will of their own
     to a moving box
I haven’t unpacked and likely won’t.


^^EOP^^

I’m standing in field 17 of the long series, employing my scythe.
Sometimes a conceptual dog bounds
past me, though it’s never my conceptual dog.
Occasionally future laureates gather for colloquium,
though they’re rarely my future
laureates. Thus, evening proceeds precisely
the way the handbook describes it:
as a proceeding: a runnel: shallow and babbling.
 
Into it a stranger appears. He looks like my friend.
I ask him, Are you my friend? Gravity telegraphs
its heavy message through the lolling
vines. The strangers says, I’ve sold all my clothes
and am considering, for a career, perpetual suffering.
The sun slides a tongue down the nape of the grain elevator.
Lowing cattle. It’s the fourth of July. In Spain.
I say, You are most vague and mysterious, friend.
The dog paces. I set my scythe aside and tell him,
I have employed this scythe mercilessly all my life and still
everywhere these stalks extend. He says,
Someone is always worse off than us
even at our most pitiable. Yes, I say. I read it once
in a magazine. And we laugh, let our enormous bellies jangle.
It is good to laugh with my friend and let the scythe cool, I say.
Yes, he says. Good.
 


^^EOP^^

She brightens at the evidence. Like a strong appliance.
 
You can make it hot.
 
Grown ass people having tantrums.
 
I’m unbought, unheated. Like a perfectly square morsel of lasagna.
 
A wrathful rubics cube.
 
To realize, I wish to ridicule people interested in martial arts.
 
That I’m not getting better.
 
 
 
My uncle would prank call my father, “Immigration!”
 
He’d crow. And my father would fall to silence.
 
No matter the heavy accent.
 
No matter the voice he’d known unto boredom.
 
One wing swigging out to its brother on the other bird.
 
I measured this silence when I was a girl.
 
The quality of the joke and how it rested
 
on the bad stomach of a tensile citizenry.
 
The joke was that, in an instant,
  We Lost Everything.
 
 
 
It is important to remember who would laugh first—
 
the perpetrator/uncle/jokester or the assailed/father/feather.
 
Or maybe, it isn’t.
 
Maybe what you should know is that
 
they told this joke over and over and ever.
 
My uncle crowed. My father disbelieved. We lost everything.
 
And then, the svelte, sweet brier laughter.
 


^^EOP^^




— Gaetano Donizetti, “Lucia di Lammermoor”

                 Be remote
A while from malice and from murdering.
— Gwendolyn Brooks



water this fountain
where I am yoked 
sun-break he holds
you how once I 
this secret dark
dagger my body 
rip off the collar
your cage don’t wait 
my neck his breath
these woods this water 
my waist his ring
his grip blood sister


^^EOP^^

The best thing of all is to take the enemy’s country whole and intact.
My mother took my heart out. She banked it on top of her stove.
It glowed white. She put it back in my chest.
 
Tita knew that overseas workers often had affairs.
He licked me and I pretended it pinged through my body like a swift idea
That I wrote about and considered like a bell of good craftsmanship.
He also knew that their kids ate better
 
He said your belly is like a cat’s.
He said with his bowl up to his chin
More please.
 
At night the fireflies come out. They flock to my window.
I put my hands up against the screen.
I think how fragile it is to be inside a house.
They say I want permission
 
I paint my face. I say—just take it.
Easy. If equally matched, we can offer battle.
If unequal in any way, we can flee from him.
 
Deprived of their father while sustained by his wages.
I thought a lot about walking around at night.
By myself. Just to think. But I never did.
I thought I could just flick a switch.
 
When I was born, my mother and father gave me a gardenia like personal star.
Don’t you hate it when someone apologizes all the time?
It’s like they are not even sorry.
 


^^EOP^^

We fix you maternally in the mind, orient you in a case of “tut-tut,”
“there there,” and “you’re young yet,” but how many times did
you posture yourself for the broad body of him or him and open 
like home — his hands in your hair, your nerves rising kinetically
to the cupola of his palms? Lovers’ propensity for being a keep
and your saying (when you mean it), “I am yours.” 
We fix you in the mind as bright-sighted seminar, dipping from
the source all that you know, but how often did your eyes light
in flirtation or fight, working from his getting your dander up to 
his oval mouth there, there, your teasing tut-tut in arousing
admonition at what he was after, knowing, as you prepared
to keep him, that you were young yet and gleaning, gleaning.


^^EOP^^

in this moment of orangutans, wolves, and scavengers,
of high heat redesigning the north & south poles
and the wanderings of new tribes in limousines,
with the confirmations of liars, thieves, and get-over artists,
in the wilderness of pennsylvania avenue,
standing rock, misspelled executive orders
on yellow paper with crooked signatures. 
where are the kind language makers among us? 
at a time of extreme climate damage,
deciphering fake news, alternative truths, and me-ism
you saw the twenty-first century and left us
not on your own accord or permission.
you have fought and fought most of the twentieth century
creating an army of poets who learned
and loved language and stories
of complicated rivers, seas, and oceans. 
where is the kind green nourishment of kale and wheatgrass? 
you thought, wrote, and lived poetry,
knew that terror is also language based
on denial, first-ism, and rich cowards.
you were honey and yes to us,
never ran from Black as in bones, Africa,
blood and questioning yesterdays and tomorrows.
we never saw you dance but you had rhythm,
you were a warrior before the war,
creating earth language, uncommon signs and melodies,
and did not sing the songs of career slaves. 
keenly aware of tubman, douglass, wells-barnett, du bois,
and the oversized consciousness and commitment of never-quit people
religiously taking note of the bloodlust enemies of kindness
we hear your last words:
     america
     if you see me as your enemy
     you have no
     friends.


^^EOP^^

The last time he cut his mother’s hair
     the rude morning sun
left no corner of her kitchen private,
     the light surgically clean
where it fell on his scissors.
     Her hair fell in a blonde circle
on the lake blue tile—smell of coffee
     and cinnamon; her laughing
shook her head, Hold still, he said,
     his hands surfeit with the curl
and softness of her hair.
 
     Three weeks after her death,
a stranger entered the salon
     and settled in the chair.
She had the color and shape
     of his mother’s hair,
and when he sunk his hands in it,
     the texture, even cowlicks,
individual as freckles—same.
     Twice he had to leave the room,
and twice, he returned—still,
     when he touched her hair, it blurred. Hold still, he said, hold still.
 


^^EOP^^

All birds—even those that do not fly
—have wings
 
A constant confession
Admission of omission
 
This is your punctuated equilibrium
And everything in between
Slow it down
 
The moment of extinction
The death of the last individual of a species
(Let’s put it aside for now)
Stay with it
 
This is our gene flow
How do you like our genetic drift
A riff, a rift, a raft…
Too rough for the second half
 
Take us under, take us downhill
Paint pangenesis all over your dancing body
The new party god
Keep the beat going, don’t stop, you can’t stop
 
Crick & Watson
Evo-devo
This is your mother’s local phenomenon
 
If this is racial hygiene
Why do I feel so dirty?
 
Microcosmic soul
It’s an involutionary wonderland
This living matter
A modern synthesis
4.6 billion years of biology
Can’t stop the ideology
Graduate from meet/mate
To fitness landscape of sexual selection
 
From land over sea
It’s a hard lyric
The impression of a key in a bar of soap
A transitional fossil
 
Keep camping
Plant the flag
Bury the burial mound
Put the pop in popular
And the sigh in science
 


^^EOP^^




—St. John of the Cross



And it won’t be multiple choice,
though some of us would prefer it that way.
Neither will it be essay, which tempts us to run on
when we should be sticking to the point, if not together.
In the evening there shall be implications
our fear will change to complications. No cheating,
we’ll be told, and we’ll try to figure the cost of being true
to ourselves. In the evening when the sky has turned
that certain blue, blue of exam books, blue of no more
daily evasions, we shall climb the hill as the light empties
and park our tired bodies on a bench above the city
and try to fill in the blanks. And we won’t be tested
like defendants on trial, cross-examined
till one of us breaks down, guilty as charged. No,
in the evening, after the day has refused to testify,
we shall be examined on love like students
who don’t even recall signing up for the course
and now must take their orals, forced to speak for once
from the heart and not off the top of their heads.
And when the evening is over and it’s late,
the student body asleep, even the great teachers
retired for the night, we shall stay up
and run back over the questions, each in our own way:
what’s true, what’s false, what unknown quantity
will balance the equation, what it would mean years from now
to look back and know
we did not fail.


^^EOP^^




November 9, 2016
University of Notre Dame



minutes
felt
like hours
 
"deplorables
knocking
at your door"
 
he shouted
the day
after—“build
 
the wall—
we're
building
 
a wall
around
your room!"
 
minutes
felt
like hours
 
"cowards!"
you managed,
catching
 
a glimpse
by cracking
your door:
 
there were three
of them
scurrying
 
down the hall,
their faces
obscured…
 
your back
against
the wall, you slid
 
to the floor—
"Hail Mary..."
you began
 
whispering
to yourself
and back
 
they came their
laughter 
louder
 
minutes
felt
like hours
 
and the thumping
in your chest—
his fist
 
pounding the door
 
 
        for Gregory Jenn ('18)
 


^^EOP^^

The pleasure of walking a long time on the mountain
without seeing a human being, much less speaking to one.
 
And the pleasure of speaking when one is suddenly there.
The upgrade from wary to tolerant to convivial,
so unlike two brisk bodies on a busy street
for whom a sudden magnetic attraction
is a mistake, awkwardness, something to be sorry for.
 
But to loiter, however briefly, in a clearing
where two paths intersect in the matrix of chance.
To stop here speaking the few words that come to mind.
A greeting. Some earnest talk of weather.
A little history of the day.
 
To stand there then and say nothing.
To slowly look around past each other.
Notice the green tang pines exude in the heat
and the denser sweat of human effort.
 
To have nothing left to say
but not wanting just yet to move on.
The tension between you, a gossamer thread.
It trembles in the breeze, holding
the thin light it transmits.
 
To be held in that
line of force, however briefly,
as if it were all that mattered.
 
And then to move on.
With equal energy, with equal pleasure.
 


^^EOP^^

Each flower a wilting sun
The death of a new day is never kind
Grief ain’t no song
No loss is this romantic


^^EOP^^




After “She was the song of my dark hour,” a photograph by Paul Tañedo



I woke up
and I was old—
 
It’s hard to judge
if this new country
 
was worth
its costs—
 
Fil and Eileen
educated themselves—
 
They blessed me
with their happiness—
 
Roy and Glen
lost themselves
 
to a car accident
and something worse
 
(that I will not reveal
even for a poem)—
 
When I see myself
reflected in a mirror
 
I turn away to hide
both my eyes, all of my self—
 
when half of your
children are destroyed
 
the half who flourish
cannot compensate
 
exactly
                        as if
 
a heart breaks exactly down the middle.
 


^^EOP^^

Inside me lived a small donkey. I didn’t
believe in magic, but the donkey
was a sucker for the stuff. Psychics,
illusionists, arthritics who’d predict
the rainfall. That was the year I had trouble
walking. I over-thought it and couldn’t
get the rhythm right. The donkey re-taught me.
“This foot. Yes, then that one. And swing
your arms as if you’re going to trial
to be exonerated of a crime
you’ve most definitely committed.”
Next, trouble sleeping because
I’d need to crank the generator in my chest
so frequently. Seeing I was overworked,
the donkey finally hauled it out—
it looked shiny and new, a silver dollar—
and tossed it into a flock of birds
who had to fly a long way to find safety.
I knew then I was a large and dangerous man,
what with this donkey living inside me,
but felt futile. One day, during
a final lesson on breathing,
the donkey asked what kind of jeans
I was wearing. I said, “The somber ones.”
“Poor kid.” “So will you be staying on
for a third year, donkey?” “No. I think
I should be leaving soon. I think
I should go and await your arrival beside
the crumpled river.” “Yes, I suppose
you have many important matters to attend to,
but maybe one day I will come and join you
for a drink or, perhaps, for a brief nap.”


^^EOP^^

One among the shifting mass
   of humanity intent
on countless destinations,
   one hungry stomach
 
and dry mouth among many,
   one brain dazed
by the speed and altitude
   of flights unnatural
 
to any animal, by herding,
   followed by waiting
succeeded by rushing,
   waiting, herding—
 
and more flight
   incomprehensible
to any body contained
   in this seemingly unwieldy
 
mass of metal lifting
   improbably over Chicago,
where a misty orange aura
   hovers over the city’s
 
brighter lights, as if
   its soul sought ascension
it could only attempt,
   as if the aura
 
might break free
   and follow us,
wherever we might fly,
   wheresoever we may rest—
 
one with the multitude
   of humans en route
through mystery,
   to mystery.
 


^^EOP^^

       pulse light
 
 
starts there starts           getting smaller     All that you can’t remember,
Claire says.  ,   With two glass eyes           I’m wobbling down
  a walkway          inflecting aloha                                        no thumbtacks,
          attached     no pins,           To feel.          Good by.
among crimson and silver turnstiles,     all the folks          In orange,
               Silvery hats and thermal     The madmen mad getting
madder     daisies all done          Again          me strolling, me fuming,
slipping,   the stream frozen. the matter of face. the quasars
 
     huffing on.           In December   no summery mask,     No, just
the shimmering scene, the firmament.     a blackbird indicating, nods
           Maybe a change    dust of a brick  maybe
I remember,      I recall.      a cyclotron.          An ingenuous ramrod
     The flay of her hair               fall sinking          Rowboat
turning to winter,     rowboat, rowboat      Chatter of the breakage
    
iii.                              verb forms of a neutron bomb
 
starts sloe gin     over time                    Fermenting in the firmament
     red shifting with Claire     waking with Claire, betweening
and vaguing Claire          the embassies exchanging airs.          lily white,
     glittery photons          , spark                         at the bottom working
iamb          iamb iamb                    iamb                                        iamb
Claire    don’t care                    reminiscing          Tuscaloosa
in.           A corner of the soiree.                              , standing so bluntly
     you resemble no one,          Precisely, as if receding          over a hill,
 
you resembles everyone. corralling       , the bulky idea of the hill into.
              an encampment,                                                  a tiny cranium.
     And it’s                    as if,          Spying you                              through
          a whiskey on rocks.                    a mass hysteria
I struttle along,      Making          commonplace.          Ubnutterances,
     and guts                                        your house is blue with two glass eyes
   
 
iii.                              quantum entanglement
 
starts with a single shot.          fired                not the year of my     fathers.
          slow, death starts.     year my mother goes     terminal,
The vacuous scene          chattering,                         Like an elephant
      collapsing     the animals fuming,                              weird winged bugs
     The serious business of.    squishing them, they simply regroup.
And reappear.    , Claire.          I’m stumbling down the thoroughfare.
in a dark,  Pinching what few glittering photons,          I’m trolling.
murky and building up.     start at the bottom,                    working a way
 
Upwards     Evening,       like a tumbler.                    folding.  itself over
          Feeling contented all around.  squinting,          started clawing
with two glass eyes          feeling for thumbtacks.                    Among
the broad vagaries.                         among the wild visions,          Claire.
. I say I know you better,                            , than.   You could imagine,
     or some other,          but you sock me.          Hard. In the gut instead.
   
 
i.                              aimed by magnets
 
 
               starts redundant          Futile with a screwdriver, among the wrecks.
,  I am having a ball comma       Describe the house        comma paint
the doorjamb end-stop               these months     spent   a-chatter.
                the sidewalk spinal column                              of a mule that carries me.
Through the broad making-world.            one universe over,
We are inseparable.      And own many cats     the city.                             Large.
   like  viewing an egg,                        From the egg’s interior.
I go about the serious business   strolling,                                    The firmament
 
Claire.   your pocket watch,          A frayed yellow.                                    T-shirt.
on the narrative fringe.  of the narrative,                  the weightless photons
say       Holding hands                              One universe over. You do not forgive
   me.            ,  all that I can’t                              but Maybe a small change
maybe something less     than the sky,
             maybe something.                              More than the sky could conjure.
    
ii.                                    if this were a sonnet, I
 
                     start with all that you can’t remember.                  The gutters
Overloaded.      the funky trinkets,           Weird winged bugs
  on the sill.                  In the air,      When I go about the     business
, strolling home    Claire.                        riding the slipstream
sloe gin.            All drink and whiskey.      the old ferry, a rowboat
,            in my gut.                        smooth as a mirror          Every mad
Artifact     everyone I’ve ever met,                       resembling
Claire dissembling          My wintered axe.            start at the bottom
 
Work your way upwards.            like a signature saying I’ve been here,
      strolling past,            these fumes,                             on the air
smell like a letter.            All thermal               , all water     Quasars
   bleating,      blackbird saying,      The search light pauses     Pluck
The wings out one at a time.      Chicago and     blackbird, blackbird,
I unaware.    of ours, the               recombinant bodies of the gods.
      
 
i.                              focused by a lens
 
starts with the scene     starts.               December,          Smooth
as a mirror     Hard in the gut                         feels like a tumbler.
          Claire, inflecting               good, by.     walking.
Claire.          the scene of sparks.     among the while, the fission
   The house is blue.     with two glass eyes     among the firmament
 
no pins to pin you   No, thumbtacks to hold you          But photons and
          all the things that you can’t       .        Among the sloe gin,
your frayed yellow T-shirt. I returned          to you, but you wanting
 
In a corner of the soiree.  a corner of the prairie,     more than the sky
     This is where the elephant toppled.     when what you remember is
Collided, with               Often     under the webbed foot
               Of my imagining, you     are the entire throng.          Wearing
   your face,     Dust of a brick,     what’s left is               What when
the particle accelerator               paints its          disastered portrait
   
 
iv.                        scatter
 
many phrases starts with shatter.                                    , crossing
           the parking lot, my skin     pixilated in the sodium light,
harsh corundum               skin a vapor trail                    edging
      the slipstream.            Tidy up the floorboards.            the wiggling
infrastructure of a signature.                        says, I’ve been here
           before                    All airs as if a unified field.                  of
  night.      of     Claire.                  Collapse, arrangement
           of bones   where the elephant toppled.                  spells are cast,
 
Luster in clusters,                        stone I toss          Chicago,
the old ferry   through the house’s eye,  through the firmament     Light
     bulbs wilting,            carnations flickering,      Like a cyst the crick
dribbles outward                         toward   a shore     my lady trickles,
my lady pours          Give up give up,            my sweet canteen
Been taken to the forest.      Honey.                  Among the wild fission.


^^EOP^^

One spring night, at the end of my street
God was lying in wait.
 
A friend and I were sitting in his new sedan
like a couple of cops on surveillance,
shooting the breeze to pass the time,
chatting up the daydreams, the raw deals,
all the wouda-coulda-shoulda’s,
the latest “Can you believe that?”
As well as the little strokes of luck,
the so-called triumphs, small and unforeseen,
that kept us from cashing it all in.
 
And God, who’s famous for working
in mysterious ways and capable of anything,
took the form of a woman and a man,
each dressed in dark clothes and desperate enough
to walk up to the car and open the doors.
 
And God put a gun to the head of my friend—
right against the brain stem, where the orders go out
not only to the heart and the lungs
but to consciousness itself—a cold muzzle aimed
at where the oldest urges still have their day:
the one that says eat whatever’s at hand,
the one that wants only to fuck,
the one that will kill if it has to…
 
And God said not to look at him
or he’d blow us straight to kingdom come,
and God told us to keep our hands
to ourselves, as if she weren’t that kind of girl.
 
Suddenly time was nothing,
our lives were cheap, the light in the car
cold, light from a hospital,
light from a morgue. And the moments
that followed—if that’s what they were—
arrived with a nearly unbearable weight,
until we had acquired
a center of gravity
as great as the planet itself.
 
My friend could hardly speak—
he was too busy trying not to die—
which made me chatter all the more,
as if words, even the most ordinary ones,
had the power to return us to our lives.
 
And behind my ad-libbed incantation,
my counterspell to fear, the orders
still went out: keep beating, keep breathing,
you are not permitted to disappear,
 
even as one half of God kept bitching
to the other half that we didn’t have
hardly no money at all, and the other half barked,
“I’m telling you to shut your mouth!”
and went on rummaging through the back seat.
And no one at all looking out their window,
no one coming home or going out…
 
Until two tall neighbors came walking toward us
like unsuspecting saviors…  And God grabbed
the little we’d been given, the little we still had,
and hustled on to the next dark street.


^^EOP^^

rustle plastic bags of outside food in
movie theaters/talk out of turn
in the swallow-dark light/believe
trash should be/as confetti/everywhere
in the viaducts’ shadow/souring in gutters’
craw/jaywalk with the urgency of sloth /split
verbs meaningfully/do or want to do
better/ tattoo so you will never mis-
remember our names/name ourselves
Precious and Mercedes/must have
some Indian in us/search for signifiers
in eyes/ bright earlobes/textures of hair/
are color-stuck/are disabused our definitions
of love/love and don’t know how to call it/
grieve any number of nouns/mostly people/
pets/preoccupy with memories at the
repast/recall that day at the beach that /
leads us to days at the beach grilling/meat
browning/its purpose/it’s children on the
sandbar tossing a ball/the dog biting
the surf/finally some mirth/we carry
for keeps.


^^EOP^^

All cousins know the electric slide/ how
to spell/despite the stink of it/chitterlings
or chitlins/the odor of pig feet or catfish
under a steam of vinegar/ believe
blood is the most important thing/bring
family up for better or worse/better
the family or bemoan who just
won’t do right/ learn early the
power fist/dap/pound/and running
man/invent glorious ways to say
“brother” with intricacies of hands/we
cool/give elders their due/cull histories
in quilts/set records/set beats/set
rights/set Black Jesus/love our tannin
skin/drown yowls in jazz/ watch blocks
bristle heat/in the hundreds/it’s past
sundown/Mecca’s everywhere now.


^^EOP^^

Some(where a) woman wears
 
the face once given. Possessions
 
scarce we go halves on slant
 
of eye & span of palm with cousin & other
 
ghosts. Where is the man with the face lent
 
mother? Fathers rare; infant found
  at Shinkyo police station box—official
 
shoes careened around fortune of Name
  & birth, pin &
  note. Elsewhere (Norway, Australia)
 
another Korean
 
National bears the imprint
 
of my din. Cribs, nurse, hands, rice-milk powder, down
 
& rocked—carefully dated
 
checks. American/Father
 
asks Why. We don’t speak. Years
 
burn to decades, this permanent
 
occupation.
 


^^EOP^^

it doesn’t matter when I cross.
two seconds and they’re gone.
the ferry facing Ulus. the trees
that spanked of green. the narrow
bags of temples. beyond that –
just – these Peri scenes
 
            when the human body sweats              the skin produce an oil
 
            when Peri bodies sweat             it does not produce the oil
 
the ropes fall to the pavement
their waters slap me still
their green glow sweats
into the pavement waters
slap me still –
 
            I could curl among the roses
              I would make an aqualung
 
we will reach the edge of this walk soon.
all lights torn out for fuel.
 
            move my fingers in the dark
 
awoke without a start.
Peri here – my name is Peri –
 
my name is Perihan


^^EOP^^




The art of war teaches us to rely not on the chance of the enemy not attacking but rather on the fact that we have made our position unassailable.
          —Sun Tzu



My father called me a chink
so I’d know how to receive it.
So I wouldn’t be surprised.
  Therefore the good soldier will be terrible in his onset and prompt in his decision.
 
In the wall, I bricked up my secret.
So it would gush forth. I did this for effect.
So you would know me.
  On the day of battle your soldiers might weep bedewing their garments.
 
But it grew like a bullet loving its flowerstain.
It happened nonetheless.
  But let them at once be brought to bay.
 
Because you are simply my medic watching me.
I’m a poem someone else wrote for me.
All of the characters “beautiful and flawed.”
  When we are near, we must make the enemy believe we are far.
 
My sister said, you can forget our way of life?
I said yes and was annoyed. She ran away and I was desperate for her.
I was screaming into the mindspeaker.
  When far away, we must make him believe we are near.
 
I said, Christine, christine, christine.
 


^^EOP^^

Toward summer or its dependence
On demarcations in the sandy vial
Some tree spelling astronaut onto a
Planet’s arm, it stopped making sense.
I am not an apothecary or a wave
Or a dog by the 15th hole, I am not
A light sparking a whole country’s demise.
I will never be a towel holding someone’s
Sunscreen while they wash it off in foreign
Seas. My hair goes up and down, it’s true
As it is I am not a bag of tea nor will I ever
Be exceptionally happy. Let the director
Know I was distressed by the construction
Noise, that I had no known allergies that
My parents convinced me I was wanted
And why wouldn’t you believe them.
If the earth when it opened dragged away
Our sense of faith, doubt was an
Invention I preferred to ignore in the
Manner of solicitations by mail.


^^EOP^^

                    
                    
                    Because of time being an arrow, I had to imagine everything.
 
I had to fold the song with my mind because of the time being. Wash the rice here, in the present.
 
Because of the arrow I pent up the fourth wall as though I were diapering my own newborn.
 
I put time to the breast, though I feared it was not an arrow but an asp.
 
Being time I kept that fear under my tongue like a thermometer. I felt its mercury rolling under my teeth, boiling like language.
 
A deaf man, an old man, I am his hand, rough and gentle, an arrow here and then.
 
Time, I can see what I feel.
 
In the future even your future becomes my past. Arrow, I have died. There is peace. I pull it from me like a blanket.
 
As in a dream, because of time being an arrow, I put on the dress of a young, lovely mother. Because of her, because of the time, here I am, always watching over you.

 
                

^^EOP^^

This is you—Titanus giganteus, your maw snapping pencils in half and cutting through human flesh. My encyclopedia chokes on your bulk. My camera, timid, afraid to look, as if you’re naked—not one adult male, but millions.
 
Few garments sound as fine as flak jacket, the best of the tagmata the thorax, more prime than brains as the body can keep mating, cracking its margins. Your shield like a wing, protects your bulletproof heart from the wind, your right arm black in the cloth of your brothers. Full face visor. Baby gladiator.
 
Beyond the screen, memorized—jawbone like a scandal reflecting all the thieves and beggars. Insect lord, insect mind. This is my fear. You look like my brother, my son. You could kill me with your looks.


^^EOP^^

No more hangings, no more gas chambers. No one allowed to remain in the center of the labyrinth, guarding their dna from the world, from the future. No more contemplation, no more waste. Everyone leaning toward paradise. Shields down and the word enemy will pass from memory. You are my kind.


^^EOP^^

Whitman thought he could live with animals, they were
so placid and self-contained, not one of them dissatisfied.
I have lived with animals. They kept me up all night.
Not only tom cats on the prowl, and neurotic rats
behind my baseboards, scratching out a slim existence.
There were cattle next door in the butcher’s pen,
great longhorns lowing in the dark. Their numbers had come up
and they knew it. I let their rough tongues lick my sorry palm.
Nothing else I could do for them, or they for me.
 
Walt can live with the animals. I’ll take these vegetables on parade:
string-beans and cabbage heads and pea brains, who negotiate
a busy crosswalk and feel brilliant, the smallest act accomplished
no mean feat, each one guiding them to other small acts
that will add up, in time, to something like steady purpose.
They cling to this fate, clutch it along with their brownbag lunches:
none of us would choose it, but this is their portion, this moment,
then this one, then the next. Little as it is, pitiful as it seems,
this is what they were given, and they don’t want to lose it.
 
The gawky and the slow, the motley and the misshapen…
What bliss to be walking in their midst as if I were one of them,
just ride this gentle wave of idiocy, forget those who profess
an interest in my welfare, look passing strangers in the eye
for something we might have in common, and be unconcerned if nothing’s there.
And now we peek into a dark café, and now we mug at the waitress
whose feet are sore, whose smile makes up for the tacky carnations
and white uniform makes it easy to mistake her for a nurse,
even makes it necessary, given the state of the world.
 
And when the giant with three teeth harangues us to hurry up,
what comfort to know he’s a friend, what pleasure to be agreeable,
small wonders of acquiescence, like obedient pets. Except animals
don’t have our comic hope, witless as it is. They don’t get
to wave madly at the waitress, as though conducting a symphony
of ecstatic expectations. If I turned and lived with animals
I’d only be a creature of habit, I’d go to where the food is
and the warmth. But I wouldn’t get to say to my troubled friend,
“Your eyes are so beautiful. I could live in them.”
 


^^EOP^^

The students know the agenda. When I step
inside our classroom, the PowerPoint is loaded,
the student presenting her report stands poised 
to begin. And so she does. This day is her
second try, the first a wash due to our failed
technology. I ask, Do you think you will earn 
another chance each time error is out of your hands?

^^EOP^^

i. the old marrieds 
But why the moon rose so cruelly, neither of them would say.
Though a listless jazz buzzed obediently beneath their day,
and he had seen the hand-in-hands dotting the dim streets.
And she had heard the morning skillet scorch its Mississippi sweets,
its globs of fat. Now, time to be closer — here, on the verge of May.
But why the moon drooped so cruelly, neither ventured to say.   ii. kitchenette building 
We are soft-caged behind streaked windows, our someday plans
grayed and siphoned flat. “Faith” is simply a church sound, not strong
like “factory,” “scrubbing the chitlins,” or “keeping that man.” 
But could faith be a blatant gold blasting through dinner’s fatty fumes,
its perfumed lure tangling with the smell of twice-fried potatoes
and twist-tied bags of reeking rubbish lining the dark hall?
Fluttering beneath florescent sputter, could faith warm our rooms, 
even the walls scrubbed raw with Baptist chill? If we let faith in,
had the mind to carve it a space, keep it Sunday clean,
anticipate its slow glories, beg it to begin? 
We can’t spare the time faith needs. We don’t have that minute.
Since silly wants like hot water require we be practical now,
we wait and wait on the bathroom, hope the warm stays in it.   iii. the mother 
Murders will not let you forget.
You remember the children you had — suddenly quarry, target —
the daughters with gunfire smoldering circles in their napped hair,
the absent sons whose screams still ride the air.
You knew the ways of bullets, prayed your child run, outrun, beat
them in their race toward the heart of your baby, your sweet.
You imagine another child cocking the hammer with his thumb,
or blazing the blade forward, harkening the dark that will overcome
you. Never again will you look at a bright, upturned face and sigh,
returning again and again to drown your baby in the mama-eye. 
I hear on Kilbourn, on Christiana, the not-there of my children.
I have pushed them flail and wriggle from my tired body, eased
my babies into a world of growl and gun. The breath-suck,
I wailed and prayed, my loves, as rougher mothers seized
you. Now I am newly barren, drained of mother luck,
and you are suddenly far beyond my futile reach.
If I let these frantic streets deny the tender in your names,
if I relinquished you to this city and its unrelenting games,
your end is all I own. If I dared let others govern your deaths,
if I wasn’t there to mourn your final blurring breaths,
believe that my loss of you to this was not deliberate.
Though I have no right to whine,
whine that none of the blame was mine,
since, in every world I’m rooted in, you are dead.
Or rather, or instead,
you are so much a hollow of the children I made.
But now you are scar on the pavement. I am afraid —
is that the you there is now, how the story of you will be said?
You were born — a gunshot, a swift blade — then you died.
It’s too much this way — even the child who killed you cried.
Believe. I loved you all.
Be. Leave me the sounds of still-thudding hearts. I grieve you
All.   iv. a song in the back yard 
I’ve wallowed in the back yard all my life.
I want to slide ’round front
Where it’s gold-splashed and guarded and spined fragrance grows.
A girl gets a craving for rose. 
I want to go in the front yard now
and far away from these nappy weeds — this alley
too. I wanna see where the well-off children play.
I want some proper fun today. 
They do some miracle things.
They have that secret kinda fun.
My daddy says They’re uppity, but I think it’s fine
how they’re tucked in their beds by a quarter to nine. 
My mama, with her country ways, try as she may,
will never turn me into a weeds and wildflowers woman,
that’s a fact. I only stay up late
on account of all her party folk flooding our back gate. 
But that’s OK. I think front yard folk are perfect. Really, I do.
And I’m gonna be a righteous woman, too.
And wear a soft cardigan, cashmere trimmed in lace.
And stroll ’round all of Lawndale with this righteous on my face.


^^EOP^^




after Hokusai and Hiroshige



I dreamt half my life was spent
in wonder, and never suspected.
 
So immersed in the moment
I forgot I was ever there.
 
Red-tailed hawk turning
resistance into ecstasy.
 
The patrolmen joking with the drunk
whose butt seemed glued to the sidewalk.
 
A coral quince blossom in winter,
pink as a lover’s present.
 
And tilting my bamboo umbrella
against the warm slant
 
of rain, was I not a happy peasant
crossing the great bay on a bridge that began
 
who knows when, and will end
who knows when?


^^EOP^^

I wanted to give you something for your pain.
But not the drug du jour
or the kind word this side of cliché.
Something you wouldn’t find on a talk show,
in a department store or dark alleyway.
I wanted to give you something for your pain
 
but I couldn’t imagine what.
Frankincense, myrrh—even gold
seemed too plain (too plain and too gross).
I needed something that wouldn’t have occurred
to you or me, or even Nature: a creature
more fabulous, more imaginary
 
than you’d find in a rain forest or tapestry
or pixel-loaded screen. Some exotic anodyne
an alchemist or astrophysicist
would be envious of: a chemical reaction,
an astral refraction, an out-of-body,
out-of-mind, one-of-a-kind
 
transport from your pain, that would last
longer than a day, go deeper than the past.
I would have founded a whole new religion
if I thought that would suffice.
As for love—sacred, profane, or both—
I wanted to give you something
 
that didn’t arrive with a roll of the dice
and was hard to maintain and had a knack
for disappointing. I wanted to give you
something for your pain that didn’t smack
of a sorcerer’s trick, or a poet’s swoon,
or a psychiatrist’s quip. Nothing too heavy
 
or spacey or glib. I’d have given you the moon
but it’s been done (and besides, its desolate dust
and relentless tendency to wane
might have only exacerbated your pain).
If I could have given you something
you could depend on, could always trust
 
without a second thought, I would have.
A splendid view, perhaps, or a strain
of music. A favorite dish. A familiar tree.
A visit from a genie who, in lieu of granting you
a wish, would tend subtly to your every need,
and never once tire, never complain.
 
But when all was said and done
(or hardly said, not nearly done)
I was as helpless as you. Could you tell—
or were you so overcome your pain was all
that mattered? It seemed to me we were a kind
of kin: willing the mind its bold suspensions,
 
but the heart, once shattered, never quite matching
its old dimensions. And yet you persevered
in spite of pain, you knew to hold hope
as lightly as you held my hand (a phantom grasp,
a clasp that seemed to come from the other side).
And your genial smile made it plain: you were pleased
by my wish to please. And then you died.


^^EOP^^




NYTimes headline for September 4th 2012:
Elephants Dying in Epic Frenzy As Ivory Fuels Wars and Profits



          They return to the site whence they came with eyes tearful,
with psalms trumpeting the air.
They stand ever so watchful;
guarding the graves of their ghosts and their kind.
They shall not forget.  They shall not want.
They lie down in green silky pastures
and finding their way to the still waters.
They restore and nourish their soul.
They walk through the dark valleys; always the shadows
of death lurking behind them.
Always striding till they reach the comforting light.
They fear no evil.  Man fears.
They forage for food and they eat amongst their enemies
because they fear not.  They are the happiest.
The honey is under their tongue.
The winter is past, the rain is over and gone.
Their hearts awaken.  They know no violence.
Even in the waning light they tower over all else.
They are the landscape.  They are the trees.
They throw up the dust in their dance.  The skies become misty.
They rise up and lead each other away into the dusk.


^^EOP^^

I wanted to write the story of a metamorphosis. The story
is at least partly based on a dream I recall from the diary of
another writer. In the dream, which may not be a dream but
simply a vision the writer has while seated at his desk, an
image of a white horse appears on teh wall. It is a white horse
that haunts the writer's mind. The white horse has escaped
its traces somewhere on an urban street. It is moving toward
the suburbs with an eye to the countryside. It is successful in
this movement because it progresses without hurry. It does
not gallop. It moves along the street with the gait of a horse
that drags a very heavy cart behind it. The horse moves successfully
toward its liberation since it does not appear to be a fugitive.
My heart beats more quickly when I think about this story,
which I have almost certainly partially invented. The horse
hides its fear of slaughter. It plays a game.  
Irony is a kind of secrecy. It is a principle of groups.


^^EOP^^

75.  
Even with geographic proximity, there may exist temporal
systems such that two people cannot meet one another or will
never meet again.   
Dream last night includes swimming. Something about a thick
river, keep riding boots on it, travel from station to station,
temporary home to home. It is Berlin or a group of islands
called "Connecticut." I am alone or have a child or am with
my brother. It is sunset, when one seek something.   
It is possible we somehow die for a time, a year, a month, a day,
without realizing this, then awake to find ourselves, which is to
say "someone," present again, attentive, expectant, apologetic
even?


^^EOP^^

I that in heill wes and gladnes,
Am trublit now with gret seiknes,
And feblit with infermite;
Timor mortis conturbat me. 
Our plesance heir is all vane glory,
This fals warld is bot transitory,
The flesche is brukle, the Fend is sle;
Timor mortis conturbat me. 
The stait of man dois change and vary,
Now sound, now seik, now blith, now sary,
Now dansand mery, now like to dee;
Timor mortis conturbat me. 
No stait in erd heir standis sickir;
As with the wynd wavis the wickir,
Wavis this warldis vanite.
Timor mortis conturbat me. 
On to the ded gois all estatis,
Princis, prelotis, and potestatis,
Baith riche and pur of al degre;
Timor mortis conturbat me. 
He takis the knychtis in to feild,
Anarmit under helme and scheild;
Victour he is at all mellie;
Timor mortis conturbat me. 
That strang unmercifull tyrand
Takis, on the moderis breist sowkand,
The bab full of benignite;
Timor mortis conturbat me. 
He takis the campion in the stour,
The capitane closit in the tour,
The lady in bour full of bewte;
Timor mortis conturbat me. 
He sparis no lord for his piscence,
Na clerk for his intelligence;
His awfull strak may no man fle;
Timor mortis conturbat me. 
Art-magicianis, and astrologgis,
Rethoris, logicianis, and theologgis,
Thame helpis no conclusionis sle;
Timor mortis conturbat me. 
In medicyne the most practicianis,
Lechis, surrigianis, and phisicianis,
Thame self fra ded may not supple;
Timor mortis conturbat me. 
I se that makaris amang the laif
Playis heir ther pageant, syne gois to graif;
Sparit is nocht ther faculte;
Timor mortis conturbat me. 
He hes done petuously devour,
The noble Chaucer, of makaris flour,
The Monk of Bery, and Gower, all thre;
Timor mortis conturbat me. 
The gude Syr Hew of Eglintoun,
And eik Heryot, and Wyntoun,
He hes tane out of this cuntre;
Timor mortis conturbat me. 
That scorpion fell hes done infek
Maister Johne Clerk, and Jame Afflek,
Fra balat making and tragidie;
Timor mortis conturbat me. 
Holland and Barbour he hes berevit;
Allace! that he nocht with us levit
Schir Mungo Lokert of the Le;
Timor mortis conturbat me. 
Clerk of Tranent eik he has tane,
That maid the Anteris of Gawane;
Schir Gilbert Hay endit hes he;
Timor mortis conturbat me. 
He hes Blind Hary and Sandy Traill
Slaine with his schour of mortall haill,
Quhilk Patrik Johnestoun myght nocht fle;
Timor mortis conturbat me. 
He hes reft Merseir his endite,
That did in luf so lifly write,
So schort, so quyk, of sentence hie;
Timor mortis conturbat me. 
He hes tane Roull of Aberdene,
And gentill Roull of Corstorphin;
Two bettir fallowis did no man se;
Timor mortis conturbat me. 
In Dumfermelyne he hes done roune
With Maister Robert Henrisoun;
Schir Johne the Ros enbrast hes he;
Timor mortis conturbat me. 
And he hes now tane, last of aw,
Gud gentill Stobo and Quintyne Schaw,
Of quham all wichtis hes pete:
Timor mortis conturbat me. 
Gud Maister Walter Kennedy
In poynt of dede lyis veraly,
Gret reuth it wer that so suld be;
Timor mortis conturbat me. 
Sen he hes all my brether tane,
He will nocht lat me lif alane,
On forse I man his nyxt pray be;
Timor mortis conturbat me. 
Sen for the deid remeid is none,
Best is that we for dede dispone,
Eftir our deid that lif may we;
Timor mortis conturbat me.


^^EOP^^

All that's left is the shroud
                                  the back wings. Roaches
scurrying in the kitchen. There’s no
greater threat than this time at hand.
      Drunken cackles from the street. Still damp
                                                         from 4 AM rain.
I missed the instructions for this part. The trap.
The deflate of dream. Utopia was always
supposed to be right at hand. Right and left.
Any which way we’d make of it.  
                                                    Marine layer
won’t budge for the rumble under our feet. Sky
tears open in the north. Sirens
on high. A small pool forms
in the buckle of asphalt.
In its gentle tremble
the reflection of the grey
white mass overhead
with a perfect seam of blue.
The rift where
the dead speak
how-tos.
 


^^EOP^^

in the end, cold crows piece together
the night: a black map
I've come home—the way back
longer than the wrong road
long as a life 
bring the heart of winter
when spring water and horse pills
become the words of night
when memory barks
a rainbow haunts the black market 
my father's life-spark small as a pea
I am his echo
turning the corner of encounters
a former lover hides in a wind
swirling with letters 
Beijing, let me
toast your lamplights
let my white hair lead
the way through the black map
as though a storm were taking you to fly 
I wait in line until the small window
shuts: O the bright moon
I go home—reunions
are one less
fewer than goodbyes


^^EOP^^

That boy, the champion breath holder,
Kenji Takezo, lost his title
This year to Mack Stanton
A retired truck driver
New to the area.
Held in the town swimming pool
Thirty-five participants inhaled
Deeply all at once
Submerged the depth.
The contest went on into twilight.
One by one each person
Came up sucking air.
Kenji was the town favorite.
We wanted him to win again.
He trained so hard,
It was the only real talent
He had
Other than surfing and making
Trouble. When he surfaced
Second to last
Gulping the night
Then vomiting water,
We were disappointed.
He was doing so well.
He had his lucky twenty-pound brick
Cradled in his lap.
It kept him down.
But that trucker Mack was too good.
He read
Comic books, aloud, underwater.
We watched from the bleachers
His laughter bursting above him.
Kenji saw this too.
He never had anybody
Read to him
Not even his mother,
And he wanted to hear
What was being read
What his opponent found so funny.
 


^^EOP^^

This is the g-dropping vernacular
     I am stuck in. This is the polyphone
where my head is an agrarian gang
     sign pointing like a percussion mallet
to a corn maze in one of the smaller
     Indiana suburbs where there aren’t
supposed to be black folks. Be cool & try
     to grin it off. Be cool & try to lean
it off. Find a kind of black & bet on it.
     I’m grinning to this vernacular
like the big drum laugh tracks a patriotic
     marching band. Be cool & try to ride
the beat the same way me, Pryor,
     & Ra did driving across the 30th Street
Bridge, laughing at these two dudes
     with big afros like it’s 1981 peeing into
the water & looking at the stars. Right
     before Officer Friendly hit his lights. Face the car, fingers locked behind
     your heads. Right after the fireworks
started popping off. Do I need to call 
     the drug dog? Right after the rattling
windows, mosquitoes as busy in my ears
     as 4th of July traffic cops. Right before
the thrill of real planets & pretend planets
     spun high into the sky, Ra throwing up
three West Side fingers, each ringed
     by pyrotechnic glory & the misnomer
of the three of us grinning at the cop’s club
     down swinging at almost the exact same
time Pryor says, Cops put a hurting on your
     ass, man. & fireworks light up in the same
colors as angry knuckles if you don’t
     duck on the double. Especially on the West
Side—more carnivorous than almost any
     other part of Earth Voyager saw when
it snapped a blue picture on its way out
     of this violently Technicolor heliosphere.
 


^^EOP^^




for Yu Luoke



Perhaps the final hour is come
I have left no testament
Only a pen, for my mother
I am no hero
In an age without heroes
I just want to be a man 
The still horizon
Divides the ranks of the living and the dead
I can only choose the sky
I will not kneel on the ground
Allowing the executioners to look tall
The better to obstruct the wind of freedom 
From star-like bullet holes shall flow
A blood-red dawn


^^EOP^^

Whoever kisses time’s ancient nodding head
will remember later, like a loving son,
how the old man lay down to sleep
in the drift of wheat outside the window.
He who has opened the eyes of the age,
two large sleepy apples with inflamed lids,
hears forever after the roar of rivers
swollen with the wasted, lying times.
 
The age is a despot with two sleepy apples
to see with, and a splendid mouth of earth.
When he dies he’ll sink onto the numb
arm of his son, who’s already senile.
I know the breath growing weaker by the day
Not long not till the simple song
of the wrongs of earth is cut off,
and a tin seal put on the lips.
 
O life of earth! O dying age!
I’m afraid no one will understand you
but the man with the helpless smile
of one who has lost himself.
O the pain of peeling back the raw eyelids
to look for a lost word, and with lime
slaking in the veins, to hunt
for night herbs for a tribe of strangers!
 
The age. In the sick son’s blood the deposit of lime
is hardening. Moscow’s sleeping like a wooden coffin.
There’s no escaping the tyrant century.
After all these years the snow still smells of apples.
I want to run away from my own doorstep,
but where? Out in the street it’s dark,
and my conscience glitters ahead of me
like salt strewn on the pavement.
 
Somehow I’ve got myself set for a short journey
through the back lanes, past thatched eaves, starling houses,
an everyday passer-by, in a flimsy coat,
forever trying to button the lap-robe.
Street after street flashes past,
the frozen runners crunch like apples;
can’t get the button through the button-hole,
it keeps slipping out of my fingers.
 
The winter night thunders
like iron hardware through the Moscow streets.
Knocks like a frozen fish, or billows in steam,
flashing like a carp in a rosy tea-room.
Moscow is Moscow again. I say hello to her.
‘Don’t be stern with me; never mind.
I still respect the brotherhood
of the deep frost, and the pike’s justice.’
 
The pharmacy’s raspberry globe shines onto the snow.
Somewhere an Underwood typewriter’s rattled.
The sleigh-driver’s back, the snow knee-deep,
what more do you want? They won't touch you, won’t kill you.
Beautiful winter, and the goat sky
has crumbled into stars and is burning with milk.
And the lap-robe flaps and rings
like horse-hair against the frozen runners.
 
And the lanes smoked like kerosene stoves,
swallowed snow, raspberry, ice,
endlessly peeling, like a Soviet sonatina,
recalling nineteen-twenty.
The frost is smelling of apples again.
Could I ever betray to gossip-mongers
the great vow to the Fourth Estate
and oaths solemn enough for tears?
 
Who else will you kill? Who else will you worship?
What other lie will you dream up?
There’s the Underwood’s cartilage. Hurry, rip out a key,
you’ll find a little bone of a pike.
And in the sick son’s blood the deposit of lime
will melt, and there’ll be sudden blessèd laughter.
But the simple sonatina of typewriters
is only a faint shade of those great sonatas.
 


^^EOP^^

Our lives no longer feel ground under them.
At ten paces you can’t hear our words.
 
But whenever there’s a snatch of talk
it turns to the Kremlin mountaineer,
 
the ten thick worms his fingers,
his words like measures of weight,
 
the huge laughing cockroaches on his top lip,
the glitter of his boot-rims.
 
Ringed with a scum of chicken-necked bosses
he toys with the tributes of half-men.
 
One whistles, another meouws, a third snivels.
He pokes out his finger and he alone goes boom.
 
He forges decrees in a line like horseshoes,
One for the groin, one the forehead, temple, eye.
 
He rolls the executions on his tongue like berries.
He wishes he could hug them like big friends from home.
 


^^EOP^^

Let us praise the twilight of freedom, brothers,
the great year of twilight!
A thick forest of nets has been let down
into the seething waters of night.
O sun, judge, people, desolate
are the years into which you are rising!
                     
Let us praise the momentous burden
that the people’s leader assumes, in tears.
Let us praise the twilight burden of power,
its weight too great to be borne.
Time, whoever has a heart
will hear your ship going down.
 
We have roped swallows together
into legions.
Now we can’t see the sun.
Everywhere nature twitters as it moves.
In the deepening twilight the earth swims into the nets
and the sun can’t be seen.
 
But what can we lose if we try one
groaning, wide, ungainly sweep of the rudder?
The earth swims. Courage,
brothers, as the cleft sea falls back from our plow.
Even as we freeze in Lethe we’ll remember
the ten heavens the earth cost us.
 


^^EOP^^

The clock-cricket singing,
that’s the fever rustling.
The dry stove hissing,
that’s the fire in red silk.
 
The teeth of mice milling
the thin supports of life,
that’s the swallow my daughter
who unmoored my boat.
 
Rain-mumble on the roof—
that’s the fire in black silk.
But even at the bottom of the sea
the bird-cherry will hear ‘good-bye’.
 
For death is innocent,
and the heart,
all through the nightingale-fever,
however it turns, is still warm.


^^EOP^^

Let me be in your service
like the others
mumbling predictions,
mouth dry with jealousy.
Parched tongue
thirsting, not even for the word—
for me the dry air is empty
again without you.
 
I’m not jealous any more
but I want you.
I carry myself like a victim
to the hangman.
I will not call you
either joy or love.
All my own blood is gone.
Something strange paces there now. 
Another moment
and I will tell you:
it's not joy but torture
you give me.
I'm drawn to you
as to a crime—
to your ragged mouth,
to the soft bitten cherry. 
Come back to me,
I'm frightened without you.
Never had you such power
over me as now.
Everything I desire
appears to me.
I'm not jealous any more.
I'm calling you.
 


^^EOP^^

Leaves scarcely breathing
in the black breeze;
the flickering swallow
draws circles in the dusk.
 
In my loving
dying heart
a twilight is coming,
a last ray, gently reproaching.
 
And over the evening forest
the bronze moon climbs to its place.
Why has the music stopped?
Why is there such silence?
 


^^EOP^^

The sound of a guitar drifts through the air.
Cupped in my hand, a snowflake quivers lightly.
Thick patches of fog draw back to reveal
A mountain range, rolling like a melody. 
I have gathered the inheritance of the four seasons.
There is no sign of man in the valley.
Picked wild flowers continue to grow,
Their flowering is their time of death. 
Along the path in the primordial wood
Green sunlight flows through the slits.
A russet hawk interprets into bird cries
The mountain's tale of terror. 
Abruptly I cry out,
"Hello, Bai—hua—Mountain."
"Hello, my—child," comes the echo
From a distant waterfall. 
It was a wind within a wind, drawing
A restless response from the land,
I whispered, and the snowflake
Drifted from my hand down the abyss.


^^EOP^^

My son lives on the streets.
We don’t see each other much.
Like a mother who puts white lilies
on the headstone of a dead child,
I put money into his bank account,
clothes into E-Z Access storage
and pretend he’s far away—
at a boarding school, or in a foreign country.
Nights, I dream fairy tales about him.
I dream he becomes a prince,
scholar or warrior who rescues me
from sorrow, the way he rescued me
when he was a child and said,
“Mommy, don’t cry,” and brought tea
into the room of his father’s acrimony—
brave, standing tall in the forest
fire of his father’s scorn. I wake
to the empty sound of wind in the trees.
He says he wants to live with me.
I say I can’t live with him—
boy whose words crash like branches in a rain storm.
Nothing can hold him in,
the walls of a house too thin.
Back home, I had seen
the “study-hard-so-you-don’t-become-like-them”
street bums on Mamo Street,
and he’s like them.
These days, in order to catch a glimpse of him,
I circle the city. One day,
I see him on his bike.
People give him wide berth,
the same way birds avoid power lines,
oncoming cars or trees.
I park on a side street.
Wild-eyed, he flies the block
as if in a holding pattern.
Not of my body, not of my hopes,
he homes in on what can’t be given or taken away.
 


^^EOP^^

About the only thing I thought I knew
was that nothing I’d ever know would do
any good. Sunrise, say, or that the part
of the horse’s hoof that most resembles
a human palm is called the frog;
certain chords on the guitar of no mercantile use;
the abstruse circuitry of an envelope
quatrain; even the meaning of horripilation.
 
Sometimes on a flatland mound the ancients had made,
I took heart in the pointlessness of stars
and lay there until my teeth chattered.
I earned my last Boy Scout merit badge
building a birdhouse out of license plates
manufactured by felons in the big house.
No more paramilitary organizations for me,
I said, ten years before I was drafted.
 
I had skills. Sure-footedness and slick
fielding. Eventually I would learn to unhook
a bra one-handed, practicing on my friend,
his sister's worn over his T-shirt (I took
my turns too). One Easter Sunday I hid
through the church service among the pipes
of the organ and still did not have faith,
although my ears rang until Monday.
 
I began to know that little worth knowing
was knowable and faith was delusion.
I began to believe I believed in believing
nothing I was supposed to believe in,
except the stars, which, like me,
were not significant, except for their light,
meaning I loved them for their pointlessness.
I believed I owned them somehow.
 
A C major 7th chord was beautiful and almost rare.
The horse I loved foundered and had to be
put down. The middle rhyme in an envelope
quatrain was not imprisoned if it was right.
In cold air a nipple horripilates
and rises, the sun comes up and up and up,
a star that bakes the eggs
in a Boy Scout license plate birdhouse.
 
God was in music and music was God.
A drill sergeant seized me by my dog tag
chain and threatened to beat me
to a pile of bloody guts for the peace sign
I’d chiseled in the first of my two tags,
the one he said they’d leave in my mouth
before they zipped the body bag closed.
Yet one more thing I’d come to know.
 
He also said that Uncle Sam owned my ass,
no more true than my ownership
of the stars. I can play a C major 7th chord
in five or six places on the neck of a guitar.
A stabled horse’s frog degrades; a wild horse’s
becomes a callus, smooth as leather.
Stars are invisible in rainy weather,
something any fool knows, of course.
 


^^EOP^^

blacks painted onto bricks & split vinyl on the East Side,
jaws as tight as window locks with the curtains drawn
& behind that diligent fabric: blacks already tucked
into homemade forts—folding chairs, wobbly backbones
& the whole, snowy world waiting outside like ghost
stories whispered around the last sputtering match. & later,
top sheets pulled up over heads from fear of mirrors
at midnight or some backfired beater’s rusty pop pop pop
after the key twists at the edge of the week. No doubt:
Tuesday is the scariest day in Section 8, but Friday is right
after it in the suburbs. & after those trembling weekdays,
even more blacks with money disappearing & reappearing
as unexpectedly as poltergeists inside of TVs & haunted
trees with fast fingers in West Side yards. & still not
a wavelength of any kind for a black to put in the bank.
The inks in everybody’s hatted & contracting checkbooks
don’t change black. Some front-row architecture might.
Some guns, too, & their loud, colorful opportunities:
whatever version of black is inside a fist around a grip.
Not a color, really—more like the face a man makes in
the glinting face of a gun pointed at him every single day.
 


^^EOP^^

Many months have passed
since the diagnosis,
and you’re still grieving for her.
She’s not dead yet.
But she’s lost, like a child is lost—
her mind the ocean floor,
where she kicks up sand
and churns in the water.
 
Al, we call it, or AD—
never by its real name
as if mentioning the word would bring bad luck—
the need to cross one’s self across the heart,
throw back to the ocean half of one’s catch,
turn three times and pray to the East.
 
Papa’s and her letters,
written during their courtship,
are tied with a faded, red ribbon
and sunk in a safe deposit box at Bishop Trust.
Long ago, she gave them to you
for safekeeping. At the time
 
she exacted a promise from you,
that you would not read them
until she was dead.
We twist down the spiral staircase
curled like a strand of seaweed
into the cold room of vaults,
the heavy thud of door distinct as your sadness
following us everywhere. There,
you turn over the bundle of letters
in your hand like unbelievable money.
“I’m so tempted to read them,” you say.
 
You want her back,
the feisty and independent one,
the one who could, at eighty,
do ten knee bends in aerobics class,
dance a smooth jitterbug
and shuttle like the tide
to and from the house about her business.
Not this Elizabeth you mourn,
the one who can no longer reason,
who points and giggles at fat people
and smells, sometimes, like the ocean.
Time slides like Dali’s clock.
Elizabeth is surprised
that she once was married and had a husband,
that she once gave birth to sons.
 


^^EOP^^

After Kenji Takezo fell from a wave,
The turbulence of whitewash confused
His sense of direction.
He breathed in
When he should have
 
Held tight. By accident, he swallowed
The Pacific. The water poured down his throat,
A blue cascade he could not see.
He felt in his stomach
The heavy life of the ocean.
 
It wasn’t funny, but he giggled
When a school of fish tickled his ribs.
He went home, the surf not rideable,
It was no longer there,
The water weighted in his belly.
 
That night, while he slept, the tide moved.
The long arms of the moon
Reached inside him pulling the Pacific free.
When he woke the next morning,
He lay in a puddle of ocean that was his.
 


^^EOP^^

Steel horses nodding
In the petroleum field are beasts
That suck
The crude of earth.
They have lived here for as long as I
Remember. This moment,
 
I smell wild incense:
Heather, abducted by a desert wind.
Its growth hides
The rain-carved ribs of the foothills.
Evening swallows
The city fasting on late fall.
 
Years ago, after hearing the story
About a boy who lost
Both legs while playing on an oil pump,
I was dared to straddle one.
All my friends were there to watch
The Pacific behind me burning with dusk.
 
The brute lifted me to the sky,
Where I merged with the twilight,
A warm breeze embracing my back.
None of them noticed
The world stopped to breathe.
When I looked, they disappeared.
 
Nearby in pink-flowered bushes
Someone found
The girl who’d been missing for weeks.
They stood in awe, the body
Decomposing, while I rode
The slow bucking animal.
 
Two months later, off the same pump,
A man dove,
An imperfect swan into night.
He landed in the dirt gully
Breaking the soft, white wings
He never had.
 
Today, I catch in my hand
An insect charged with lightning.
It tickles
The obscure scoop of my palm
As I hold it to my mouth and explain
A wish so simple
 
By morning I will have forgotten it.
I release
The bug to a desert wind
That is racing toward the sea,
A brutal dryness in its wake.
Fire in the hills everywhere.
 


^^EOP^^

In her illness
Elizabeth believes we do this deliberately,
the washing of her body.
She blames me,
her Japanese daughter-in-law
for having made keeping her clean a fetish.
Angry, she says we do this to torment
her soul, the shower a hot
spray of needles we subject
on her moon-colored skin.
She hates it even more
if I’m there to wash her.
She wants her son,
the person she thinks of these days
as her lover, or husband, or father.
Memory and privacy,
she cries at their loss
as I soap her down like an old car.
What protestations!
And as I listen to her,
I think of these bodies
we have given so freely to men,
yet feel ashamed of
when in the eyes of another woman.
How she fawns
when she thinks a man’s around.
Today, she bangs the walls.
“I hate you! The water’s too wet!”
Hanging onto the safety bars,
she pitches back and forth
like a child,
wanting to be let out at the gate.
I wash her back.
She spins around
in my soap-lathered hands,
and loosening her face in mine,
she glares.
She sticks out her tongue,
and biting down on it, she squeals,
jowls swinging, arms jiggling.
Then, in a dive of both hands
between her legs,
she drops to a semi-squat, simian posture
and thrusts her pelvis bones forward
like mountains in an antediluvian upheaval.
In a gesture of obscenity,
she unfolds her petals
and displays her withered sex to me—
the same way boys moon, flip the bird
or grab their crotch and waggle their tongues—
the profane she feels but can’t articulate.
 


^^EOP^^

No, I am not deformed.
I wear these socks
Because I haven't any gloves,
And my fingers are bitten with frost.
They feel like stumps.
Luckily, I finished covering
The citrus tree with sheets of burlap.
Before darkness,
I will light a smudge pot
Near the mummified trunk,
Then anoint my hands in a blue salve.
Yesterday was cold
But the freeze is on now.
I must remind myself
Not to lick any cars.
Mr. Nishizawa, a house over,
Told me his nephew
Lost a fourth of his tongue
For that reason. Years ago,
The rosebushes were ruined to a freeze
And have never come back.
If needed, I will stay up all night
And pray, will let the hoarfrost
Burn in my chest. My grandfather
Ate the yield from this tree
After he died. I saw him.
 


^^EOP^^

The first space shuttle launch got delayed until
Sunday, so we had to watch the shuttle’s return
to Earth in class instead—PS113’s paunchy black
& white rolled in, the antennae on top adjusted
sideways & down for better reception. That same
day, Garrett stole my new pencil box. That same
day, Cynthia peed her jeans instead of going
to the bathroom & letting Garrett steal her pencil
box. Both of us too upset to answer questions about
space flight, so we got sent to the back of the class.
I smelled like the kind of shame that starts a fight
on a Tuesday afternoon. Cynthia smelled like pee
& everyday Jordache. The shuttle made its slick way
back to Earth, peeling clouds from the monochromatic
sky & we all—even the astronomically marginal—
were winners. American, because a few days before,
a failed songwriter put a bullet in the president
in the name of Jodie Foster. The shuttle looked
like a bullet, only with wings & a cockpit, & when
it finally landed, the class broke into applause
& the teacher snatched a thinning American flag
from the corner, waved it back & forth in honor
of our wounded president & those astronauts.
 


^^EOP^^

When I was three,
a tsunami hit town.
“Daddy, Daddy, save me,
don’t let me drown.”
He saved me
and my common-type dolls.
 
When I was sixteen,
another tsunami hit town.
I cried to my daddy,
“Daddy, Daddy, please save me,
don’t let me drown!”
But he let go of my hand!
 
I still dance
to what broke on my life.
 


^^EOP^^

I am ten.
My mother sits in a black
rocking chair in the parlor
and tells stories of a country school
surrounded by ricefields
and no roads.
 
I stand in the kerosene light
behind her,
earning my allowance.
A penny
for each white hair I pull.
 


^^EOP^^




—for James I. Ina



1.
The emotion of trucks, buses & troop trains
brings them here,
to the wrong side of another state.
A woman at the Klamath Falls depot
calls it the wrong side of the ocean.
 
2
Crumbs hide around the table legs
in the mess hall,
dishes & silverware
clink a strange song.
Families talk across long tables.
Questions drop like puzzles
to the unfinished floor.
 
3
Blocks away from their new home
a woman finds a latrine
not backed up. Stands
in line, waiting her turn
in the wind. Down
the center of the open room:
12 toilet stools, six pair,
back to back. Sits down
and asks for privacy,
holding a towel in front of her
with trembling hands.
 
4
In a North Dakota prisoner-of-war camp,
surrounded by Germans & Italians,
a quiet man
hammers a samurai sword from scrap metal
at night in a boiler room.
A secret edge
to hold against the dark mornings.
 
He sends love notes to his pregnant wife
in Tule Lake
sewn in pants
mailed home for mending.
His censored letters
mention a torn pocket.
She finds the paper near the rip,
folded & secret in the lining.
 
White voices
claim the other side of the ocean
is so crowded
the people want to find death
across the phantom river.
Headlines shake their nervous words.
Out on the coast
beach birds print their calligraphy
in the sand.
It is such a small country.
 


^^EOP^^

The   first    great    poet  of
the  crisis  the   one  whose
generation   was  left  as  if
firebombed     though      if
you    look     back   at    the
seminal    work    you   will
see  that only a  handful of
 
of   the   poems    explicitly 
touch   on   that  dark time 
the    blood    filling     with 
virulence    and   the  night 
always          black         and
spangled   with  stars  says 
when           faced         with
 
difficult      material      the 
poet       should          begin
obliquely      creeping     in 
from   the   edge  a  square 
of         light             moving
imperceptibly   across  the
floor as    the earth    turns
 
and   so   I   will   tell    you 
that  ever  since  I saw  the 
footage           of              the
journalists   hiding  in  the
attic      the    rope    ladder
pulled     up     after    them
only     the       one       with
 
foreign   papers    left     to
stand   her   ground  down
below   the   journalist    at
first     calmly    sitting   on
the      couch      but     then
huddling  in  a   cabinet  as
the     soldiers    enter    the
 
apartment     next       door,
the   cries   of   the  mother
floating       through       the
wall       ib’ni       ib’ni     the
language     ancient       like
something       whetted   on
stone     the   way   I   image
 
language      would        have
sounded     in     the  broken
mouth    of     King      David Absalom        Absalom    the
man-child       hanging     by
the    shining    black   noose
of     his     own    hair  in the
 
fragrant         woods           of
Ephraim       ib’ni           ib’ni
next    door    the   sound  of 
a    body      being     dragged 
from     the    apartment    as 
his            mother           wails
into      the        dark        how
 
many     mothers   and   how 
many     sons    dragged   out 
into    a       night     spangled 
with             stars          where
everything    is  a   metaphor
for      virulence      my     son  my   son   and   ever  since  I
 
saw    a   clip  of the   footage
the       foreign        journalist
managed   to    smuggle   out
of   the  country   images   of
the        journalist       herself
hiding   in   a   space   meant
for   buckets   and   rags    as
 
next     door    the     soldiers 
drag    away   a   young   boy 
please     hear     it   again   a 
child    of    no    more   than 
twelve         his        mother’s
lamentations             forever
seared   in    the    blood   of
 
this    thing   I   call  my  life
but     really     what     is    it
what   is   this  light  I   hold
so   dear  it  wants   to move
imperceptibly    across   the
floor    as   the   earth   turns
so     as   not     to      become
 
too       aware      of      itself?


^^EOP^^

One day we will all be like this—the boat’s sickening pitch, & the delicateness
     needless, consumable.
 
How everything here naturally passes into night, a room
     w/o walls.
 
Could mindlessness keep us alive? Could bright colors?
 
Tonight I am thinking of the young woman who dreams of her father
     being shot in the head. Imagine needing to believe the one you love
     has been destroyed.
 
Now it is after midnight—the spindrift lunar & diaphanous. Here alone on deck
     could I make peace w/it all in thirty seconds—the water’s inherent rising, the gasping
     for air?
 
I have never seen such omnipresence, such vast dreamlessness—  
     but I too am such things.
 
What does it mean to be eroded? What would be the significance of slipping one leg
     over the rail & straddling the indifference?
 
Yes. Once upon a time we spent three days on a boat out of Kobé, Japan.
 
All night the waves. All night the somnambulistic urges.
 
Or how as children we would swim in a hard rain—the lake’s surface ragged & torn,
     but underneath
 
the roots of the water lilies like ladders
     trailing down into the marvelous.
 


^^EOP^^

in florida a giant hamster lays in bed worrying about its future
the hamster has bad eyesight
and many other problems
later that night the hamster drives its car around
listening to sad music; the master lightly drums its paws on the steering wheel
the hamster is alone
but not for long: at home three waffle friends wait
cooling inside a countertop oven in the kitchen
 


^^EOP^^

in the evening the hamster sits at the computer
watermelon juice and coffee sit by the computer
the hamster drinks all of the coffee
after a few minutes the hamster drinks all of the watermelon juice
the hamster lays its paw atop a neatly folded to-do list; this is a resourceful hamster
with a strong will, a sincere and loving hamster friend, and a confident nature
we do not need to spend any more time or empathy on this hamster
 


^^EOP^^

I have come to realize the body is its own pyre, that degree
rises from within, the fatty acids a kind of kindling.
Like a scientist in a lab, this much I have established, blood jelled
like gasoline, the years spread before me like a map
pinned with targets, where I’m raging even now.
It works both ways. Clear the forests to see your enemies
and your enemies see you clearly. Like all effective incendiaries,
I won’t only bloom where I’m planted.
 


^^EOP^^

Shagged-gold, at rest the great haunches
as if axled, fur sleeked like a butter rug.
In the Serengeti sun, the male’s harem
 
like a solar system, each lady kept
exclusive, her seasonal heat for him alone,
estrous belly pressed to the ground,
 
then the male’s riding her musculature—
throughout evolution the cat’s barbed penis
nicking his breached mate as he dismounts.
 
See the deliberate walk, cool as a criminal,
the multi-jointed forepaws placed consciously
even by the usurped king, his eye teeth blacked,
 
his tail rotted off, tired wag of a bloody stump
as he finally falls dying, the crucified face bedded
in its wheel of hair, the tawny miscegenated eyes
 
binocular in breadth. Shark in the long grasses.
Shark in the long grass. Smell everywhere, the gazelle
with its small-headed splendor gracing the plains
 
is ambushed, devoured, its horned bone rack
souvenired, the murderer’s ripping muzzle crimsoned.
In the despot’s sons’ palace of pure gold
 
the three in the iron cage lazing like statues.
When the American unlocks the hinged door
our shackled hearts contract. Unhooded and naked
 
we are pushed into their presence,
and for a shining moment the animals study us,
these fabulous aliens.
 
Here in a desert captivity
snatched from the baobab’s sour fruit,
their swagged bellies shifted, broken, and resignedly
 
the ancient drive rose up only in one—
its head wreathed beyond sorrow
as it slouched out of the habitual darkness,
 
the permanent rictus of its terrible mouth
pain-struck. The thing came toward me
with its ruined light, and I saw affliction in it.
 
Dream of mastery. Dream of being wholly consumed,
freed. I am the lion and the lion is me.
Then the American pulls us out.
 


^^EOP^^

Listen closely as I sing this. The man standing at the gate
tottering on his remaining limb is a kind of metronome, his one
leg planted firmly on the earth. Yes, I have made him beautiful
 
because I aim to lay all my cards on the table. In the book review
the critic writes, “Barry seeks not to judge but to understand.”
Did she want us to let her be, or does she want
 
to be there walking the grounds of the old prison on the hill
of the poison tree where comparatively a paltry twenty thousand
died? In the first room with the blown up
 
black-and-white of a human body gone abstract someone has
to turn and face the wall not because of the human pain
represented in the photo but because of her calmness,
 
the tranquility with which she tells us that her father
and her sister and her brother were killed. In graduate school
a whole workshop devoted to an image of a woman with bleach
 
thrown in the face and the question of whether or not
the author could write, “The full moon sat in the window
like a calcified eye, the woman’s face aglow with a knowingness.”
 
I felt it come over me and I couldn’t stop. I tried to pull myself
together and I couldn’t. They were children. An army of child
soldiers. In the room papered with photos of the Khmer Rouge
 
picture after picture of teenagers, children whose parents
were killed so that they would be left alone in the world
to do the grisly work that precedes paradise.
 
And the photos of the victims, the woman holding her newborn
in her arms as her head is positioned in a vise, in this case
the vise an instrument not of torture
 
but of documentation, the head held still as the camera captures
the image, the thing linking all their faces, the abject fear
and total hopelessness as exists
 
in only a handful of places in the history of the visible world.
For three $US per person she will guide you through what was
Tuol Sleng prison, hill of the strychnine tree.
 
Without any affectation she will tell you the story of how
her father and her sister and her brother went among
the two million dead. There are seventy-four forms
 
of poetry in this country and each one is still meant to be sung.
 


^^EOP^^

Say, when we woke those icy spring mornings they were still there.
The upper portion of their faces long ruined but you could still see
                                        the meaning in their hands,
 
palms once covered in gold. We knew better than to call them
by their names, Light that Shines Throughout the Universe
                         and His consort, but there were stories
 
of  travelers lost  in the foothills of  the Hindu  Kush and a distant
brilliance that led them home. The way a candle physically enters
                                        your body after it has been
 
snuffed out. The pearly smoke suffused in the air. In one school
hundreds  of  miles  away  all  the   girls  my age  were  poisoned,
                              and last week outside the capital
 
a woman like my  sister was shot dead  in front of a crowd by two men
who forced their bodies into her body and then judged her an infidel
                                        so they could kill her
 
and be done with it.  After the  visitors were blasted I had a dream.
I saw a human man standing by a lake and no one was looking at him
                                          directly. His image
 
on the surface of the water cleaner than anything in this world.
In   my   dream  the  man   said,  “Thousands   of  lifetimes  ago
                                        when my body was cut
 
into pieces by an evil king, I was not caught up in the idea of the self.”
Then  in  my   dream  someone   picked  up  a rock  and  I  woke  up.
                              It took almost a month,
 
the  great  heads  drilled with holes,  then anti-aircraft  tanks rolled in.
Each hundred-foot niche now empty but each cavity left shaped like us,
                              like a person. Before it happened
 
we talked about it. Grandfather said don’t they have a share in heaven?
Second Aunt said it was more realistic this way. God not in heaven
                                        but in exile.
 


^^EOP^^

Somebody says draw a map. Populate it with the incidents
of your childhood. Mark the spot where the lake receded
after a winter of light snow. The stairs on which someone
slapped you. The place where the family dog hung itself
by jumping over the back fence while still on the dog run,
hours later its body like a limp flag on a windless day.
Draw a map, someone says. Let yourself remember.
In the refugee camp a hundred thousand strong
draw the stony outcrop from which you could no longer see
the plume of smoke that was your village. Draw a square
for the bathroom stall where Grandpa hid each day
in order to eat his one egg free from the starving eyes
of his classmates, an X for the courthouse where you and he
were naturalized, a broken line for the journey. Draw a map,
Jon says. Let it be your way into the poem. Here is where
that plane filled with babies crashed that I was not on.
Here is where I was ashamed. On the second floor
at Pranash University the people wait their turn. Have you
drawn your map, Jon asks. He has rolled up his sleeves.
Forty-five minutes to noon the Prince stands up and says
that the monks must be excused. We watch them file out,
saffron robes as if their bodies have burst into blossom.
Draw a map. Fly halfway around the globe. Here is the room
next to the library where you realize how poor your tradition is,
the local people with poetic forms still in use that date back
to the time of Christ. Tell us about your map. Explain
how these wavy lines represent the river, this rectangle
the school-turned-prison where only seven
escaped with their lives. This is my map. This star the place
where I sat in a roomful of people among whom not one
was not touched by genocide. Every last map resplendent with death
though nobody knows where their loved ones lie buried.
How many times can I appropriate a story that is not mine to tell?
The woman stands up and says she is not a poet, that she
doesn’t have the words. She points to a triangle on a piece of paper.
Here is the spot where she found human bones in the well
of her childhood home, and how her mother told her don’t be afraid because it was not the work of wild animals.


^^EOP^^




—after Frank O’Hara



You have been smiling across the table at your date
with a sesame seed stuck in your teeth.
 
You will gain sophistication, become accepted by Reader’s  Digest, and retire in Puyallup.
 
In your next life you will be a teacher
and no one will ever call you by your first name.
 
After your next vacation you will come home
and discover that your neighbors have redecorated
in the style of Iowa trailer court.
 
If you feel like you’re getting old,
secretly plant zucchini in your neighbor’s flowerbeds.
 
Avoid people who iron their sheets
or roll their socks & underwear.
 
Painting and poetry and music will show us where we should
be going, not the senate or tv news.
 
The next thermos bottle you see will actually
be a listening device made in Korea.
 
All the people in this restaurant
are glad that they are not you.
 


^^EOP^^




—displayed in the Weaverville Museum



It is the picture of a man who dreams
at night, his dreams a cartoon color
he can’t forget in his blue cell:
a fork chases a hard-boiled egg
across the smooth paper,
cheered on by an angry alarm clock.
The clock rings
and the artist knows it is morning
even though the iron cell
is in a basement with no windows.
 
In the center of the painting
the devil blows a whistle
and his pitchfork drips blood.
Above in the night
a man has taken off in a Buck Rogers spaceship
heading for a yellow one-eyed moon.
He grips the steering wheel in the open cockpit
and doesn’t look back.
 
In a lower corner
under a naked tree
a satyr sits and plays his pan-flute.
The notes weave all around the painting,
twist around a girl
dancing in veils.
 
The man who dreams all this
pulls at his covers,
drowses at the bottom of the painting.
 
The man who painted this
died in his dreams.
 


^^EOP^^

Nowhere    in   the     Halakha’s     five   thousand   years   of   rules 
does   it     specifically    state    Thou     shall     not     [                      ]
but     sometimes    tradition    carries    more     weight    than    law
 
and   so   for    much   of   the    past    year   we    have   not    talked
about     what    will    happen    on     Thursday,    how   the    cervix
will     start     its     slow    yawn,     the     pelvic      floor     straining
 
as         the           head        crowns,      the      fontanelles     allowing
the       bony        panes       of       the      skull     to      pass    through
until,     over    the   next    24   months,    the   five   cranial   plates
 
gradually      ossify,     the      head      forming    its     own    helmet
as     structures     harden    over   the    soft    meats   of  the  brain,
nor     do   we    talk   about    the   colostrum  sunny  as egg   yolks
 
now   collecting  in   your   breasts,   the    thing’s   first   nutrients
already    ready    and    waiting,    the     event    just    days   away
and   still  we  do  not  talk  about it, the mass growing inside you
 
tucked    up    safe     in   the     leeward   side    under    the   heart
because   sometimes   our   god   is   a  jealous god,   the evil   eye
lidless    and    all-seeing.  Instead  we  will wait  until  it is  done,
 
until  the  creature  has been  cleaned and wrapped in soft cloth,
the    bloody     cord   that    binds    you    severed.    And   maybe
you       will      name      it      Dolores,      which       means     grief,
 
or perhaps you will call it Mara, the Hebrew name for bitterness
because       this      is      how     we      protect     what     we    love,
by   hiding   what  it   truly  means  to   us,  the little  bag  of  gold
 
we    keep   buried   in  the  yard,   the  thing  we will do anything
to      keep      safe,      even    going     so      far    as    to     pretend
it    doesn’t    exist,   that   there’s   nothing  massing in  the  dark
 
despite  the steady  light  emanating  from  your  face, a radiance
so bright sometimes I can’t look at you, the joy so  overpowering
you     want    to     shout   it     from   the    highest    mountaintop
 
straight into God’s ear.
 


^^EOP^^

The sky wants the water to turn grey,
but if I notice how waves
 
play with the clumps of yellow flags,
or the way turtles share logs,
 
or even try to understand a friend’s decision
to walk onto a glacier
 
and end her life—I will be ready
for any poems that have been waiting.
 
The horizon opens as I walk,
escorted by swans and Canada geese.
 
I need to stop backpedaling into the present.
In my old life people would straighten
 
the truth, but the river
flows in curves.
 
The names of my father and my mother
rest next to each other in Greenwood Cemetery.
 
The distance between me and the mountains
measures an uneven thought: I feel like an orphan.
 
An early moon is just a piece of change
in the softening sky.
 
Light is such an actress. Time to seek
Hopper’s wish to simply paint sunlight
 
on the wooden wall of a house. I am growing
older. Maru in Japanese means
 
the ship
will make it back home.
 


^^EOP^^

Literally the thing has been gutted, a ragged gash
carved under its tail to midway up its chest, eyes
like stagnant water, horns intricate as a woodwind.
Where did the viscera go? Where do the viscera ever go?
I am in a car driving to the northernmost point
on this spit. Porte de Mort. Death’s Northern Door.
Literally where my grandmother lives. Her 89-year-old cousin
has just fallen out a window but is all right, the bruises
 
like stained glass. Enthusiasm. To be in God.
My grandmother says it is proof, and I nod my head
because I too would like to live in such a world
where an eighty-nine year old crawls out a window
and falls seven feet to the ground, in turn the miracle
of her body stained a deep blue, vitreous. In one room
of the unfinished mansion where we will celebrate the day,
the ninety-year-old matriarch sleeps in her four-poster bed
 
under the canopy of a wedding dress, its hundred eyelets
a fallacy. After dinner someone will hand around an indulgence
of the Black Madonna of Częstochowa, the lady’s dark cheek
marred as if she has been scratched. Who at this table
fled the police? Who left that place in flames, the rubble
of infinite hearths? The deer’s eyes like perfect cataracts,
the evidence cooling. When I think of my room in the earth,
I can’t breathe. A friend of a friend recently hit a small bear
 
with his car. At the end of my favorite novel a bear
is dancing on a makeshift stage, the bear a grotesquerie
like the rest of us. No one stopped to help,
said my friend. Traffic barely slowed. I do not judge this,
 
or even the surreptitious footage of the workers
somewhere on the killing floor, stomping
the breast-heavy creatures with their rubber boots.
How we raise them not to fly, what should waft
 
gnostically through the air, the hollowness of evolving.
My heart is doing that thing again, saying climb the stairs
on your knees. I tell a friend a man halfway across the world
has been killed, torn apart by motorbikes, each limb
tied in a different direction. Could a universe be born this way?
One minute you are scarping the silvery bark off a birch
when it comes to you forever and there you lie
in the bed of a blood-smeared truck at a stoplight
 
on Highway 41 because this is the season of messages.
The man was a teacher. He taught girls.
When they came for him he told his children
not to cry. Then the men took out half his bowel,
the viscera steaming as they do, and they tied him
ingeniously in such a way that they tore him apart.
In that other place three million of us died. When I left,
I left them all behind. In the unfinished mansion
 
someone will ask me what I’m thankful for.
What to say? That one of the most beautiful things
I have ever seen was a paper nest secreted by wasps,
and that in the summer I would sleep under it,
the runnelled mass turning like a planet in the moonlight?
I will admit I was in favor of war and now look what’s happened.
At the end of the road the man driving the truck will eat
the deer. If I had to watch someone be torn apart by motorbikes
 
I would still be me, which is the horror of it all.
 


^^EOP^^

notice how my forehead approaches you at a high speed
notice the contortions on my face; hear and feel the impact
of my forehead against your eyebrow
never get angry if someone doesn’t do things for you
react to disappointment by being quiet and nice
and alone, not by being confrontational or frustrated
in 1952 a DSM copy-editor removed ‘headbutting’
from the entry for ‘psychopathic behavior’
thereafter the headbutt has thrived
across all social, political, and elementary school gym classes
today the headbutt is a sign of friendship, stability, and inner calm
the exponential effect of your repeated lies makes me afraid what will happen
to us; ‘the perfect headbutt’ destroys both participants and impresses
even the severely disillusioned, and the phrase ‘giant poem’ reverberates
through my head with the austerity of ancient ruins, the off-centered beauty
of repressed veganism, and the lord of the rings trilogy
I forgot what this poem was about
 


^^EOP^^




And both the girls cried bitterly (though they hardly knew why) and clung to the Lion and kissed his mane and his nose and his paws and his great, sad eyes. Then he turned from them and walked out onto the top of the hill. And Lucy and Susan, crouching in the bushes, looked after him and this is what they saw.
—C. S. Lewis, The Lion, the Witch, and the Wardrobe



Tonight we will function like women.
The snow has gone away, the ice with its amniotic glare.
I clasp my sister’s tiny hand.
We will not turn away
Though spring, spring with its black appetite,
Comes seeping out of the earth.
 
The lion was sad. He suffered us
To touch him. When I placed the bread of my hands
In his mammalian heat, I was reminded
That the world outside this world
Is all vinegar and gall, that to be a young girl at the foot of a god
Requires patience. Timing.
 
The White Witch has mustered her partisans.
Because I am fascinated by her bracelets strung with baby teeth,
I will remember her as the woman
Who grins with her wrists. From my thicket of heather
I note that in her own congenital way
She is pure, that tonight she ushers something new into the world.
 
I cannot stop it. I cannot stop it just as in that other place
I could not keep the planes with their spiked fires from coming.
Though in this closed realm the smell of camphor is overwhelming
I have nothing but my hands to use
In ministering to the dead. Here too
My hands must suffice.
 
Hush now while I testify. They are shaving him.
The corona of his mane falls away
Like pieces of money. In the moon’s milk light
Her bangled wrists grin as she raises the blade.
Something is diffused. In whatever world he comes again
There will be women like us who choose to.
 


^^EOP^^

The prisoner can’t go any longer, but he does.
The beggar can’t go on begging, but watch—
Tomorrow he’ll be in the alley, holding out a bowl
To everyone, to even a young, possibly poorer, child.
The mother can’t go on believing,
But she will kneel for hours in the cathedral,
Holding silence in her arms.
The rain goes on, daily, sometimes, and we cry,
As often as not alone.
The fishmonger, the bell ringer, the cook, each
Can be corrupted in a less than dire way.
Nothing can replace the sea breezes you were born to.
Nothing can stay the shy ache in the palm
you hold out to the fortune-teller.
The concrete lions on her steps go on
Making bloodless journeys, they go on
Hunting in air longer than any of you will live to watch,
Hunting still after your futures become all irises
and blamelessness.
 


^^EOP^^

               I got a call from the White House, from the
President himself, asking me if I’d do him a personal
favor. I like the President, so I said, “Sure, Mr.
President, anything you like.” He said, “Just act
like nothing’s going on. Act normal. That would
mean the world to me. Can you do that, Leon?” “Why,
sure, Mr. President, you’ve got it. Normal, that’s
how I’m going to act. I won’t let on, even if I’m
tortured,” I said, immediately regretting that “tortured”
bit. He thanked me several times and hung up. I was
dying to tell someone that the President himself called
me, but I knew I couldn’t. The sudden pressure to
act normal was killing me. And what was going on
anyway. I didn’t know anything was going on. I
saw the President on TV yesterday. He was shaking
hands with a farmer. What if it wasn’t really a
farmer? I needed to buy some milk, but suddenly
I was afraid to go out. I checked what I had on.
I looked “normal” to me, but maybe I looked more
like I was trying to be normal. That’s pretty
suspicious. I opened the door and looked around.
What was going on? There was a car parked in front
of my car that I had never seen before, a car that
was trying to look normal, but I wasn’t fooled.
If you need milk, you have to get milk, otherwise
people will think something’s going on. I got into
my car and sped down the road. I could feel those
little radar guns popping behind every tree and bush,
but, apparently, they were under orders not to stop
me. I ran into Kirsten in the store. “Hey, what’s
going on, Leon?” she said. She had a very nice smile.
I hated to lie to her. “Nothing’s going on. Just
getting milk for my cat,” I said. “I didn’t know
you had a cat,” she said. “I meant to say coffee.
You’re right, I don’t have a cat. Sometimes I
refer to my coffee as my cat. It’s just a private
joke. Sorry,” I said. “Are you all right?” she
asked. “Nothing’s going on, Kirsten. I promise
you. Everything is normal. The President shook
hands with a farmer, a real farmer. Is that such
a big deal?” I said. “I saw that,” she said, “and
that man was definitely not a farmer.” “Yeah, I
know,” I said, feeling better.
 


^^EOP^^

The elephants of reckoning
are bunches of scruff
men and women picking up
thrown out antennae
from the rubbish
bins of the city
 
to fix on their tubular
bells and horn about
by oil can fires
in the freezing midnight
of the old new year
 
We ride by their music
every hour in cabs on trains
hearing the pit pat
of our grown-wise pulse
shut in shut out
 
from the animals
of the dry season
the losers and boozers,
we must not admit our eyes
into the courtyard
 
the whimsy of chance
and our other excuses—
dollars in pocket—
to write beautiful songs
is all I ask, God
 
to do right with friends
and love a woman
and live to eighty
have people listen
to the story of my trip to America
 
The elephants of reckoning
are beaten and hungry
and walk their solitary horrors
out every sunrise slurping
coffee bought with change
 
while in some houses
freedom-bound lovers
embrace late and read Tagore
about the people working
underneath the falling of empires.
 


^^EOP^^

Imagine half your face
rubbed out yet
you are suited up
and walking
to the office.
 
How will your mates
greet you?
with heavy hearts,
flowers,
rosary beads? 
How shall we greet
the orphan boy,
the husband whose hand
slipped, children
and wife swept away?
 
How to greet
our new years
and our birthdays?
Shall we always
light a candle?
 
Do we remember
that time erases
the shore, grass
grows, pain’s
modified?
 
At Hikkaduwa
in 1980 I wrote a ditty,
a sailor’s song
about rain
in sunny Ceylon.
 
I don’t know
what Calypsonians
would compose
about this monstrous
wave, this blind hatchet man;
 
don’t know
the Baila singers’ reply;
we are a “happy and
go” people
yet the fisherman’s wife
 
knows
that her grandfather
was eaten by the ocean—
fisher communities
have suffered in time
 
and what’s happened
now is just another feast
for that bloody,
sleeping mother
lapping at our island;
 
but what if the ocean
were innocent,
the tectonic plates
innocent, what if God
were innocent?
 
               *
 
I do not know
how to walk upon the beach,
how to lift corpse
after corpse
until I am exhausted,
 
how to stop the tears
when half my face
has been rubbed out
beyond
the railroad tracks
 
and this anaesthetic,
this calypso come
to the last verse.
What shall we write
in the sand?
 
Where are gravestones
incinerated? Whose
ashes are these urned
and floating through a house
throttled by water?
 
Shall we build
a memorial
some calculated distance
from the sea, in a park,
in the shape of a giant wave
 
where we can write
the names of the dead?
Has the wave lost
its beauty? Is it now
considered obscene?
 
               *
 
Yet tomorrow
we must go to the ocean
and refresh ourselves
in the sea breeze
down in Hikkaduwa
 
where it is raining
in sunny Ceylon.
Tomorrow, we must
renew our vows
at sunrise, at sunset.
 
Let us say the next time
the ocean recedes
and parrots gawk
and flee, and restless
dogs insist their humans
 
wake up, we will not peer
at the revelation
of the ocean bed,
nor seek photographs.
We will run to higher ground,
 
and gathered there
with our children,
our cats, dogs,
pigs, with what we’ve
carried in our hands
 
—albums, letters—
we will make a circle,
kneel, sit,
stand in no particular
direction, pray
 
and be silent,
open our lungs
and shout thanks
to our gods
thanks to our dogs.
 


^^EOP^^

Among physicians rich in their death watch
In hallways crowded with locked wheelchairs,
Cradles of a century’s platitudes,
The stale air smelling of disinfectant
And weeping wounds enough to stupefy nurses,
Among the staring insomniacs of the day room,
The stroke victims on their rented gurneys,
Complaining orderlies and rattling carts
 
Among these in this place my father lay
At the end of everything
 
In the curved landscapes of white sheets
Abandoned finally by parents, his son,
 
The loyal company, old friends, his death
A sign of other deaths too soon to come
 
Unable to recall one life, his thoughts,
Features, he lay unknown to himself,
 
The tall hunter of pheasants out with his boy
In vellum corn and brassy orchards
 
In an autumn that never was, the proud
White-collared Ford employee lay on a bed
 
Too short for legs tattooed with red burn-rings
From daily syringes of Cytosar
 
Considered useless, still a requirement
For state funding for a body described
 
Leukemic waiting for Saturday's fiddlers
Who came to raise the spirits of the dead
 
With a music he never cared for turned
Suddenly attractive, he found genius,
 
Theirs or his like some lyrical phosphor
That shapes itself in the dry night air
 
To make a thing then make it disappear
He lay listening to the county fiddlers
 
At the end of every purpose, act and form
I leave you here, my father, in perfect accord.
 


^^EOP^^

Of course wars, of course lice, of course limbs on opposing sides
to remind a body about ambivalence, of course orphans and empty beds and eyes
exiled for blinking in the harsh light. Of course Khrushchev gave Crimea
to the Ukraine in a blind drunk, and yes, land mines and burning skin
and of course organs, some members dismembered
to shake at strangers and their evil, and there is no way
to imagine that a man shaking a dried penis would ever utter the word darling.
Of course personal, add starch for pain, add bluing, of course hang
the laundry in the basement, there are thieves in the backyard, of course
departing trains, carload after carload of sorrow,
the man on top of a boxcar waving,
his rifle silhouetted against the white sky, its color draining
the way warmth left the Bosnian after he’d burned the last page of the last book,
knowing he had reached the end of something though it was not end enough.
Of course kisses, the stages of kissing like running borders,
endless conversations, stations of the cross, till even the promise of kissing bores you,
of course teeth gnashing, ethnic cleansing. The cynical will shrug off the past,
the future, the whole left hip of Ecuador slashed for six days of oil,
of course an X on the coats of the sick so they would stand apart
for deportation, of course rogue tumors over the body politic,
the same bodies that took Egyptian mummies and powdered them
to use as food seasoning, bon vivant cannibalism,
and yes civilized men tossed living penguins into furnaces to fuel their ships.
Of course partitions so that after the new territories were defined,
families had to line up on a cliff with bullhorns
to talk to their people on the other side,
of course courage, at times a weapon against yearning, surrender another,
a mother of course goes on setting the table, even if it’s with broken plates,
and a friend will say gently of course I want to ride with you to the funeral,
of course of course of course of course,
now then, negotiations, whatever,
palisades, the end of whimsy,
but then one evening though it is wartime,
a man climbs the hill to an amphitheater to play his cello at twilight
and history stops talking for a moment and sighs
while the melancholy of Albinoni
passes from heart to heart and each lifts a little,
the way passing a baby around a room can be sacramental,
and the memories of simple pleasures become more beautiful, the memory
of your joy on a highway to see in the next lane in a neighboring car
a clown take off his nose at the end of the day, the memory
of how your mother laid roses, sweetheart roses, on the cold grate of the fireplace,
and the sudden rain one afternoon in fall after you’d hiked far into the dells
and you huddled deep in your overcoat in the wet,
waiting out the storm with a sheep
that had come up to lean against your side
like a rock.
 


^^EOP^^

The fearless blackbirds see me again
at the footpath beside the tall grasses
sprouting like unruly morning hair.
They caw and caw like vulgar boys
on street corners making love to girls
with their “hey mama
this” and their “hey mama that.”
But this gang of birds is much too slick.
They are my homeys of the air
with their mousse-backed hair and Crayola
black coats like small fry hoods who smoke
and joke about each other’s mothers,
virginal sisters, and the sweet arc of revenge.
These birds spurn my uneaten celery sticks,
feckless gestures, ineffective hosannas.
They tag one another, shrill and terrible,
caroling each to each my weekly wages.
But they let me pass, then flit away.
They won’t mess with me this time—
they know where I live.
 


^^EOP^^

Nothing can reach you now, not lead or steel,
or what life itself eventually reveals.
 
No more studies of kindness or courtesy,
nor grace or charity, all is needless now.
 
All is needless now, sky, world, family
grieving for their bundles of purity,
 
now beyond disgrace, failure, winter streets,
or whatever attacks, and then retreats.
 
Classrooms emptied of children’s things,
paper and paste, and love’s imaginings,
 
bundles of peace, Christmas-blessed
with the unborn and the dead at rest,
 
nothing can reach you now, not lead or steel
or what life itself eventually reveals.
 


^^EOP^^

Kissing your lips
I try to forget roses
or the fruit of palmyra trees
sweet and strong
 
Tongue lolling upon tongue
heart beating
against heart beating,
these are my words
signifying our human bodies
which poetry does not capture,
the absolute desire I have
to kiss your lips
on this hot and sunny afternoon.
 
I do not know how much longer
I can walk about the garden
kissing roses,
 
or perambulate the toddy tavern of my dreams
where black faces and white toddy mix
in black and white memories
of Jaffna, Sri Lanka,
my Tamil countrymen
far away on an island across the sea.
 
Far away and far away
the palmyra fruit and your lips.
To drink toddy now.
To kiss your rosy lips now.
To uproot the roses in my garden
and offer them upon my tongue now.
 
To fly to Sri Lanka
and grab the last fruit on the tree
before history throws the Tamils into the sea
as is said it will do;
 
before all this and everything else,
before the apocalypse,
I do so sincerely wish,
though my words may not fit,
to rest my head in your hair
and kiss your lips.
 


^^EOP^^

Jesus did not ride that monstrous wave,
not Yahweh, Jah, Allah, none of the major
 
Gods or the minor ones, not even the godless
strode that bugger which sliced our lives
 
in two: the past where we danced ballroom
while the children played carom, and mangos
 
stained our lapels, and today, hobbling,
scavenging in ash heaps, how easy
 
the arithmetic, day and night, two by two.
Bring on the mind workers.
 
Let a thousand doctors bloom.
I lived right here on the x, my name
 
is blue: sea green blue blue green
I do not speak in tongues. I am not
 
disordered, a babbler. I did not lose
anybody close to me, just 30,000
 
fellow island bees, not to worry, machan,
old fellow, I will subscribe tomorrow,
 
the order of every day, skip and jump rope,
whistle, talk to aid workers, even swim.
 


^^EOP^^

This is the poem of death.
There is only one
and no other.
 
Every one is an occasion,
one way or another,
and the last poem is this poem of death.
 
It is an occasion like no other.
I will no longer lope after elegance,
beauty’s body, or love’s wonder.
 
I will be sorry for everything
I was, and for everything I was not.
I speak to you as if you were my brother.
 
I will forgive everyone.
Death will make this possible.
There will be no other.
 
Death was in the mind
before thought or love,
in ourselves, and in our lovers.
 
The poem of death is speechless.
A companion will appear again
like another self, like your brother.
 
Enough now, enough has been said.
The spinning leaf will spin
like no other.
 


^^EOP^^




After Octavio Paz



What’s most human must drive
an arrow to the heart.
 
Ghosts, too, must abide by this directive
& remain transparent,
 
going about their business in old houses.
Before I was an I, I longed to be ethereal.
 
Sprouting wings at will & gliding through
cul-de-sacs and malls around the valley.
 
My hands, too, would gradually disappear
followed by my arms, then neck & head
 
until my whole body was slight as allergen.
Before I was an I, I spoke an old language
 
that would return on drowsy afternoons.
Therefore I struggled to say
 
the simplest sentences. So much so
that the maligned semicolon
 
became an ardent ally, an island
of pause and the deep breath.
 
The comma, too, bless its tiny soul,
was the crumb which the god
 
of small favors multiplied
tenfold for my morning pie.
 
Before I was an I, knowledge
clung to me like burrs & hunger
 
guided my ship like the barefoot light                 on the sleeping land & sea.
 


^^EOP^^

Why are you still seventeen
and drifting like a dog after dark,
dragging a shadow you’ve found?
 
Put it back where it belongs,
and that bend of river, too. That’s not the road
you want, though you have it to yourself.
 
Gone are the cars that crawl to town
from the reactors, a parade of insects, metallic,
fuming along the one four-lane street.
 
The poplars of the shelterbelt lean away
from the bypass that never had much to pass by
but coyote and rabbitbrush.
 
Pinpricks stabbed in a map too dark to read—
I stared at stars light-years away.
Listen. That hissing? Just a sprinkler
 
damping down yesterday until it’s today.
The cottonwoods shiver, or I do,
every leaf rustling as if it’s the one
 
about to tear itself, not I.
Memory takes the graveyard shift.
 


^^EOP^^

If they ask what it was like, say it was like the sea
rolling barrels of itself at you in the shadowless light of the shore,
say it was like a spider, black as night, large as a campesino’s hand,
a deepness that could balance a small world of dirt as easily as a gift
of gleaming red tomatoes held out to you eight at a time.
If they ask you how it felt, say solitary,
at first the ease of sleeping alone, warm without even a sheet,
then the nonchalance of a dirt road leading down the hill, its dust
raised and re-raised in plumes as each guest departed,
and later, say it was like the blind cat that came out of nowhere
to lie on your tile floor, lifting its face to stare with white marble eyes.
If they ask what you heard, tell them the single note of the watchman,
who coughed his one syllable when you went to bed,
and at the end of every dream when you woke with a simple plea— stay, go—again, the cough of the watchman.
If they ask about thirst, tell them no one could carry water as far
as it had to go, so that when it was time to rest,
people went to the spigot at the edge of the train tracks
and cupped their hands under the water, lowering their faces to drink.
Tell them a man could stand at noon in the park wearing nothing but underwear
and beg for hours with his cup empty.
Tell them you could sit quietly while phrases you didn't know you knew 
rose up in the language there and on an undisturbed lake in your mind 
you could back float—that weightless prayer that prays  Let me die with my toes pointing up at the sun.
When they ask what people will eventually get around to asking, 
How was the food? Tell them batata, mamón, guanábana, maní,
indigenous crops exchanging places with hunger,
giving up to the dark store window whose inventory is one hand
of bananas sold one banana at a time, giving up to little pyramids of limes
by the side of the road and the kids who tend them, dreaming
of a few coins tossed down in the dirt.
 


^^EOP^^




But these, thy lovers are not dead.…They will rise up and hear your voice. . .. and run to kiss your mouth.
         –The Sphinx



In the garden of Père Lachaise,
city of the dead, we passed angels
covering their faces in shame,
& nineteenth-century trees, with tops bowed
as if their only purpose was to grieve,
& crossed the Transversales to Wilde’s grave.
 
When lovers leave, they leave their kisses
glistening on the gray slab,
on impressions of lips themselves,
a tissue of strangers’ cells
the conservators cannot leave alone,
& scrub the graffiti, as the plaque decrees
by law, no one can deface this tomb,
& still the images of lips remain,
dark gray stains of animal fat
imprisoned in limestone.
 
Lips are pressed as high as lovers
climb, against the Sphinx’s ridiculous
headdress, on the carved trumpet
of fame, & on the cheeks of its voracious face
of mindless passion flying with eyes pinched tight,
that some farsighted lover tried to open
with lines from a red pen, like a blepharoplasty,
while others kissed its sybaritic mouth
to make a poem a prophecy.
 
So here is love alive
surviving the wreckage it survives,
a lipstick envelope of hearts on their flight
to some other place, less aware,
more receiving, a final Champ de Grâce.
 


^^EOP^^

The King Cobra slides
through our jungles,
and tucked in bushes
by the riverbanks
the grand Kabaragoya
holds court among lizards—
 
but if you want to swim
at Mount Lavinia, or fly kites
on Galle Face Green, or ride
horse carts in the Jaffna peninsula
of your ancestors, or bear a child
in Colombo General Hospital,
 
or sleep in Cinnamon Gardens
under a mango tree,
or beg in the Borella Market,
or ride for historical reasons
on patrol boats in the Bay,
or stilt-fish off Matara down South,
 
just remember here everywhere
 
there is only man burning
and woman burning
 
here everywhere
 
in shallow graves
in deep graves
floating out of salt water
washing down the sands
 
the dead have tongues
the dead have ears
tongues are speaking to ears
 
What are they saying?
What are they saying?
 
Tell us, brown bear
bolting out of your cave.
 
Tell us, leopard
leaning on your branch.
 
Tell us, flamingos.
Bend your necks
and pour wine pour wine
 
Hoopoes, kingfishers,
cranes, have you got your messages
on the bill, are you ready
to sing? Are you going to sing?
 
Monsoon.
 
Are you going to sing?
 
Monsoon.
 
Are you going to sing?
 
Monsoon. Monsoon.
 


^^EOP^^




Yes, your childhood now a legend of fountains
                                                         —jorge gullén



Yes, your childhood, now a legend
gone to weeds, still remembers the gray road
that set out to cross the desert of the future.
 
And how, always just ahead,
gray water glittered, happy to be just a mirage.
Who steps off the gray bus at the depot?
 
Sidewalks shudder all the way home.
Blinds close their scratchy eyes.
Who settles in your old room?
 
Sniffy air sprawls as if it owns the place,
and now your teenage secrets have no one to tell.
For the spider laying claim to the corner,
 
there is a stickiness to spin, that the living may beg
to be wrapped in silk and devoured,
leaving not even the flinch from memory.


^^EOP^^

In college, people were always breaking up.
We broke up in parking lots,
beside fountains.
Two people broke up
across a table from me
at the library.
I could not sit at that table again
though I did not know them.
I studied bees, who were able
to convey messages through dancing
and could find their ways
home to their hives
even if someone put up a blockade of sheets
and boards and wire.
Bees had radar in their wings and brains
that humans could barely understand.
I wrote a paper proclaiming
their brilliance and superiority
and revised it at a small café
featuring wooden hive-shaped honey-dippers
in silver honeypots
at every table.


^^EOP^^

Two sets
of family stories,
one long and detailed,
about many centuries
of island ancestors, all living
on the same tropical farm... 
The other side of the family tells stories
that are brief and vague, about violence
in the Ukraine, which Dad's parents
had to flee forever, leaving all their
loved ones
behind. 
They don't even know if anyone
survived. 
When Mami tells her flowery tales of Cuba,
she fills the twining words with relatives.
But when I ask my
Ukrainian-Jewish-American grandma
about her childhood in a village
near snowy Kiev,
all she reveals is a single
memory
of ice-skating
on a frozen pond. 
Apparently, the length
of a grown-up's
growing-up story
is determined
by the difference
between immigration
and escape.
 


^^EOP^^

Newsmen call it the Cuban Missile Crisis.
Teachers say it's the end of the world. 
At school, they instruct us to look up
and watch the Cuban-cursed sky.
Search for a streak of light.
Listen for a piercing shriek,
the whistle that will warn us
as poisonous A-bombs
zoom close. 
Hide under a desk.
Pretend that furniture is enough
to protect us against perilous flames.
Radiation. Contamination. Toxic breath. 
Each air-raid drill is sheer terror,
but some of the city kids giggle.
They don't believe that death
is real. 
They've never touched a bullet,
or seen a vulture, or made music
by shaking
the jawbone
of a mule. 
When I hide under my frail school desk,
my heart grows as rough and brittle
as the slab of wood
that fails to protect me
from reality's
gloom.


^^EOP^^

Mad has decided to catch a vulture,
the biggest bird she can find.
 
She is so determined, and so inventive,
that by stringing together a rickety trap
of ropes and sticks, she creates
a puzzling structure that just might
be clever enough to trick a buzzard,
once the trap’s baited with leftover pork
from supper.
 
Mad and I used to do everything together,
but now I need a project all my own,
so I roam the green fields,
finding bones.
 
The skull of a wild boar.
The jawbone of a mule.
 
Older cousins show me
how to shake the mule’s quijada,
to make the blunt teeth
rattle.
 
Guitars.
Drums.
Gourds.
Sticks.
 
A cow bell.
A washboard.
Pretty soon, we have
a whole orchestra.
 
On Cuban farms, even death
can turn into
music.
 


^^EOP^^

The first story I ever write
is a bright crayon picture
of a dancing tree, the branches
tossed by island wind. 
I draw myself standing beside the tree,
with a colorful parrot soaring above me,
and a magical turtle clasped in my hand,
and two yellow wings fluttering
on the proud shoulders of my ruffled
Cuban rumba dancer's
fancy dress. 
In my California kindergarten class,
the teacher scolds me: REAL TREES
DON'T LOOK LIKE THAT. 
It's the moment
when I first
begin to learn
that teachers
can be wrong. 
They have never seen
the dancing plants
of Cuba.
 


^^EOP^^

but for the askance in her
but for the biding in abeyance of her
but for the clairvoyance that came to her like a grandmother
but for the expanse of love in her the lark in the clear air
but for the auld acquaintedness with violence in her


^^EOP^^




Homage to Morton Feldman  
“Before the oracle, with the flowers”
—1 Kings 7:49



1 
Here in the gloaming,
a wormwood haze — 
the “m” on its head,
a “w,” amazed
at what the
drink itself does: 
Vermouth,
god bless you — th.   2 
What really matters now is begonia,
he thought, distracted while reading — 
their amber anther and bone-white petals
missing from a jade pot
by the door — not a theory of metaphor.   3 
In this corner, sweet alyssum.
And beside it fragrant jessamine. 
Almost rhyming scents in the air — 
a syntax weaving their there, there.   4 
Erodium holds
an eye in the pink
looping the white of
its tendering cup.   5 
The blue moon opens all
      too quickly and floats
      its head-
                     y fragrance over
                               the path
                  before us: 
And so we slit
its throat, like a florist.   6 
These hearts-on-strings
     of the tenderest green
things that rise
from dirt,
then fall
                  toward the floor,
                                  hang
                            in
               the air
         like —  
              hearts-
on-strings of the tenderest
green things — 
     they rise from dirt
then fall toward
           the floor,
    hanging in
                the air like —  
                                 these
hearts-on-strings of the
tenderest green things,
                                       rising
from dirt then falling
toward the floor,
             hanging
      in the air like   7 
Moss-rose, purslane, portulaca
           petals feeling
     for the sun’s
light or is it
only warmth
or both 
     (they need
to open) 
an amethyst
           almost
see-through
shift   8 
Bou-
          gainvillea
lifts the sinking
spirit back
           up and nearly
into a buoyancy — 
      its papery
pink bracts
proving with
their tease
     of a rustle and glow
through the window —  
there is a breeze.   9 
Epistle-like chicory
blue beyond
the bars of these
    beds suspended
                  in air,
(what doesn’t dangle?)
elsewhere, gives
way to plugged in,
pez-
             purply thyme,
against a golden
(halo’s) thistle.   10 
What’s a wandering
Jew to you
two, who often do
wonder about
that moving about?
Its purple stalk
torn-off and stuck
elsewhere in
the ground takes root
and soon shoots
forth a bluish
star with powder
on its pistil.
Such is the power
of that Jew,
wherever it goes
(unlike the rose),
to make itself new.


^^EOP^^




Think Beyoncé’s “Lemonade”



Belle as beast
Eel as style 
Bats testy
Best lastly 
Bluely astute — 
as bull
as beetle
as Bey
as butte 
Beauty as lute
   thus beauty as lush 
Late lethal
Lust salty 
She’ll eye
She’ll tally 
Yes stately yet stealth
Yes steely yet sly 
Hey lathe — 
   [she taut] 
Hey sleuth — 
   [she tale] 
He heel
He that 
She bluesy
She ballsy 
She byte
She shall


^^EOP^^

While the tennis ball went back and forth in time A girl was burning. While the tonic took its greeny Acid lime, a girl was burning. While the ruby sun fell
From a cloud’s bent claws and Wimbledon was won And lost, we sprawled along the shore in chairs, We breathed the azure airs alongside
A girl with the thinnest arms all scarred and scored With marks she’d made herself — She sat with us in flames
That not all saw or saw but couldn’t say at risk Of seeming impolite. And later we’d all think Of the monk who’d doused himself with gas,
Lit a match, then sat unmoving and alert amid Devouring light. She didn’t speak. She touched No aspect of our silly selves.
I was the awkward guest everybody hardly knew. She was an almost ghost her mother saw Erasing the edges of herself each day
Smudging the lines like charcoal while her parents Redrew her secretly into being over and Again each night and dawn and sleepless
All years long. Having seen that mother’s love, I testify: It was ocean endless. One drop could’ve Brought to life the deadest Christ, and she
Emptied herself into that blazing child with all her might And stared a hundred million miles into The girl’s slender, dwindling shape.
Her father was the devoted king of helicopter pad And putting green. His baby burned as we All watched in disbelief.
I was the facile friend of friends insisting on a hug Who hadn’t been along for years of doctors, wards, And protocols. I forced her sadness close. I said
C’mon let’s hug it out. Her arms were white Birch twigs that scissored stiffly at my neck till she Slid on. That night we watched
Some fireworks on the dewy lawn for it was Independence Day. Soon after, she was gone. She was the flaming tower we all dared  To jump from. So she burned.


^^EOP^^

the voyage of st. brendan  
Books were Brendan’s love. At number one, Amazing Tales, a vast compendium.
Within, he found the Mathematic Salmon,
the Manticore, the breath-defying Dragon. 
The dog-head folks, called Cynocephali,
a godless bunch who play the banjolele.
The Arctic tribes who worship tiger seals,
their ice-hickle cities on wagon wheels. 
The whale  Jasconius, its mountain-back
all porcupined with oak, and elm, and ash.
And Inexpressible Isle, its ruined fort
with butterfly judges, Heart’s Grief Court. 
In time, this diet of ripe and rum detail
weighed on Brendan: he sickened, grew pale.
He craved, instead, a simple common sense
in keeping with his Rule of abstinence. 
“These things,” he cried, “are figments, folderols.
The truth is here, at hand: a linnet’s carols,
Kerry mountains, Christ upon his hook.”
And Brendan made a fire, and burnt his book.


^^EOP^^

From the unfathomed, farthest away from the light, from the sea’s
iron guardedness they come —  
pin-eyed, with flesh like tree bark. Their jaws are gorgeously spiked,
ragged with toothpick teeth, goon teeth, prison-bar teeth. 
O anglerfish, vampire fish, oarfish, goonch. A strange fish holds himself
upright and fast to the park railings. He is white knuckled. 
His eyes focus upwards as if counting or reciting, tugging at the brain’s
stubborn pinions. When you ask if there’s somewhere 
he needs to get to, he only sets his jaw harder. You both know that if he
acknowledges you, he’ll fall. Every one of your dreams 
is about the president, however tangentially. Each morning,  pre-waking,
mucid insects seem to attach themselves 
to your collarbone and gnaw in at the marrow. What if we could all say
whatever came first to mind, whenever we wanted to? No 
perusal. Scullion! Arse-wipe! Warp-faced pignut! Invincible as a body
that’s snug in the womb. What if we could all get 
whatever we wanted, whenever — as in the fairy tale? On the beach
at Marazion the surf is spangled with mackerel scales. 
The sands heave with stranded bodies, underwater silver bullets, drying
and curling up in the winter light, so close to home.


^^EOP^^

the voyage of st. brendan  
A cry of “Land!” A cliff face, iron ore red,
a monastery perched on top, gold-gilded.
The crew cast anchor, doggy-swam ashore
and surfed the scree slopes in buoyant uproar. 
The summit gained, they gasped: seven monks
advanced in welcome, cooing like rock doves.
The ground was fire-grate ash, entirely barren;
reading looks, the eldest spoke to Brendan: 
“We drink the dew. Our food arrives by raven,
one loaf one fish, our drop, our daily ration,
the bird so clockwork and plain bountiful.
Rest here, brothers. Come, observe our ritual.” 
The monks performed a wordless parable:
seven stones in a fruit picker’s pail,
bird-skin robes. Cried Brendan: “Holy fathers,
bless you — these are quality palavers.” 
The crew half-slept, that night, in golden cells,
their dreams hatchlings, their nerves eggshells.
Before the raven-dawn they fled in haste,
fearing their hosts’ hunger, and their faith.


^^EOP^^

Down in the basement, jacked on Kimbo, I’m screwdriving chunks of OxiClean into the washer. 
Jane: Collage is tattered backdrop, not worth the Time nor Money.

^^EOP^^

along the street the outcast pauses
his earring makes him special
a useless worker of the disgraceful
he’s stood at the crossroads of  years
the traffic light contains three colors
but none give him permission to cross 
I live OK and work at present
as word processor (from the root “cess”)
and in the process wander
or hold court with whacked youngsters
you just can’t get used to death
you drain your life toiling for some treasure
you’ll die like a darling you won’t protest
and out of decorum pretend to see the light 
die just like the rest of us
and to your relatives’ delight
agonizing confess you know
where to find the gold
 
Translated from the Russian


^^EOP^^

I believed death was a ﬂat plain spectacular endlessly 
Can you distort my voice when I say this? 
My scared ghost peeling off me 
Distortion, she says, as if she has just made it up 
And then she is quoting a line from a poem 
Or is it a whole poem, I wish I could remember 
My voice opens and calls you in 
I don’t know if you can hear me 
I said, I carry inside me the trace of a threat that I cannot discharge 
I said, I want to ask you things you can’t ask a person who doesn’t exist 
She said, Why can’t you ask them 
If we can’t have everything what is the closest amount to everything we can have? 
She said, Why can’t you have everything 
Well, you know, when you’re looking for a person, sometimes they appear 
And a light goes on and off in the opposite window, twice 
Yes, you say, that was a sign 
Strange love for the living, strange love for the dead 
Listen. I don’t know who you are but you remind me of — 
I wish you would put some kind of distortion on my voice, I tell her 
So people don’t know it’s me 
They know what they know, she said 
I told a story about my shame 
It got cold when the air touched it 
Then it got hot, throbbed, wept, attracted fragments with which it eventually glittered 
Till I couldn’t stop looking at it 
Exactly, she says 
And then she is quoting a line from a poem, I don’t know which one 
In my dream she reached out to touch me as if to say, It’s all right 
How I began to believe in something 
Are you there? 
The wind called to the trees 
And then it happened 
And they said, How do you feel? 
And I said, Like a fountain  Night falls from my neck like silver arrows 
Very gently

^^EOP^^

                    
                    
                    What can I do but make of the eyes of others
my own eyes, but make of the world a ghazal
whose radif is a haunting of me, me, me?

Somewhere there are fingers still whole
to tell the story of the empire that devours fingers.
Somewhere there is a city where even larvae

cannot clean the wounds of the living
and cannot eat on the countless dead
who are made to die tomorrow and tomorrow.

Carrion beetles and boot bottoms grind corpses
powder-soft to feed the small-mouthed gods
of gardens and wind. Roses made to toss their silk

to earth like immolated gowns, hills
spewing ribbons of charred air from cities
occupied by artillery and pilfered grain, limbs

blown from their bodies and made into an alphabet
that builds this fool song, even now, presented
before you as false curative, as vacant kiss — even

what is lost in the fabrication of strangers needs naught
from strangers. Even somewhere stings with stillness,
stings with a home not surrendered but a given.

•

But I have not been with my feet on the earth
there where bullets make use of skin like flags
make use of the land. My thinking is as skeletal

as the bombed-out schools and houses
untelevised. What do I know of occupation
but my own colonized thinking to shake

free from. While my days themselves tremble
from time and shake off place to feel falsely
placeless, a hollow empathy as if its soft chisel

could make of this wall — my ignorance mighty
before me upon which drawn figures alight
against the stone — my own; what is mine is

the wall my votes and non-votes, my purchases
wrapped in unthought have built and stretched,
undead gray. There are no secrets in debris.

I have a home I hate, its steel and lights
red and blue upon me. Home itself a mist
through which I pass and barely notice.

Home, to assume you are home is to assume
I am welcome in you — to what degree let the wounds
say so — and can come and go as I please.

The television tells me Over there, and one must point
with a fully extended arm to show how far from,
how unlike here there really is. Over there

where they blow each other up over land and God.
And it feels good to stretch as if from waking — 
this silence could be called a kind of sleep — and think

beyond, where I am not and where those who are
are not — wall upon which drawings of fists
strike skyward and faces of activists stare into me

from my Google search. Turnstiles separate
home from home. Barbed wire catches clouds
in its coil saws. What do I know of injustice

but having a home throughout which bullets,
ballots, and brutality trifecta against
people who were here before here was here

and people were brought here to change
the landscape of humanity? That word has rolling hills
and towering walls. To hammer against it not to get

to the other side — believe nothing is there — 
but to make obsolete side — know there is nothing.
I know this: my metaphors have small arms,

my wallet has made monstrous my reflection,
I have done terrible things by being alive.
I have built a wonder of terror with my life.

•
 




[Image of an eight-meter-tall wall, constructed by connected prefabrications. Interspersed among them are surveillances (I’ll make them pay). What is closed opens then settles. Spill: a scream, what makes it. On the wall a body leans, which is a caption: “This is not prayer.” (Which side are you on?) Here where there is no here, endurance measured by a field’s disruption and around it what makes possible a furthering (to settle this in court or to settle in this courtyard). Argument: this thinking is real because it has been made touchable if touch is the mutual rejection of objects from entering into the other (let’s settle this once and for all) who’s going to pay for what reaches toward and fails at heaven? To settle the debt, settle in silence. If it is not silent (this roaring (is it fire / stone / a pen lifting (ban no ban no b — ) or falling?) is it home?) make it so.]

•

Between his war with self and the war
in a sand-sealed country neither of us could spell,
juvie took from R what little childhood

Chicago hadn’t taken. Between bloody showers
and rushed meals, him forced by bigger boys
until pain became expectation and expectation

pleasure. A shortened sentence meant fighting
for a country against people for whom R held
no hatred while hating the ones he fought for.

There is venom in coercion misnamed loyalty.
Boys and bloody water in his head when he left
to fight in heat and camo. Then in the barrack’s

shower, three soldiers raped R. Sand is the Plaza
of Pardon. Wind draws its name across the grains
and leaves the grains with the name it gave.

Who would I be after so many tried to live
in me forcibly? R in the desert, our Skype
lost connection when an explosion blew out

what little service he had. Oh shit,
we been hit. Then blackout silence
and my pulse explicit. Let us rejoice in this:

war is a love song that makes your body dangerous
to others, that makes you unlivable. You become more
private. You are always early to yourself.

When I saw him again, marijuana discharged him
dishonorably and the men inside him shooting guns
and shooting cum went with him. This is one veteran’s

legacy, one man I know and have lost to distance,
my own pulling me from everything I’m meant to
hold close. What do I know of exile but self-imposed

self-removal. When R kissed my forehead goodbye
the first time I felt citizenly, patriotic, my white
handkerchief au revoir-ing a friend from my mind

who returned with sand hissing down his pant legs.
A hero is an hourglass. For what
does his countdown drop its grains, skull to heel?

•

One night, words came, swift
as if prayed for, showing
myself to me to correct myself:

Grief unhides beneath bombed mosques
while the sky blows into pale blue absence
dust and vaporized skin.

Grief and sky, unrequited lovers. Whose hurt
could hold the other’s? Grief knows the passage
of the worm and the temperatures of dirt.

Sky knows the neon of kite sail and tail.
Fifteen thousand names written in the air
by ribbon, rhombi billowed into shields,

glide into the Guinness Book of Records, memories
passed page to page across oceans and treaties
in ink out-blacking smoke. Waves leave soft creases

on the Gaza Strip and know airborne diamonds
by the shadows of their measured shapes
tethered like falcons to a child’s quick hands ...

How to mistake American arrogance for love,
to think kites could humanize the already-human
and hide the anti-human from its history.

Why cloak our custom of cloaking? To make
palatable the blade we turn on ourselves we turn it
on others. In good light the metal will give

us back to ourselves. Does the wolf know
it has a reflection? Ask the water if it shows
to us its beast self or has one given to it.

•
 




[Image of an eight-meter-tall wall, over which is painted “Is you coming or going or is I?” A ray of light ballistic through the form is both answer and rejection of an answer’s possibility.]

•

Tragedy disturbs tragedy.
There can never be just one
way to see the end to ourselves.

The Mediterranean has endless room
where capsized boats of hundreds bloomed
once with refugees. Water can’t be trusted.

The wind with its countless hands hasting
water into waves can’t be seen so can’t be
trusted even though we feel it, even when we

know along its unseen force bobs curt hymns
from the dead to the living. We don’t hear them
rising from the salt like fins. We hear bombs

and think Each storm carries the broken cries
of a broken nation in its contortion. Alibi
for the living is the land: it’s the earth

itself that refuses the dead a home in burr
or field, in the stone plateaus or tableaux
of scree from a city of wild boars and roads

that lead to a burning garden, a gutted church,
a school uniform hemmed by soldiers, a birch
limned with blood and pointing dually

west to a row of houses roofless but for crows and east
to a rifle hung above a threshold like a saint.
Something’s always watching, well-aimed

and unkind, empty and on fire or just-
finished burning. And the water will rust
the skin, will extinguish the fire and the flesh.

Baptism is what the living do. The rest
are left to idols of fish and worm, are left
with the living’s pens and books bereft

and intricate as mausolea woven from husks
of stories the dead cannot tell. They brux
in our renditions as we cull their truth for our song.

•

The wilderness within us creeps closer
to the surface of thought and burial.
We drag ourselves from the selves

that laid bear traps that trapped us into our own
dragging, one leg limp behind like a memory
pain brings forward. Low grass collects

pockets of our blood as if any gloss
could reduce droughts in the smallest needs.
If we make eye contact with the most beleaguered

of us, we pray the remains of god would shower
spears to smite clean such embarrassment. We are not
neighbors, just near. We are failures of nature

and the stars burn down through trees no light
we can trust. Because we were shrewd with conviction
the pads of our right hands’ digits have singed

into them one letter each to spell faith. What we touch
with that hand will fell our enemies
who are ourselves. We draw a maze with our blood,

follow paths drawn from the cruelties sculpted
into another’s body. I am losted by a child’s missing eye,
dead-ended by a family encrusted with shrapnel.

If I follow my own disaster more closely,
if I allow buzzards spiraling above prophecy
enough to reveal time as caught in the loop

of their pinions, if I remove my shirt
from my bloodied torso and twist
from it my own oil, if in my pocket

I find the final ballot before the mine
was tripped in god’s patience, if I see my vote
had predicted the immolation of seasons

and the beheading of goats sacrificed to rain
that washed away no blood and emulsified
sickness into the oceans and seas, if pain rises

from the mouths of the dead in the shape
the dead took when alive, if all this time
we’ve been building tombs and calling them home —

•
 




[Image of an eight-meter-tall wall bearing a hole in its center, or a 1.7272-meter-tall wall, which is me, bearing a hole in my center. I am the wall and the hole is what makes me better. I want to be better.]

•

Hajjar, does a body on its back act as the body’s own
grief? Is a body downed the mind’s shadow? If we must love
our souls, does that mean we must love what leaves?
                

^^EOP^^

Berkeley psychologists told Harold
his anger was justified. What parents
let their child go for a midnight walk
under no moon? I couldn’t have
been more than four

^^EOP^^

I really do wish I did. Because if I loved
lawnmowers I could go 
to the lawnmower museum I just heard
about on the radio in a piece 
about small museums.
It’s in Southport apparently —  
a seaside town “fringed to the north by
the Ribble Estuary,” according to Wikipedia. 
It would be quite a trip to go up there,
and I’d almost certainly 
have to stay the night. I think I might stay
in the Prince of Wales Hotel, which looks 
conveniently situated for the station
and the museum too. I can hardly bear 
to think how much I’d be looking forward
to making that trip if I loved lawnmowers. 
On the radio they said they have all sorts
of models from Victorian ones all the way 
through to a state-of-the-art robot one
that’s powered by solar energy. 
If I was planning the visit I’d probably
have a bit of a virtual walk-round 
on Street View, and in fact I’ve just done
exactly that in an effort to capture 
the feeling I’d have if I was actually
anticipating a trip to the lawnmower museum. 
Exploring the area I discovered
that Southport looks very much like 
Weston-super-Mare, where, as it happens,
I stayed in a halfway house many 
years ago after doing a stint in rehab.
Now crack cocaine — that I loved.


^^EOP^^

It’s going to hurt
You know this
So you drink tea in the morning instead
of an entire carafe of coffee 
Like a vampire, your skin cells burn
on their first sip of the sun
The ringing taste of green tea or whatever
the fuck kind of tea this is 
Describe to me in detail this so-called purification ritual
I can’t
I’ve never done it before
My cells are exploding into a wasting lament
This is the last time you will ever write
yourself through this
On the other side of this swamp of dark water, a plane will crash
The lone survivor will speak on the radio
as you drive down Highway 27 
In the middle of Florida in the middle of the night after you
step off the plane you see the swamps morph
into the mountains of your childhood
They raise their heads like giants
The Sierras stare; do not go there 
“Brave soul,” says the radio
“Beauty,” says the radio
“It had to be like this,” says the radio
“Difficult,” says the radio
“Now you’re 44 years old?” says the radio
“That’s right. 44 years old,” says the radio 
Continue to drive through hornets and testicular small towns
Some flags raised
Some flags down
The god of the underworld has let you go from his hand
into the empire Floridian
He says you have a pure heart
so pure he cannot destroy it
Some people look pure but they are not 
He says he cannot see you destroy yourself so he has let you go
and he will protect you with his anger and melancholy 
It will hurt
You know this 
All the substances have got to go
Substances don’t flow from your body
They leave with the violence
of an exorcism
Spicer says once a ghost leaves your body
it never returns 
“Horrendous,” your sister texts
“I’ve been vomiting all night,” she texts
“Maybe it will be a Christmas baby,” you say
Something with no substance surrounds you


^^EOP^^

My mother has taken me to Paddington Station.
We are inside a whale. 
My father sleeps all day.
When he wakes the cloisters come for him. 
My sister can sit on her hair. At night, a man sits on her bed.
Her bed is covered in oak leaves. 
The sleeves of my mother’s kaftan trail in the dirt.
We keep forgetting it’s not her. 
The telephone bursts from the wall. The wires are a joke.
We get it.


^^EOP^^

He hardly spoke any words
only two — 
or you could call it one 
the last thing
he said
was bye-bye 
ﬂight-feathers
veined and hairlike
with interlocking barbules 
of  sound
the bye-bye trapped
a breath of air 
the two linked words
drifted out
on a calm lake 
that lay there
with a single purpose — 
to receive ﬁnal words 
and allow them
to drift on its surface
out and further out 
on the lake of  thought
and composure
encircled by mountains 
the simple phrase
soared upwards
to the highest peak 
where it would be planted
like a ﬂag
would eventually be enshrined 
each identical word carefully
balanced either side
of the invisible join —  
like baby talk
he put equal emphasis
on each word 
his face was pinched
and his bird beak
very prominent 
there have never been
two joined words
with so much space around them 
pack up all my cares and woes
light the light
I’ll arrive late tonight 
blackbird     bye bye 
bye


^^EOP^^




For Yogita and Anish 



                    
                    “Ah neva seen this before in all ma years.”
Testify, Sis. How we grew accustomed,
Spoiled almost, by decorum, now try
Mosquito larvae cultivating at speed
In standing bodies of water. Pigeons
Flock rooftops, twist, launch, shout
As one, spin sky, turn skulls porous.

Car repair shop drills sing industry.
Tires feel out parking, meters freed.
First horn blare triggers this chorus.
Step up pistons, fire motor mouths,
Say our only worry is our worst fears
Come true. Mosquito straw proboscis
Drinks from my arm, bam! Adios asterisk.

•

But, really, am I eyeballing an armored truck?
Says one dung beetle to half earthworm,
Who replies, as Gloucester, I see it feelingly.

Who gave those uniforms permission to storm
School car parks, automatics drawn? Finches ask
Robins, who, channeling Auden, whistle — 

Bang! WTF!

Bang, bang, Lulu,
Lulu gone ...    

The calypso worked its juju
On my digital radio.

Flags at half-mast for this Union.
Taps on trumpets dawn till dusk.
Guides, Scouts, look out for rainbows

Projected on a disused warehouse in LA County.
Clocks throughout the land tell one contiguous time.
Rain and shine stop dead in tracks on borderlines.

•

Cat asks me if dogs can ever be cool.
After two of my kind pin down one of his
On a front porch until chased off by our rulers.

I open my mouth to spit some piety about
Lions lying down with lambs but only bark
What my genes say I should, ears pulled back.

Do you remember Judas Iscariot? Thirty silver
Pieces and a certain last supper just for this.
A taser for every problem warns the bee

With an empty bonnet, sting for emphasis,
About why one plus one never makes two,
After voting from sea to oil-slicked sea.

Look at her, look at him, hold, kiss babies
In photo ops, all gaga, minus bathtub
Never mind water, in this national soap,

This wait for the next sentence whose weight
“Illegals” carry on shoulders they look over
Nonstop, even in sleep, one eye open,

Breath held when police cruise by,
Car backfire skin jump heartbeat skip,
Day in, day out, glory hallelujah, do I have

A witness as empire zips into bonfire.
For what? To dip wrists in fresh water
From an inverted fountain in a square.

•

Black lives matter but blue lives matter more. Duh.
Veins, blue, blood, plus or minus, B this or A that.
Epicurus, I find your coin staring up at me
From the bottom of my beer mug, too late
For Troy, for Trayvon. I need a flotation device,
A buoy, Woolf’s lighthouse and single room
Garvey’s Star Line to beam me up Scotty.

Where is yesteryear’s full moon that silvered
Towers and made a midnight lake of the city
Where lovers strolled, hand in hand, one black,
One white, with no mind for anyone and no two
Minds in their business? Gone the way of drones
Whose shadows crossed the moon without trace
On GPS to sow grief in the name of cod, liver, oil.

Spell it out or risk talk stuck in ecofriendly caves.
Black and blue, both, why can’t we, intoned,
Rodney (not Walter), get along? Because,
Because, because (fill in the dots) with your
Trotsky (or Brodsky) and your Marx (Groucho).
Laugh therapy narrows eyes, blocks ears,
Hurts jaws, ribs, merrily, merrily, cha-cha. Cha.

•

Eek-A-Mouse blasts my buds, as I read
The instruction manual, which says
One thing but leads to another
When I piece it together, finally.
It being the thing I refuse to name.

My nerves, porous as that strainer
I hold over a tilted pot full of spaghetti
In hot water. Pavarotti in the shower,
Malcolm before a cracked mirror,
Gaga at each news item competing

For part Fool. Ornate, abandoned nest
Left in place, in my suburban rafter,
Squirreled from without a note,
Unless feathers could ever be a sign
Of things to come, of what once was.

•

Face Beckett’s door, imperceptibly ajar.

His stage direction, for how things
Turn out here if this show goes on.

Sir Ian, why reserve your last check
For your flies, before you take the stage?

Because all eyes alight there first.

Mr. Spock, where is the logic in this?

I marvel at comics from my youth
In 4K, LED. Captain, put me ashore.

By which I mean at sea with sirens,
Ears unwaxed, sternum lashed to bow.

What is your name? Kunta. Whip.

Am I not a ... asked Sizwe in Fugard.

You are trans, on loan from genes,
Dust, waves, particles, here, today.

•

Go-go in la-la land whines craft for art’s saké.
See that chrysalis hanging like a mural.
Should it stop unfolding, hold back
Dues, suspend when wings peel gloves,
Snake free, take flight, remind the greed
In our chi, Che, cha, what turns without
Turning? If you must know, but first,

Shush, write milk in lemon juice on foolscap,
Read by passing over Bunsen. Mercurial
Chemists, we were all Curie. Cooked crack
Ready to pay any price, to find out if love
Could ever be a portion, all you would need,
To spin Mercator a tad faster on whiteout
Poles, match our heart, tap, rat-a-tat burst.

•

1.  Hummingbird feeder needs refill
2.  Peel sticker, off window, that says glass
3.  Buy T-shirt with directive, mind the gap
4.  Sip tea from mug, of civil rights dead
5.  Breathe in, sure, but really exhale
6.  Note how breeze lifts a whole branch
7.  Whose green skirt shows white undies

•

I mean certain legends about flight that grow up with right minds to help them come to terms with change that may be out of their control.

Lone branch ranges from a curved palm 90 feet over LA’s 1914 craftsman in historic Adams. How flayed branch cruises broadcasts a specific gravity geared to flight of the right kind, slow, bracing, reluctant, noncommittal, inevitable, and resigned to its fate.

Through double-glazing I hear, so I believe, that swoosh of storied capital decline, swish perhaps, almost a whistle, as you wish, much like us as kids with a clasped blade of grass held to our pursed lips for that didgeridoo that was elevator music to us atonal types.

But how can a branch sing if made to move on by wind and rain from where it began, and thought it would end, even if a philosophy spread among shoots of a final sail set for another dimension?

As word of government raids spread through town and university we forwarded emails, Instagrams, and stopped with neighbors in streets to exchange the latest.

Is this time for emergency measures or are we too blind to know what we can feel coming a mile away, where someone who knows someone we know stops for bread, milk, eggs and is grabbed, handcuffed, and carted off to detention? Imagine us as branches dislodged in a sea change helped by soft water. We cling, not to give up on all we know. What for? That fall, we must accept as fate.

•

Juggernaut ancestors shape-shift cumulus,
March across dull blue grass to bagpipes.

Change bandages on Grandmother.
Amputated right hand she says she feels

Rainy days in Georgetown as a firm handshake
That rattles all 27 phantom bones, makes her shiver.

Grandfather never averts his bifurcated lens
From his Golden Treasury, unless his hanky readies

To catch eyewater at the blurred sight of her.
In a time of airships, of toothpicks operated

Behind hand cover. Whoever you vote for,
(Runs the calypso) the government gets in,

Ting-a-ling-a-ling. Doan tek serious thing
Mek joke, bannoh. WTF. Twin towers got us

Here. Nah, Reagan. Nope, slavery. Try again.
Irony, that republic of deferred action.

Hummingbird smashes into that glass door,
My mother walks absently into it too.

I glance just in time, brake and catch a face
That I look through to my final destination.

•

K Street in South London? Now?
How? One morning at 6:30
I crossed Blackheath Hill.

On my paper round
Met a scrawny fox halfway
Uphill, down, not sure.

We paused, inhaled each
Other, fox-trotted away,
In a slight panic,

Me thinking tabloid
Headlines, rabid animal
Chases paper kid

On delivery route.
Follow as I buzz myself
Into a tower,

Board elevator, a man
In a suit exits,
With the merest nod.

Climb 8 floors, carry
That fox, and just as I plunge
The folded Mirror

Into letter box,
Door, ajar, flies open, wham!

A very pregnant
Woman, naked, swollen breasts
Blazing redhead, small

Burning bush at crotch,
Fills doorframe, scrambles my head.
She takes one moment

To compute I am
Not her partner, slams door, smack,
In my wide-eyed face.

That moment, as she
Processes me and I her,
Stretches out enough

For me to see her
Shoulder-length, red, flaming curls
And inverted red

Triangle tuft at her crotch,
Bright stretched skin at her
Distended navel,

An outie, as though
I crashed at high speed and could
Recall the lead up

Frame by stark frame for
Posterity, mine and hers,
Her child near its term.

The rest of my round
I peer left, right, near distance,
Round bends, for said fox.

I conjure woman,
Pregnant, framed by her threshold,
Here, now, with only

Me, you, these measures,
This emergency, all three,
To foster, connect all.

•

Lap up 70s Airy Hall, Guyana.
One road in and one road out,
One of everything village,
Caiman, donkey, peacock,
And mad expat Englishman
Footloose and fancy-free
Who we stone with red sand
That crumbles on contact
Grabbed from the roadside
That acts as giant bow,
Strung with two-story house,
Whose Greenheart frame,
Tensed, held all this time.
English pelted for saying,
Down his big burnt nose,
That he was sent here
To rule us half-clad children
That he in his better days
Seeing better times before
Guyana’s famous red rum
Got the better of him,
Helped sow high and low,
And everything between
Our town and country.

•

Maestro, we played shoots
Planted in one place
Sprouts in disorderly rows,
Up whole feet if you look away
For a spell, all loaded
In one hammock strung
Between rafters in a back room
Empty until harvest
Stuffed paddy from roof
To pillar to post.
Rice husk smell for days.
Rocking chair song and dance
On full moons, donkey-bray
At midday, peacock-scream
Various most afternoons.

•

Now help bring barefoot
Pale instep, cracked heel, stamping
Englishman back, not to curse,
Stone or ridicule, but to hear
How he would remedy this now
So out of sync with then.

•

Once more help us

•

Parse wheat from chaff,

•

Quantify this voting

•

Result that tests our gall.

•

Stepped-on alligator, Uncle

•

Takes for a log bridge

•

Until it lifts, shakes, yawns.

•

Velocity of legs cycling air,
Caiman, not alligator,
Lassoed between two poles,
Fetched back to the house,
Cut loose in a fenced field
For sport for that day,
Lost to me every day since.
I bring it back, steady
Its shine, against this time,

•

Where I am told one past
Counts most, all others
Must be put down to what
That alligator, jaws open,
Head reared, presents,
Ready to lash with tail,
Charge at anyone
Who takes it for a log.

•

X marks the spot where
Englishman walks in half
Circles, pumps his bent
Arms as if to fly, cackles
Like a peacock, only to get
The real thing started,
The two in a quarrel thrice
Removed from that magic
Flower duet from Lakmé
By Léo Delibes. Peacock,
Donkey, caiman, village fool,
Be my ally, bring it all,
Cow, moon, dish, spoon.

•

Yo-Yo Ma follows Eek
On democracy’s Shuffle Play.

•

Zebra asks me in Queen’s
English peppered with Esperanto
If he be black whiff white stripes
Or white wid black stripes.
I wake with this atonal pair
On the edge of my edginess:

“I do not care, I do not care,
If the Don has on underwear.”

“But don’t you think or worry some,
That his nudity is zero sum?”

“I cannot see for the life of me,
Why that should concern anybody.”

“I fret when all’s said and done,
We leave him be, he has his fun.”


^^EOP^^

What got done to me stains
through my hopes of passing 
as fully human — though my
“bad blood” won’t gloss that; 
to canter around its crimson
rosette would tart up a harm 
more my postwar bad luck
than a told shame’s mother. 
Still, the pose: Say yellow rose
go hard & plain to Amarillo

^^EOP^^

the darkest hour 
the stars arisen asinine 
tomb and I left opened to the altogether 
am I to live among men abandoned I may learn to love again 
adrift in Jerusalem 
am I upon strewn palm


^^EOP^^

In their proverbs, the Sumerians quoted Fox as saying — on having pissed into the sea — All the ocean is now my urine! Now, hang on there girl.
I want to get a handle on your homeopathic incontinent ways, because I think you may be onto something. Firstly, what kind of fox
are you that approaches the shore; no hen house to bother, no brambles to scoff? No line of emerald shit to booby-trap the garden with? 
Perhaps wherever we are, you are; so why not the beach? What promise did the salt ocean offer you, or appear to? Cured meat? Fish? After all,
once a month I know I reek gloriously of kelp — salt and iron and yeast —  an umami feast for the brave, or weak. Or were you worrying seabirds
up on the cliff — stopped in your tracks, unable to resist. A little splish. The wind threshing your water as it fell — yellow, scattered, one or two 
drops of which maybe reached. Or perhaps you were caught short, coy on the beach, and entered the surf for decorum’s sake. All over
the world, miles from the sea, girls caught between poor sanitary provision and a social imperative to be discreet ﬁnd themselves
in a dark place, their skirts about their waists. Maybe it was the king’s men that saw ﬁt to drive you into the sea. But clever, 
resourceful, you just thumbed your nose and learned to swim. Paddled to safer land, much like we once did. Your charcoal paws
doggedly turning the cold pages of the sea. Pausing now and then to pee, a comforting cloud of heat. And which child among us hasn’t
cast their blessing on the waves? Sent into the surf  by mothers, which of us hasn’t rightfully claimed the ocean as our own, or in turn been claimed?


^^EOP^^

Pandemic of lilies                          dreaming majesty
hovers like sweat & unwraps you & you
               are in love
                              it makes you bad,    bad
                                                            is your name
               is the desert
               is movement                                      long kiss
heavy gut            slow
                                         slow hands                 in your seeds


^^EOP^^

A new obsession. How to get out
of cold, metallic waters alive.
Every night for a week I dream
of my car ending up in a body
of water. If I’m not driving, someone
else is. Bob, the neighbor.
My new paranoia.
I Google how to escape a car
filling with water. I watch videos
on YouTube. I memorize the steps
of what to do if this happens. First,
you take your seat belt off. Late at night,
I read pages and pages on the internet.
What if the car lands
in the water flipped over?
Remember to stay calm.
If you panic, you will die.
News story about a woman who drives
her minivan into the ocean on purpose.
Horrified beachgoers run toward the water.
The two kids are strapped in the back seat.
One of the kids is screaming “No, mommy” —
What about the sunroof?
What if you land in the water
and your car has a sunroof?
My new car has a sunroof.
You have to let the car fill with water
so that pressure is equalized on both sides.
This is elementary physics.
If you don’t do this, it’s
impossible to open the doors.
This is the scary part.
You have to hold your breath.
None of the YouTube videos say anything
about what to do if you have
kids strapped in car seats in the car.
I look up what the dreams mean.
Water in dreams signifies turbulent emotions.
If you are in your car and there
is a flash flood, you should get out immediately.
Even six inches of water can sweep your car away.
Sweep it to where?
Maybe the forest? 
I get nervous driving by the Gulf of Mexico.
My friend Dyan got into an accident
there and she said that if the car had
flipped on the other side of the road,
her whole family would
have ended up in the water.
I don’t like water.
I don’t want to touch it.
It scares me.
I know all life was born of water.
Today the government proposed
to sell off all public lands.
That before anything existed
there were rocks and then water.
I know that water is beautiful and mysterious.
But why does it sweep people away?
I want to push down the rising seas.
I look at a map of cities that will be underwater by 2100, 2200 — 
Jacksonville, New Orleans, Amsterdam.
I want to push them down with my bare hands.


^^EOP^^

And slowly we’m sweethearts
atween the wet grass all river-licked,
lime dust in our hair
and both of us so frightened,
blind as moles. But wanting
something. Wanting.
We’m side-by-side on the grass,
me barefeet in the water,
bowing our heads, gentle
as osses at the water trough.
I can feel his shoulder ashiver
and it makes me bold, makes me jumpy,
so I hold out me ond
till he takes it and kisses the palm
like he’s eating sugar from it
and we’m off ...


^^EOP^^

my first drink was in my mother
my next, my bris. doctor spread red
wine across my lips. took my foreskin  • 
every time i drink     i lose something  • 
no one knows the origins of alcohol. tho surely an accident
before sacrament. agricultural apocrypha. enough grain stored up
for it to get weird in the cistern. rot gospel. god water  • 
brandy was used to treat everything
from colds to pneumonia
frostbite to snake bites 
tb patients were placed on ethanol drips
tonics & cough medicines
spooned into the crying mouths of children  • 
each friday in synagogue a prayer for red
at dinner, the cemetery, the kitchen
spirits  • 
how many times have i woke
strange in an unfamiliar bed?
my head neolithic  • 
my grandfather died with a bottle in one hand
& flowers in the other. he called his drink his medicine
he called his woman
    she locked the door  • 
i can only half blame alcohol for my overdose
the other half is my own hand
that poured the codeine    that lifted the red plastic again & again &  • 
i’m trying to understand pleasure     it comes back
in flashes    every jean button thumbed open to reveal
a different man     every slurred & furious permission  • 
i was sober a year before [          ] died  • 
every time i drink     i lose someone  • 
if you look close at the process of fermentation
you’ll see tiny animals destroying the living body
until it’s transformed into something more volatile  • 
the wino outside the liquor store
mistakes me for his son


^^EOP^^

And contemplate this: the heat-treated hairdos of next-door
neighbors, the roseate nosebleeds of fuckboys in hoodies;
your own face, rinsed in the mirror, the sweet green sweat
you’re riddled with in mornings, a rock pool reflection under
algaecidal light. You are going nowhere. This poem yokes
you, to the pain you are chronic and adipose with; to the desk,
to the chair, to ergonomic purgatory. And to the body, its
spasms and its rhapsodies, three-part harmonies, one-chord
wonders. You will never be whole. The voices. His voice,
broadcast on your remedial frequency, making its way
through a rubbishy dusk, the streetlamps beaming fizzy glow
like Lucozade. You will never be whole. Vomit o’clock
and the brain is Kraken, white and shaking. Open the window,
pry the chipboard from the window; fill your punctured eye
with stars. And contemplate this: Saturday night and the dirt
purrs with it; cars, litter bins, pit bull dogs. A girl with high
Yorick cheekbones drags a false nail down the scratchy
surface of a bri-nylon sleeplessness. A man rides ignorance
like a white horse, kicking mirrors from parked cars. You
have the itch under your skin. Insectile dysfunction. Lust,
with its own murky gravities. You will fail. You have not
made a friend of this city and you will fail. Cup your eyes
like coins. Addiction holds such simplicity. Check your
used-car contours in the broken glass. You are going
nowhere. They cannot nail you to a pronoun, hot mess
of cravings and behaviors, tainted frailty, old meat’s
rancid rainbow. Ugly. Contemplate. Consider: your
lilies, toiling like deaf ears, tearing the tired night a new
one, stirring a sulfate dust in your veins. Your eyes
are blue with pseudo-scientific toxicity, with chemical
expectancy, a dread that dries a smile like paint. Your
blood is on fire, full of bellicose adrenaline, nitrate
and neon; brighter, even, than the hoary fluorescence
of angels. It is so late. And you are pining the rhinestone
shine of a lost narcotism. Now trauma’s your ergotamine.
Trauma, your ergot, your argot of rye. Awful thought
that treads the brain’s rank breadth. Silence. Pray silence.
Pray the dark room away, the candles, the pious vibrations
of flame; the dim bulb with its gospel of moths, one
hundred pairs of gloved hands clasped to powder.
Marooned in your gooseflesh, one hand does not know
what the other is doing. It’s three a.m., the mind’s alive
like frostbite, a cold burn that blackens things. Your
graphite smile could shatter. Thoughts of him have
poisoned you, rust in the blood. You have not eaten
for days, you mottle, run your own hands over your
oxidizing thighs, watch the bruises ripen to a landmass,
a landmark, a brave new world, a here be dragons.
You listen to yourself, creaking like rope; your body, its
canned laughter repeating mean and low, throwing
out thought according to the malnourished algorithm
some devil has devised. You clutch and sway in a crêpe
air and you want-want-want what you’ll never have
again: sleep; his image breaking across your scrubbed
flesh like surf. Contemplate this: this is forever.
There is no movie montage where you’ll shop yourself
to transformation. You will never be whole. And grief
is not a line we walk to wellness; the tidy smirk
of therapy, the therapized, the girls licking flakes of gold-
leaf pastry from a Pret a Manger croissant, saying you
should take up yoga

^^EOP^^

I might not wash today. I might
let the weekend slide into gratifying
anarchy. I am supposed to be thankful,
this town is not among the true nightmare
portions of the world. A roof over my head
and quite sufficient shine on the silver,
thanks. I might, though. Haven’t you seen it?
Your city pokes a crafty fang at a ﬂight path.
It’s my city too, I suppose. You think you
are in control. Idiot! To name is to own, not
to know. And now we are so used to blood we
miss the silly crimson pity of it. I dream of
hardmen, the torturer’s tweezers; of scholars
supplanting their teeth in basement gardens.
It’s there, but you miss it. I don’t miss
a thing. It’s always there, the aura before
a seizure, inside my expendable circuitry,
deeper than dog years down, always, even
always. I dream of the made face coming
apart in my hands like wet bread. I might not
dress today. I might suck sauce from the bottle.
Here’s mud in your gloria mundi, and a blue
blowtorch to your extremities, dear. How do
you feel about that? Or the massive enigma
of love? Does anything shock you? I
am supposed to be grateful, the shirt on
my back and quite enough coal in the cellar,
thanks. But a grand mal growls at the back
of the mind, and the back of the mind is
a bottle bank, love. We come and go, stooped
in their palisades. The rich are always with us,
their hexentanz and agonies. Here’s Kate, we all
love Kate, oblivious, bombshell, and didn’t
she used to be us? Not me. Your city, its nicotine
ﬁngers, windows lit, yellow and sickly. Here’s
where we crouch our snouts to the wall. I might
not leave the house today. Haven’t you seen
what’s out there? Their vaunting faith; the awful
punitive spring. I dream of muti and suitcases;
grown men stabbed in their Camden hamlets, eyes
without faces, world without end. It’s there, still
there, but you do not see it. I see everything. I see
it all. And the billy-born-drunks in the house next
door are shouting again. Inadmissible ﬁgments
slurred through the wall.


^^EOP^^

After my father unhooded it, lugged it down
the steep path to the boat and clamped it on,
drew back the cord again and again like a pitch
about to be thrown, grimacing with each
whining refusal, and muttered, finally said She doesn't want to start, after it always did,
and we shoved away from the pier, rowed out of the dense
tangle of weeds and lily pads, not once
did our resting oars uncross their feet,
not even as we entered the shallow inlet
between our lake and the next, just purring through
the reeds in that narrow passage, over the billow
of silt, the rocks, never getting stuck before
we flew through the waves, his hand guiding the tiller.


^^EOP^^

I have no idea what happens when I turn my back.
I sleep through everything.
It is quite stupid how I never open my eyes. 
The carpet is luscious. The blossom at the window is spectacular.
I try to keep them apart.
There are more grown-ups than I know what to do with.
I have a different Darling for each one. I inﬂect it. 
I miss everything — the haunted wardrobe, the bald landlady,
the slurring woman crashing up and down the stairs, Look after her, Look after her, Pierrot with his little spoon.


^^EOP^^

How well she has worn the wooden evangelist of the mind
I wrought in her. 
He is fraught as Angel Clare
With honesty, with his latchet
Worthy of her. 
When I am gone she will put him on the ﬁre
As if he’d condemned her.


^^EOP^^

Little tin key
lost somewhere in my memory, returned to me in a dream. 
Like the blue-burning match blowing over the surface of
some drunk girl’s sweet, flaming party drink. Happy
birthday.

^^EOP^^

Anoint your dead
poems. 
Put them in a little boat called
She Who Must Be Obeyed — 
our little joke. 
Invite the Molotovs for cocktails on deck.
Tell them to wear all their gold.


^^EOP^^

feygele is yiddish for the way i walk into a room.
feygele, the anglicized spelling of angel
fallen into the dark earthen pits of fashion.
feygele from the german vögelein meaning “little bird.”
little bird, where do you flame from?
where do you bird from little german flame?
little singlet split for entry. little finger slipped
into the mouth staring hard across the bare wet bar.
little bear in his arrogant leather harness, his broad
american faith. carry me with you across the fleshless
threshold how an old woman carries her language
across an ocean so vast, so many fathoms deep
one might imagine all life springing from the wet
slit of its shoreline. sure i’ve memorized every word
for faggot & nearly all their origins are plural & bound
together with twine. little string corset wrapped
around my brothers’ thighs. little horses wild
at the bit to be ridden. little films where the animals
are let out but only at night. sure i’ve eaten directly
from the hand of a man who taught me the simplest
words, gestures of thirst & begging. sure i was hatched
into a world that expected me to fly straight into power-
lines. but see how hideous hearse-shined my feathers,
see my wings spread like a dead book of legs,
see my brutal beak a seed-thief in the club light.
my first name was flame & i drew moths & mouths alike.
feygele as in son of the first preacher with gills. as in
the flood that began & refused to quench. as in when
i was a child i killed a bird, sparrow i think, with my bare
hands so it wouldn’t go on suffering — it was sick.
give me your hands, hold my skull between them
how you’d hold a bag writhing with birds, a pillowcase
thick with lights, two grown boys in gowns howling,
a cold mud village consumed by flames, a cage door
opening, a blade, a blade, ablaze.


^^EOP^^

When you think about it, mostly, a cage is air — 
so what is there
to be afraid of?
A cage of air. Baudelaire said
Poe thought America was one giant cage.
To the poet, a nation is one big cage?
And isn’t the nation mostly filled with air?
Try to put a cage around your dream.
The cage escapes the dream.
I see it streak and stream.


^^EOP^^

The night Max wore his wolf suit
made him infamous, bred the child star
never sent to bed. Middle school,
Max started drinking. Not in my house,
his mother begged, No, no, no, wild thing.
Max reminded her who bought
this condo, who paid for her meds.
Freshman year, Max raved. Roared
his terrible roar, rolled, and almost
wound up in a warehouse dead.
Where, oh where, do the wild things
go? To rehab in high school.
To college on residual book sales.
Max kept his head down. Laughed
at drunken frat boys. Bro, let the wild
rumpus start.

^^EOP^^

no poem here


^^EOP^^




I am the holy being of my mother's prayer and my father's song
                                                      —Norman Patrick Brown, Dineh Poet and Speaker



                    
                    1. SET CONFLICT RESOLUTION GROUND RULES:

Recognize whose lands these are on which we stand.
Ask the deer, turtle, and the crane.
Make sure the spirits of these lands are respected and treated with goodwill.
The land is a being who remembers everything.
You will have to answer to your children, and their children, and theirs—
The red shimmer of remembering will compel you up the night to walk the perimeter of truth for understanding.
As I brushed my hair over the hotel sink to get ready I heard:
By listening we will understand who we are in this holy realm of words.
Do not parade, pleased with yourself.
You must speak in the language of justice.


2. USE EFFECTIVE COMMUNICATION SKILLS THAT DISPLAY AND ENHANCE MUTUAL TRUST AND RESPECT:

If you sign this paper we will become brothers. We will no longer fight. We will give you this land and these waters "as long as the grass shall grow and the rivers run."

The lands and waters they gave us did not belong to them to give. Under false pretenses we signed. After drugging by drink, we signed. With a mass of gunpower pointed at us, we signed. With a flotilla of war ships at our shores, we signed. We are still signing. We have found no peace in this act of signing.

A casino was raised up over the gravesite of our ancestors. Our own distant cousins pulled up the bones of grandparents, parents, and grandchildren from their last sleeping place. They had forgotten how to be human beings. Restless winds emerged from the earth when the graves were open and the winds went looking for justice.

If you raise this white flag of peace, we will honor it.

At Sand Creek several hundred women, children, and men were slaughtered in an unspeakable massacre, after a white flag was raised. The American soldiers trampled the white flag in the blood of the peacemakers.

There is a suicide epidemic among native children. It is triple the rate of the rest of America. "It feels like wartime," said a child welfare worker in South Dakota.

If you send your children to our schools we will train them to get along in this changing world. We will educate them.

We had no choice. They took our children. Some ran away and froze to death. If they were found they were dragged back to the school and punished. They cut their hair, took away their language, until they became as strangers to themselves even as they became strangers to us.

If you sign this paper we will become brothers. We will no longer fight. We will give you this land and these waters in exchange "as long as the grass shall grow and the rivers run."

Put your hand on this bible, this blade, this pen, this oil derrick, this gun and you will gain trust and respect with us. Now we can speak together as one.

We say, put down your papers, your tools of coercion, your false promises, your posture of superiority and sit with us before the fire. We will share food, songs, and stories. We will gather beneath starlight and dance, and rise together at sunrise.

The sun rose over the Potomac this morning, over the city surrounding the white house.
It blazed scarlet, a fire opening truth.
White House, or Chogo Hvtke, means the house of the peacekeeper, the keepers of justice.
We have crossed this river to speak to the white leader for peace many times
Since these settlers first arrived in our territory and made this their place of governance.
These streets are our old trails, curved to fit around trees.
 

3. GIVE CONSTRUCTIVE FEEDBACK:

We speak together with this trade language of English. This trade language enables us to speak across many language boundaries. These languages have given us the poets:

Ortiz, Silko, Momaday, Alexie, Diaz, Bird, Woody, Kane, Bitsui, Long Soldier, White, Erdrich, Tapahonso, Howe, Louis, Brings Plenty, okpik, Hill, Wood, Maracle, Cisneros, Trask, Hogan, Dunn, Welch, Gould...

The 1957 Chevy is unbeatable in style. My broken-down one-eyed Ford will have to do. It holds everyone: Grandma and grandpa, aunties and uncles, the children and the babies, and all my boyfriends. That's what she said, anyway, as she drove off for the Forty-Nine with all of us in that shimmying wreck.

This would be no place to be without blues, jazz—Thank you/mvto to the Africans, the Europeans sitting in, especially Adolphe Sax with his saxophones... Don't forget that at the center is the Mvskoke ceremonial circles. We know how to swing. We keep the heartbeat of the earth in our stomp dance feet.

You might try dancing theory with a bustle, or a jingle dress, or with turtles strapped around your legs. You might try wearing colonization like a heavy gold chain around a pimp's neck.


4. REDUCE DEFENSIVENESS AND BREAK THE DEFENSIVENESS CHAIN:

I could hear the light beings as they entered every cell. Every cell is a house of the god of light, they said. I could hear the spirits who love us stomp dancing. They were dancing as if they were here, and then another level of here, and then another, until the whole earth and sky was dancing.

We are here dancing, they said. There was no there.

There was no  "I"  or "you."

There was us; there was "we."

There we were as if we were the music.

You cannot legislate music to lockstep nor can you legislate the spirit of the music to stop at political boundaries—

—Or poetry, or art, or anything that is of value or matters in this world, and the next worlds.

This is about getting to know each other.

We will wind up back at the blues standing on the edge of the flatted fifth about to jump into a fierce understanding together.


5. ELIMINATE NEGATIVE ATTITUDES DURING CONFLICT:

A panther poised in the cypress tree about to jump is a panther poised in a cypress tree about to jump.

The panther is a poem of fire green eyes and a heart charged by four winds of four directions.

The panther hears everything in the dark: the unspoken tears of a few hundred human years, storms that will break what has broken his world, a bluebird swaying on a branch a few miles away.

He hears the death song of his approaching prey:

I will always love you, sunrise.
I belong to the black cat with fire green eyes.
There, in the cypress tree near the morning star.


6. AND, USE WHAT YOU LEARN TO RESOLVE YOUR OWN CONFLICTS AND TO MEDIATE OTHERS' CONFLICTS:

When we made it back home, back over those curved roads
that wind through the city of peace, we stopped at the
doorway of dusk as it opened to our homelands.
We gave thanks for the story, for all parts of the story
because it was by the light of those challenges we knew
ourselves—
We asked for forgiveness.
We laid down our burdens next to each other.

 
                

^^EOP^^

I want to be sweet and clear and free, as half a line
of Auden, or an episode of the Powerpuff Girls;
I want to be dew, and honest with mine,
like Bob Marley, or Boesman the Boer.
I want to swing and get it right
at the speed of Pollock’s light,
I want to be deep like Zulu,
tight like Tamil,
and trust my sense of Sanskrit true
with little shame for its will.
I want to dabble in the fields
ignorant of what I was doing,
rub myself on the ruins
with a self-induced disease
and gleefully lapse
the hope to be heard. I want to fix
my favourite English words
into the forty-fifth century—
haw, for instance, or luminary—
hiding them in a snatch of prose…
passed over in silence
like Wittgenstein, no evidence
for myself or Laura Riding,
like Bharathiyar going mad composing,
I want to dissolve into our language
printing too little for my age;
I want to be obscure but not leaden,
flippant if I feel like it, then
I don’t mind being called poetically shitty
in a note from Manohar Shetty,
writing into the time we’ve borrowed,
singing from our utter boredom;
I want to hold in me the heat of my combustion
and leave this sweat-smear as a resurrection:
I want to be sweet and clear and free,
insouciant, insufferable, just like me.
 


^^EOP^^

We sat in the neon light
on a cool evening of a summer day
drinking beer and eating salad.
You told me your story
similar to those of many others:
All your savings are gone,
the managers, the secretaries, the supervisors,
the police in charge of passports
all having received a handsome share.
Now you have nothing left there,
your color TV and refrigerator were sold
to get the cash for the plane ticket.
 
“But I was lucky,” you assured me.
“Many people have spent fortunes
and still cannot leave the country.”
 
“What are you going to do here?
Don’t think this is a place where
you can make a fortune by snapping fingers.
Starting poor, we have to labor for every dollar.
It is a place where money
can hire the devil to make bean curd
and your growth is measured by financial figures.
There is no way for us to get beyond
a social security number.”
 
“Anything, I would do anything,
as long as I can make a living.
At least, I am free here and don’t
hate others. Do you know what I wanted
when I was back there?
I always imagined how to get a gun
so I could shoot all the bastards.
That country is not a place to live—
I would rather die than go back.”
 
We stopped to watch seagulls.
An airplane was writing the word
FUN in the distant sky.
I wish I had left the same way,
but I brought with me all my belongings,
even my army mug and a bunch of old letters.
 


^^EOP^^

Picture yourself, child, garred
in a coign of the newborn city:
 
father and infant brother dead though life,
that other half of nothing,
 
spills out the same from the hill
into the harbour. You take your spyglass to the sea,
 
late in the afternoon when the big hulls loom
against the pier, watch the ladies overdressed
 
on the embankment or the sailors
tumbling from steamers into bars.
 
There is a tunnel below
where the cargo trains go. Could it be
 
you found on foot
without the tram for smoothness
 
west on West towards Victoria where
in the salt stupor of the market a veiny hand
 
patted a fat amethyst eyeball in your palm?
In the freshly planted suburbs, the smoke of wet dirt in gardens:
 
“Those who do not belong here wear a uniform—
consider this when sleep falls on you.”
 
                              *
 
The man who sleeps in your mother’s bed
drinks tea with the British ambassador so
 
the house is kosmos enough. In one room a calliope
like an engine plays; in another, a stone horse smooth enough
 
to ride or a carved wooden mask with a nose-hole
stinging skin. There’s a monocle
 
and a pipe, a flyer for Ruth St. Denis, there’s a feathery moth’s
wing, part of a chewed-up but bright pink Europe.
 
(You tick in sticky names the pages of your enemies—
Plato, Ptolemy, Shakespeare, Dickens, Sir Conan Doyle
 
and the schoolboys who scrape you on the ground until your knees go red.
You see a girl playing in the street and feel pity.)
 
                              *
 
“The poet, a fake, lacks conviction:
he’s stuck with both absence and substance.
 
These are the laws of things,
this is the index finger, pointing.”
 
Camoens who sailed in search of Portugal,
Magellan who wrote his name in the sky elliptical—
 
that was the country dreamed by pilgrims
whose tears flowed into óur sea—
 
it was ways to make every estranged brook feel special,
to hawk deeds of Europe to Asia and vice versa.
 
The cannonade drools and sputters to a stop,
the ship pulls away from the cliff and wheels
 
toward a new mass.
The vespertine light drains by degrees
 
into the night-time as if through bright
perforations of stars. The lamps of the ports
 
dim in economic sequence.
on the tip of the land’s triangle
 
where you killed the Khoikhoi for their cattle,
the Dutch are bastards
 
and those Brits to whom you owe,
those bureaucrats and beautiful engineers,
 
are very polite but rather shy.
They slaughter hearts too, scientifically.
 
But song remained at close of day. Song took root
in the decaying estate: song in the house of faith,
 
alone in the end, after the machines,
after the former masters,
 
after the fields, recaptured by trees,
and the pedigreed dogs abandoned.
 
                              *
 
Helpless, the love of precision for territory.
Helpless, your green discoloured bust
 
on an island among commuters, on the corner
of Commercial and Soldier’s Way.
 
You are ever a stranger from Tongaat to Isipingo though
the beaches have been seized and the cuter cottages
 
turned away from loamy burial ground
to face a reopened sea.
 
But we carry Bambatha’s name
in our mouths and inherit your teeth;
 
the highway gutter-drawls into stacked flats
or tin doors, curling dirt roads, satellite towns
 
on satellite maps, and the moon is still red
and the ancestors reach down like willows.
 
You among them know well:
smoking your cigarette, to spite the gods,
 
writing, “They must eat my little boy or die,”
as another way of saying, “Let every tongue be foreign.”
 


^^EOP^^

I sing of an old land
where the gods have taken shelter underground,
where the human idols eat human sacrifice,
where hatred runs the business of philanthropy,
where blazing dragons eclipse the wronged ghosts,
where silence and smiles are the trace of wisdom,
where words imitate spears and swords,
where truth is always a bloody legend.
 
I speak of the old land not
out of love or wonderment.
Like my ancestors who were scattered into the smoky winds,
who scrambled to leave home
or rushed towards the approaching enemies,
I join those who fled and returned,
          who disappeared in other lands
bearing no hope but persistence, no honor but the story,
          no fortune but parents and children,
singing a timeless curse,
a curse that has bound us together
and rooted us deep in the wreck
          of our homeland.
 
I touch the land at night—
My hands trace the map on the wall,
from mountains to villages and to rivers,
from plains to cities and to seashores.
I see the green fields of the South,
the dark soil and birch woods of the North,
and snow swirling in summer.
 
I dream of myself in that land,
not for happiness or harvest.
I dream of suffering together with my people,
of being understood and useful,
of being left alone and able to sleep,
of my children refusing my land
so they will not repeat my life,
of talking and walking with friends,
of completing the work and dying with ease.
 
I weep for the old land,
for its vast narrowness,
for its profound stupidity,
for its chaos and tenacity,
for its power to possess those of my kind
to devour us to nourish itself
to seize our hearts and throats
and mix our moans with songs—
 
songs of monstrous grandeur
and merciless devotion,
songs crazed by the cycle of that land.


^^EOP^^




                         to L. Y.



I was told that I was a sad man.
Sadness is a fatal disease in this place
where happiness is a key to success.
If you are sad, you are doomed to fail—
you can’t please your boss,
your long face won’t attract customers,
a few sighs are enough
to let your friends down.
 
Yesterday afternoon I met Pham,
a Vietnamese man who was once a general.
He came to this country
after nine years’ imprisonment.
Now he works hard as a custodian
and always avoids
meeting his former soldiers here,
because every one of them
is doing better than he is.
“Sadness,” he told me,
“is a luxury for me.
I have no time for it.
If I feel sad
I won’t be able to support my family.”
 
His words filled me with shame,
although I learned long ago
a busy bee feels no sorrow.
He made me realize I’m still a fortunate one
and ought to be happy and grateful
for having food in my stomach
and books to read.
 
I returned home humming a cheerful tune.
My wife smiled wondering
why I had suddenly become lighthearted.
My son followed me, laughing and frolicking,
while I was capering on the floor.
 
Last night
I went to a party in my dream.
Voices and laughter were drifting in a large hall
that was full of paintings and calligraphy.
Strolling with ease
I ran into the handwriting of yours
hung in the air
piece by piece waving like wings.
Dumbfounded, I turned
and saw you sitting on a chair,
motionless, the same lean detached face,
only your blue clothes had grown darker.
Something snapped in my chest
and my tears flowed.
What’s the use of promising?
I have promised, a hundred times,
but never returned. Wherever we go
our cause is the same:
to make a living and raise children.
If a poem arises, it’s merely
an accidental blessing.
 
For several hours my heart ached,
but I woke up—smiling.
 


^^EOP^^

You feed us milkfish stew
and long grain rice, make us eat
blood soup with chili peppers,
and frown at us when we lose our appetite.
I remember when I was young and you told me
of that monsoon: the Japanese Occupation—
stories of a time before you met my father,
when you learned the language of an occupied city
in order to feed your family.
You were the pretty one at seventeen,
your skin, white as milkfish.
The pretty ones, you said,
were always given more food—
the Japanese soldiers sentried
above the loft where you worked
dropped sweet yams, and you caught them
by the billow of your skirt.
I remember you in sepia-brown photographs
as a mestiza who equated liberation
with Hershey bars and beige nylons from American GIs—
and the season of the monsoon as dark as hunger
was not about suffering
but what you knew of beauty.
 


^^EOP^^

Avocado trees on the moon. Aichigum, mullukumb, Billy Blue Gum. This is not exactly
a confessional. My father’s wound
was also my wound, dirt outside
Vedanta Hall, blood in the dirt
below the gutter pipe, blood like washing
undone in my banian fold. I am not saying
that blood was the thing. My father
was singing. From the tall narrow barred window,
the gravel driveway, in the heat, my father’s wound
is jelly to the touch. I touch it now.
 
                              *
 
A broken tree on the floor. Tarzan says,
“Tarzan save Vivek father wound.” “The shadow
before State House, he will ride his bike no more.”
Once, I looked up from paper and saw the clouds
move. It was terrible, that clouds
could move. The clouds moving reminded me
of my father’s wound. I don’t care if you like this,
 
                              *
 
I am going to take my time. My father came back
from a hernia operation, there had been a mistake,
the stitches had to be removed. Every day
I had seen him shaving
in the bathroom, whistling Balamurali’s songs.
 
                              *
 
“If you’re going
to write a poem about me,” my father says,
“don’t forget to mention my daily yoga.”
 
                              *
 
There is a large glass door looking onto the pool.
My father cleared that place up. Surrealism only matters
if it’s real. I listen to Michael,
Mr. Mister, Genesis. On Kyrie, I saw
a massive bird block the sky while I blasted
the song from the car stereo to the playground
and the driver sat quietly. Did I mention
we had a driver? He drove me around
when my father had his wound
and could not move.
 
                              *
 
I betrayed the wound. I see it half-formed, my mother
washing him, his long painful yelps. This was scary,
to hear those animal sounds. My mother went in there
instead of me. Splashing. A red oval among the ripples.
 


^^EOP^^

That night the moon over New Hampshire
wore a face I knew in high school
of a pudgy boy whose mother was a singer
and whose sister was once trapped
in a burning building. When she was a girl,
my sister and 17 of her classmates
could not leave school
because the janitor ran amok.
 
The moonlight on the lake glides
like Persian slippers wingtipping
on the surface of the water.
And the road with its arms
around the lake is silent and American.
In Thai, Sasithon stands for full moon,
a name for a woman who once saw a pair of hands
on the dashboard of my car.
Not hers, but of another who died a violent death.
 
In the whir of static
between Top Forty and twang, I listened
to the news report of Pol Pot’s capture.
And like a man whose bowl of soup
has grown too cold to eat,
I realized that I had overdriven—
missed the road I was supposed to turn into.
In a false memory, I look back
at the burning building
that claimed my classmate’s sister.
I see her moonface veiled in blue—
blue as a flame of a lit match
telling me the road I missed on the map.
I could pull over and rest my eyes.
 
I could sleep like an entire race
of bones underneath the tall grasses
where a man hacks and hacks
at something in the heat.
Once in a while he might stop
to examine the pattern of a tattered fabric
suspended on the tip of his machete,
and try to remember his wife.


^^EOP^^

Once the world was perfect, and we were happy in that world.
Then we took it for granted.
Discontent began a small rumble in the earthly mind.
Then Doubt pushed through with its spiked head.
And once Doubt ruptured the web,
All manner of demon thoughts
Jumped through—
We destroyed the world we had been given
For inspiration, for life—
Each stone of jealousy, each stone
Of fear, greed, envy, and hatred, put out the light.
No one was without a stone in his or her hand.
There we were,
Right back where we had started.
We were bumping into each other
In the dark.
And now we had no place to live, since we didn't know
How to live with each other.
Then one of the stumbling ones took pity on another
And shared a blanket.
A spark of kindness made a light.
The light made an opening in the darkness.
Everyone worked together to make a ladder.
A Wind Clan person climbed out first into the next world,
And then the other clans, the children of those clans, their children,
And their children, all the way through time—
To now, into this morning light to you.
 


^^EOP^^

Always the sky keeps expanding.
Wide as America’s brave margins,
wide as my loneliness in the Middle West.
I lean against a dust cloud behind us,
the glory sinking into a muted timberline.
I am drunk with longing. The wind is singing—
 
my drunken friend, the wind, hurls
sweet curses at my face.
We have learned to love
this road, which lies down like pythons,
refuses to forgive our excesses,
refuses to consider us kin. Our driver’s
 
sign overhead reads, Jesus is my co-pilot.
Jesus who crossed the city
gates of his ancestors
on a road carpeted by palms.
Our goodtime driver must know this—
he drives with abandon,
 
despite our fragile cargo: scholars and accountants,
prophets and exiles all the same to him.
The road, which suggests things, is tired of ceremony.
It lies down to sleep like the snow.
Lie down TallMountain, lie down
Serafin Syquia, lie down Li-Young, lie
down Divakaruni, lie down Eman Lacaba,
lie down pilgrims of the open road.
Shameless, we gather our light
jackets in balls. We rest our heads,
our faces upturned to a squall of stars. I near the end, my soul recites.
  O loneliness, my body responds.
This empty road is a house
where no one lives. What strange fire
we bring when we come to this house.
 


^^EOP^^

Praise the rain; the seagull dive
The curl of plant, the raven talk—
Praise the hurt, the house slack
The stand of trees, the dignity—
Praise the dark, the moon cradle
The sky fall, the bear sleep—
Praise the mist, the warrior name
The earth eclipse, the fired leap—
Praise the backwards, upward sky
The baby cry, the spirit food—
Praise canoe, the fish rush
The hole for frog, the upside-down—
Praise the day, the cloud cup
The mind flat, forget it all— 
Praise crazy. Praise sad.
Praise the path on which we're led.
Praise the roads on earth and water.
Praise the eater and the eaten.
Praise beginnings; praise the end.
Praise the song and praise the singer. 
Praise the rain; it brings more rain.
Praise the rain; it brings more rain.


^^EOP^^

My friend came and spent a weekend here.
In China he used to be an interpreter
and guide foreign mountaineers.
 
He told me he had once accompanied
a group of Japanese
to a snow mountain in the Uighur Region.
 
They climbed for a whole day
but did not make the summit.
A storm was gathering, so they turned back.
 
On their way down, a young woman
(the only one on the team) fell off a cliff
and disappeared in the ice below.
 
She was injured but not fatally.
“Help, help me!” she yelled
at the men two hundred feet above her.
 
None of them went down,
though they were all well trained.
They listened and turned on a recorder.
 
“Help, help! I’ll pay you ten million yen!”
Her screams were kept on a cassette tape
for her family and insurance company.
 
“Those Japs are beasts,”
my friend said. “If she were a Chinese
I would’ve gone down to help her.”
 
His story saddened me. After he left,
the voice still lingered in my home—
“Help, I’ll pay you ten million yen!”
 
I don’t know if he could be so gallant
to a Chinese woman as he claimed.
I’ve begun to walk my dog every day.
 


^^EOP^^

Somehow pesters the sadness of
                              a dog—that ungiven guardedness
                              at first report of day
               in a slyly chosen alley;
not the cat hidden in the bougainvillaea blossom,
not the bull barefaced into the lissome
 
highway, it’s a madness
                              less to do with mordant Englishness
                              in a glum phototropic
               teat, more a perky realpolitik
in over-familiar mottled skin. That hoarse howl
at the garden’s shrub-ridden edge, that shawl
 
a woman knits, waiting for a man
                              who’s not her man—not a man at all—then
                              crouching by the bedpost
               mewling.
 
                                              *
 
                              When to be tame is at most
a disavowal in proxy to the master’s unacknowledged
fear: knowing fear as part of privilege,
 
knowing privilege a state
                              infeasible, the amenable innate
                              animal to whom
               we assign the affectionate name
—Bango, Napoleon, Spot—bounding resolutely
into the black-red greenness of the middle sea—
 
 
believes itself to be human
                              in dogly garb, a non-veg incarnation
                              of mortal virtue, no less
               than a wife, child, comrade in armless
charms. We nurture this notion, lure it to the rug.
 
                                              *
 
So even if it steal to the street trailing a fog-
 
-dust deliberate, choosing mange
                              over matter to be free—deranged,
                              sheltering in a truck’s
               dappled shade, but dreading the hunger-dusk
or charity at noon—if it claim its independence
among curs, dodging some dog-chief, teeth clenched,
 
lurking in building societies—
                              it still will count the hand that carries
                              the house in a fist,
               or follow, for a glance, a humanist.
 
Paused between doorstep and forest, both gone;
kept in equilibrium, the sadness of a dog.
 


^^EOP^^

I. She Had Some Horses 
She had some horses.
She had horses who were bodies of sand.
She had horses who were maps drawn of blood.
She had horses who were skins of ocean water.
She had horses who were the blue air of sky.
She had horses who were fur and teeth.
She had horses who were clay and would break.
She had horses who were splintered red cliff. 
She had some horses. 
She had horses with eyes of trains.
She had horses with full, brown thighs.
She had horses who laughed too much.
She had horses who threw rocks at glass houses.
She had horses who licked razor blades. 
She had some horses. 
She had horses who danced in their mothers' arms.
She had horses who thought they were the sun and their
bodies shone and burned like stars.
She had horses who waltzed nightly on the moon.
She had horses who were much too shy, and kept quiet
in stalls of their own making. 
She had some horses. 
She had horses who liked Creek Stomp Dance songs.
She had horses who cried in their beer.
She had horses who spit at male queens who made
them afraid of themselves.
She had horses who said they weren't afraid.
She had horses who lied.
She had horses who told the truth, who were stripped
bare of their tongues. 
She had some horses. 
She had horses who called themselves, "horse."
She had horses who called themselves, "spirit," and kept
their voices secret and to themselves.
She had horses who had no names.
She had horses who had books of names. 
She had some horses. 
She had horses who whispered in the dark, who were afraid to speak.
She had horses who screamed out of fear of the silence, who
carried knives to protect themselves from ghosts.
She had horses who waited for destruction.
She had horses who waited for resurrection. 
She had some horses. 
She had horses who got down on their knees for any saviour.
She had horses who thought their high price had saved them.
She had horses who tried to save her, who climbed in her
bed at night and prayed as they raped her. 
She had some horses. 
She had some horses she loved.
She had some horses she hated. 
These were the same horses.    II. Two Horses 
                   I thought the sun breaking through Sangre de Cristo
Mountains was enough, and that
                                                           wild musky scents on my body after
            long nights of dreaming could
                                                        unfold me to myself.
                 I thought my dance alone through worlds of
odd and eccentric planets that no one else knew
       would sustain me. I mean
                                                     I did learn to move
                                                                                       after all
    and how to recognize voices other than the most familiar.
           But you must have grown out of
                                                                      a thousand years dreaming
               just like I could never imagine you.
                         You must have
                                                    broke open from another sky
to here, because
                             now I see you as a part of the millions of
     other universes that I thought could never occur
        in this breathing.
                                       And I know you as myself, traveling.
   In your eyes alone are many colonies of stars
                                                              and other circling planet motion.
                                           And then your fingers, the sweet smell
                                            of hair, and
                                                                 your soft, tight belly.
       My heart is taken by you
                        and these mornings since I am a horse running towards
a cracked sky where there are countless dawns
                                                      breaking simultaneously.
There are two moons on the horizon
and for you
                     I have broken loose.    III. Drowning Horses 
She says she is going to kill
herself. I am a thousand miles away.
Listening.
                   To her voice in an ocean
of telephone sound. Grey sky
and nearly sundown; I don't ask her how.
I am already familiar with the weapons:
a restaurant that wouldn't serve her,
the thinnest laughter, another drink.
And even if I weren't closer
to the cliff edge of the talking
wire, I would still be another mirror,
another running horse. 
Her escape is my own.
I tell her, yes. Yes. We ride
out for breath over the distance.
Night air approaches, the galloping
other-life. 
No sound.
No sound.    IV. Ice Horses 
These are the ones who escape
after the last hurt is turned inward;
they are the most dangerous ones.
These are the hottest ones,
but so cold that your tongue sticks
to them and is torn apart because it is
frozen to the motion of hooves.
These are the ones who cut your thighs,
whose blood you must have seen on the gloves
of the doctor's rubber hands. They are
the horses who moaned like oceans, and
one of them a young woman screamed aloud;
she was the only one.
These are the ones who have found you.
These are the ones who pranced on your belly.
They chased deer out of your womb.
These are the ice horses, horses
who entered through your head,
and then your heart,
your beaten heart. 
These are the ones who loved you.
They are the horses who have held you
so close that you have become
a part of them,
                          an ice horse
galloping
                 into fire.    V. Explosion 
The highway near Okemah, Oklahoma exploded 
                                                           They are reasons for everything
Maybe             there is a new people, coming forth
                         being born from the center of the earth,
                         like us, but another tribe. 
Maybe             they will be another color that no one
                         has ever seen before. Then they might be hated,
                         and live in Muskogee on the side of the tracks
                         that Indians live on. (And they will be the
                         ones to save us.) 
Maybe             there are lizards coming out of rivers of lava
                         from the core of this planet, 
                                                               coming to bring rain 
                         to dance for the corn,
                         to set fields of tongues slapping at the dark
                         earth, a kind of a dance. 
But maybe the explosion was horses,
                                                          bursting out of the crazy earth
near Okemah. They were a violent birth,
flew from the ground into trees
                                                         to wait for evening night
mares to come after them:
                        
then                 into the dank wet fields of Oklahoma
then                 their birth cords tied into the molten heart
then                 they travel north and south, east and west
then                 into wet while sheets at midnight when everyone
                         sleeps and the baby dreams of swimming in the
                         bottom of the muggy river.
then                 into frogs who have come out of the earth to
                         see for rain
then                 a Creek woman who dances shaking the seeds in
                         her bones
then                 South Dakota, Mexico, Japan, and Manila
then                 into Miami to sweep away the knived faces of
                         hatred 
Some will not see them. 
But some will see the horses with their hearts of sleeping volcanoes
and will be rocked awake
                                             past their bodies 
                                                   to see who they have become.
 


^^EOP^^

Sometimes when you’re walking in the street,
returning home or leaving to see a friend,
they come. They emerge from behind pillars and trees
approaching you like a pack hounding a sheep.
You know it’s no use to hide or flee,
so you stop and light a cigarette, waiting for them.
 
Sometimes when you’re eating in a restaurant,
your soup served and your dish not ready yet,
they come. A steady hand falls upon your shoulder.
You are familiar with such a hand
and don’t need to turn around to meet the face.
The scared diners are sneaking out,
the waitress’s chin is trembling when she speaks,
but you are sitting there waiting for the bill.
After settling it you’ll walk out with them.
 
Sometimes when you open your office,
planning to finish an article in three hours,
or read a review, but first make some tea,
they come. They spring out from behind the door
like ghosts welcoming a child to their lair.
You don’t want to enter, seeing cups and paper on the floor.
You are figuring how to send a message home.
 
Sometimes when you have worked day and night,
dog tired, and want to have a good sleep
after a shower and an extra nightcap,
they come. They change the color of your dream:
you moan for the wounds on your body,
you weep for the fates of others.
Only now you dare to fight back with your hands,
but a “bang” or an “ouch”
brings you back to silence and sleeplessness again.
 
See, they come.
 


^^EOP^^




Harry Franck, from the United States of America - Census Enumerator



I came to Panama planning to dig
the Eighth Wonder of the World,
but I was told that white men
should never be seen working
with shovels, so I took a police job,
and now I've been transferred
to the census. 
I roam the jungle, counting laborers
who live in shanties and those who live
on the run, fugitives who are too angry
to keep working for silver in a system
where they know that others
earn gold. 
When islanders see me coming,
they're afraid of trouble, even though
I can't arrest them anymore—now
all I need is a record of their names, ages,
homelands, and colors. 
The rules of this census confound me.
I'm expected to count white Jamaicans
as dark and every shade of Spaniard
as semi-white, so that Americans
can pretend
there's only one color
in each country. 
How am I supposed to enumerate
this kid with the Cuban accent?
His skin is medium, but his eyes
are green. 
And what about that Puerto Rican
scientist, who speaks like a New York
professor,
or the girl who says she doesn't know
where she was born or who her parents
are—she could be part native, or part French,
Jamaican, Chinese ... 
She could even be part American,
from people who passed through here
way back
in gold rush days. 
Counting feels just as impossible
as turning solid mountains
into a ditch.


^^EOP^^

On an island of music
in a city of drumbeats
the drum dream girl
dreamed
 
of pounding tall conga drums
tapping small bongó drums
and boom boom booming
with long, loud sticks
on big, round, silvery
moon-bright timbales.
 
But everyone
on the island of music
in the city of drumbeats
believed that only boys
should play drums
 
so the drum dream girl
had to keep dreaming
quiet
secret
drumbeat
dreams.
 
At outdoor cafés that looked like gardens
she heard drums played by men
but when she closed her eyes
she could also hear
her own imaginary
music.
 
When she walked under
wind-wavy palm trees
in a flower-bright park
she heard the whir of parrot wings
the clack of woodpecker beaks
the dancing tap
of her own footsteps
and the comforting pat
of her own
heartbeat.
 
At carnivals, she listened
to the rattling beat
of towering
dancers
on stilts
 
and the dragon clang
of costumed drummers
wearing huge masks.
 
At home, her fingertips
rolled out their own
dreamy drum rhythm
on tables and chairs…
 
and even though everyone
kept reminding her that girls
on the island of music
have never played drums
 
the brave drum dream girl
dared to play
tall conga drums
small bongó drums
and big, round, silvery
moon-bright timbales.
 
Her hands seemed to fly
as they rippled
rapped
and pounded
all the rhythms
of her drum dreams.
 
Her big sisters were so excited
that they invited her to join
their new all-girl dance band
 
but their father said only boys
should play drums.
 
So the drum dream girl
had to keep dreaming
and drumming
alone
 
until finally
her father offered
to find a music teacher
who could decide if her drums
deserved
to be heard.
 
The drum dream girl’s
teacher was amazed.
The girl knew so much
but he taught her more
and more
and more
 
and she practiced
and she practiced
and she practiced
 
until the teacher agreed
that she was ready
to play her small bongó drums
outdoors at a starlit café
that looked like a garden
 
where everyone who heard
her dream-bright music
sang
and danced
and decided
that girls should always
be allowed to play
drums
 
and both girls and boys
should feel free
to dream.
 


^^EOP^^




Henry from the island of Jamaica



Jamaican digging crews have to sleep
eighty men to a room, in huge warehouses
like the ones where big wooden crates
of dynamite are stored. 
My hands feel like scorpion claws,
clamped on to a hard hard shovel all day,
then curled into fists at night. 
At dawn, the steaming labor trains
deliver us by the thousands, down into
that snake pit where we dig
until my muscles feel
as weak as water
and my backbone
is like shattered glass. 
But only half the day
is over. 
At lunchtime, we see sunburned
American engineers and foremen
eating at tables, in shady tents
with the flaps left open,
so that we have to watch
how they sit on nice chairs,
looking restful. 
We also watch the medium-dark
Spanish men, relaxing as they sit
on their train tracks, grinning
as if they know secrets. 
We have no place to sit. Not even
a stool. So we stand, plates in hand,
uncomfortable
and undignified. 
Back home, I used to dream of saving
enough Panama money
to buy a bit of good farmland
for Momma and my little brothers
and sisters, so that we would all
have plenty to eat. 
Now all I want is a chair.
And food with some spice.
And fair treatment.
Justice.


^^EOP^^




The Glass Frogs



you can't see us
not like those golden frogs
flashing their beauty
because we're not here
pretend we're not here
you can't eat us
we'd taste like clear air
we're transparent
invisible 
until night when stars pass through us
moonlight flows into us
we start to sing
we need to sing
we love to sing
sing
sing
sing


^^EOP^^

Books are door-shaped
portals
carrying me
across oceans
and centuries,
helping me feel
less alone. 
But my mother believes
that girls who read too much
are unladylike
and ugly,
so my father's books are locked
in a clear glass cabinet. I gaze
at enticing covers
and mysterious titles,
but I am rarely permitted
to touch
the enchantment
of words. 
Poems.
Stories.
Plays.
All are forbidden.
Girls are not supposed to think,
but as soon as my eager mind
begins to race, free thoughts
rush in
to replace
the trapped ones. 
I imagine distant times
and faraway places.
Ghosts.
Vampires.
Ancient warriors.
Fantasy moves into
the tangled maze
of lonely confusion. 
Secretly, I open
an invisible book in my mind,
and I step
through its magical door-shape
into a universe
of dangerous villains
and breathtaking heroes. 
Many of the heroes are men
and boys, but some are girls
so tall
strong
and clever
that they rescue other children
from monsters.


^^EOP^^

City life is a whirl of poetry readings
and forbidden tertulias, gatherings
where young and old, rich and poor,
male and female, dark and light—
runaway slaves and freed ones,
former masters and former
servants—all take turns
sharing secret verses
rooted in startling
new ideas. 
Each evening, I go home
with a mind that glows
in the light of words,
which leap
like flames...


^^EOP^^




­­               —for Troy Davis



1.
 
There was a light rain on the night
of your execution. Wet little pricks
exploding on the skin.
The gears on my bike jammed
so I pedaled crazy-legged, pumping
three times harder, making time.
I glide past a charter bus emptying
in front of the Supreme Court, I double
over at the mostly white choir: I am Troy Davis / We are Troy Davis.
 
 
2.
  I am Troy Davis / We Are Troy Davis.
My mother calls hours later,
crying until her eyes swell into beets.
Why are our mothers always crying?
Why am I not crying?
It’s become so familiar.
In my boyhood . . .
Rodney King; Billy Clubs;
Loose Nooses; L.A. Riots;
Abner Louima and his attackers:
the police officers shoving a plunger up his rectum;
Amadou Diallo: 41 gun shot wounds;
Echoes of Emmitt Till: Black mothers
unable to recognize their creations.
Men strung on trees left for the crows to suck.
The way Billie Holiday’s voice wrinkles
from horror. The gallant South,
the snickering wind.
 
 
3.
  The gallant South, the snickering wind.
You were lethally injected:
poison entered your veins, stopped your heart,
then your breathing.
I wake up in a cold sweat
hearing you tell the family it wasn’t you.
You, Black Socrates. Galileo,
Prisoner to this skin.
I imagine your transition
to the other side with the ancestors.
Afro Blue. I imagine this life different—
not opposed to life, black life.
Not hateful. I imagine
this poem—a proper elegy.
Can you hear that? America singing.
Its trees mock us.
Its wind curses us.
No praying.
God’s ears are filled
with cotton.
 
 
4.
  God’s ears are filled with cotton.
Death is my pulse.
I pray daily that I will live to be old,
healthy, but sometimes
I despair. I think
about my mother almost
being thrown on a subway track
carrying me in her belly.
Hearing the metal train car
moving in. Feeling my heart beat.
Wanting to save this black boy
from an early death. Just one, Lord, spare me one.
I want to teach my daughter
that black doesn’t equal death;
and to love her people, all of them,
even the white great-grandmother
who got sick from giving birth
to half-white, all black babies.
And yet, I get quiet each time
we walk by Union Station
that increasingly resembles Monticello.
The homeless: who missed Emancipation
those Negro hymns no longer move me.
Everything is a countdown to Swing low sweet chariot coming for to carry me home
to be a black mass, riding this skin,
a bomb ticking, soon to expire.
 
 
5.
  A bomb ticking, soon to expire.
What if we didn’t have to die?
What would it mean to live?
What would it mean to give milk
to our own babies?
What would it mean to swim
to the bottom of the ocean,
recovering our bones?
What would it mean to visit
the African burial that is Wall Street?
What does it mean to tell your daughter We were the first blue chip stock?
That we do not own our children, their lives.
That any motherfucker can point and say
kill that nigger. And it happens. Like that.
Like that. What does it mean to be free
when we’ve been property longer
than we’ve been free in this great nation?
What does it mean to say Troy Davis,  my dear brother, I’m Sorry.
A part of me died tonight.
I prayed for the mother ship to come
take me somewhere else.
Do aliens kill each other?
Dear black Socrates,
Galileo:
the planets are spinning.
 


^^EOP^^

In sun the sunburned skin sloughs off the sunburned shoulder.
Most folks believe this is the body’s slow mend.
 
Most folks believe in the good yolk of the soul.
 
I believe in autopsy lingo of natural causes should be replaced
with of long-term exposure to the dim, unwavering radiation of the morning star.
 
The evening they burn your body,
I step into the garden and arrange a crooked line of birdbaths to skip stones across
 
until a bell tower tolls its eight arguments against daylight
and the skyline illuminates, ragged and unmended
 
like a poem turned on its side.
 
The evening they burn your body,
I believe I’ll step into the living room and be greeted by you
 
or by someone who could play you in a movie.
 
The curtains are an aurora of earthly proportion.
You don’t exist.
 
A flash igniting the paned glass is the silent lightning outrunning its noise.
You’re on fire.
 


^^EOP^^

known for her cooking the consistent
perfection of spring rolls evenly fried
her secret to brush it
with just a hint of apple juice
to add some color give some flavor
 
she is the mother of five a wife
a widow it is easy to forget
her strength in its subtlety
she keeps it hidden
 
like the smell of apple juice
that reminds me
of my family the eighteen days
we spent on a tanker
 
the sticky metal floors streaked
with the vomit of children crying
a pearl a day she removed
from a string milky white marbles
 
on an army issued blanket
a make-shift playground
that kept what was ours
i would have to be good
no crying no complaining
it was mine to keep it was mine to lose
 
being thirsty that i remember
drinking juice from a can tomato
apple a concoction of both
my mother traded her red jade bracelet
 
for a jar of water
the kind you drank if you had money to buy
if you spoke korean the kind
that was plain without the taste of salt
 
she said uống từ từ—drink it slowly
i was given a third of this precious water
the rest she saved     hid in a suitcase


^^EOP^^

1.
 
 Always, they begin
as units of prayer
 
in sleep
watery images
 
then I wake
seeing them
 
crowded together
in a headline
  Officers in Bronx Fire 41 Shots, And an Unarmed Man Is Killed
 
this lacerated tongue
thirsts to remember
 
the names of all the faces
hidden behind the barrel of a gun
 
loaded blasted
into national memory
 
becoming caesuras.
 
Each name is
a body craving
wholeness.
 
 
2.
 
These eyes shutter
imagining
 
a different script
playing out behind their lids.
 
 
3.
 
When I wake tomorrow
Let there be a riot of birds
 
outside my window
Let there be crows
 
flying South in horseshoe formation
Let there be Peruvian musicians
 
with their wooden flutes
& African drummers
 
& children double-dutching
over liberated firehydrants
 
Let there be Nina Simone’s
“Mississippi Goddamn” remixed
 
Let these words serve
a different master/narrative
 
Let sound shoot outside this mouth
echoing in every
 
walk home
dark alley
(neighbor)hood
 
May this poem
lodge inside your breast.
 


^^EOP^^

We will eventually be archaeology, but now in America
 
I tell my young daughter the new headlights are a bluish-white instead
of the murky yellow of my upbringing.
 
 
She’s busy with her bubble-making, her dig in the flower bed,
her pantomimed banquet, phantom guests
 
dining on her small handfuls of weeds and grasses.
 
 
Precisely, the lit up jackrabbits appear in peculiar blue candor
under the stoplight dusk,
 
pigeons hued reddish are garrulous and incomprehensible as drunks
at the end of the cocktail hour.
 
 
It’s that time in America when the air is overgrowth.
 
The piquancy of coriander neighbors allowed to flower mingles
with fragrances we douse our clothes-lined laundry in each week
 
to cloister the body’s reeking.
 
Truck smoke from the interstate.
 
 
I’m out-of-doors, which is to say nature is hemmed in by doors, which is to say
nature is a category of my making, and I can’t say why the skittish,
 
black bugs flit into the house when there’s so much turf afforded them already,
but tonight I’ll crush a few with a Newsweek before sleeping.
 
 
Now, it’s that time in America in the out-of-doors beneath tree and trellis
 
and vapor trails of overnight flights
fare-thee-welling to London and Morocco.
 
Brandy in soda water, a xylophone jingle of the ice, I sit in my Adirondack
 
without my minute, Midwestern wife
who Tuesday returns from her summit in Cleveland.
 
 
It’s that time when I’m alone in America with my young daughter who startles
 
herself realizing the woodpile beneath that black oak is itself formerly a tree,
and she wants to know whether these trees have feelings.
 
It’s this acquaintance with death she so improves upon annually.
 
 
It’s in this precise moment in America that I realize this acquainting, this becoming
familiar, this cordiality with death is the entire task of her growing older.
 
Next year her ficus will die and the next year her minnow will die,
and it’s in these moments in America
 
when my daughter’s plump lip quivers in a preface to bawling,
when I’m alone and can do too little, I say,
  I’m sorry life is too much, my love, I’m sorry my love, it isn’t enough.
 


^^EOP^^

I’m grateful to the man now sleeping with my ex-lover.
It’s true I loved her, but it’s right that someone be with her now
in the dark hour of our republic. Life is no good anymore.
There are no jobs and no money, so it’s good
that someone be with her now under street lamps filtered
through sheer curtains at night, the pale approximation of daylight
illuminating the outer slope of my ex-lover’s left thigh
and the asymmetric birthmark located there I thought
resembled the bust of Martin Van Buren,
which that man should smooch now and cherish
as I did those tender hours on the other side of time and the republic
when in the opulence of waking I’d move to the window to squint
at the dapper bodies passing which seemed then to know
where they were going. What awaited
when they arrived there. No job, no money,
I’m grateful for the man now nuzzling and elating with my ex-lover,
how she survives with him this dark hour, its sad redundancies,
the human condition like a phonograph skipping,
which is the condition of urging the same thing over
and anticipating a different result. How dull it is,
its mimeographed disasters, dull how the bankers are
offing themselves now in morning again, leaping from windows again,
the republic fretting as if it’s the first republic, the first dark hour,
and dull the way the man drives daily at daybreak away from my ex-lover
in an extravagant light believing that if he does, that when he does,
he’ll be the first to hurt her. O enduring sun.
 


^^EOP^^

In a dream, a young Baraka slaps five with my father.
They ask when I last got some pussy or whooped
someone’s ass? On one side of the street are the black poets
(their closed memberships, spider-fingered hand-shakes,
invitation-only parties) tossing my journal with my father— Bullshit, Bullshit, Bullshit!     I’m soft-spoken. He’s bullhorn.
I believe in breaths. We’re both sensitive. I do not deserve
to be his son. I didn’t suffer like my father. Don’t fit in
any boxes with bars. Never served time (except once at Bellevue
for 17 days). I retreat in ambiguity. Live between the lines.
Prefer shadow to light. I do girl push-ups. Write on the mirror
with my mother’s lipstick. I’m nothing like my father.
I spend my recesses reading When the People Could Fly, Black Skin, White Masks, & Metamorphosis. I visit Harlem
with my 35mm in search of jazzmen. I’m paranoid. My palms
stay moist. Long before I wake from this dream, there’s your voice
& Baraka’s, the broken limbs ghosting our family tree, you
and Baraka mouthing to me:  This life. . . is a . . relay . . race . . .  
and in a single hand motion—Catch!  And that look on your faces.
The pause. The lean in. The reveal.
 


^^EOP^^

Sometimes the horse is simply a horse.
 
               Sometimes the horse is a stalwart
               bearer of bodies.
 
                              Sometimes the horse is stubborn,
                              refusing to ford the river,
 
or the horse is a mistake
 
               in the vapor, what looks like a horse
 
                              emerging out of a thrust
                              of fog on Telegraph Avenue.
 
There’s the perpetual feeling of being
 
               overdressed for summer
               and underdressed for spring.
 
                              I’m variously sweat or shudder.
 
I mistake the strange bodies
for those I owe apologies to,
 
               oversleep and open my eyes on
               the clock radio, the time a typo,
 
                              the apartment a disaster.
 
Sometimes the horse is a disaster
or the horse is time in a trot or a canter.
 
               Sometimes the horse is a boy
               growing in time into a man
 
                              who often laments,
                              A horse, a horse, my kingdom, etc.
 
But there is no horse.
 
               There are two days good and one day bad
 
                              without any hint of a horse.
 
Sometimes speaking about the horse
is a means of avoiding speaking
 
               about myself which is lousy.
 
                              Late last night myself
                              regarding another carelessly.
 
Late last night my body
with a temporary body.
 
               The horse is the taut metaphor for sex,
 
                              but sometimes the horse is the taut silence after.
 
Sometimes the horse is the silence
after her body rises
 
               in the embarrassment of morning
               and leaves,
 
                              and this silence is filled
                              with less than remorse
 
but with more than indifference.
 
               This is a feeling there is no word for.
 
                              What I decided in place of what I needed.
 
I should eat better.
 
               I should vacuum more often. 
                              I should settle down
                              and raise a young horse. 
Sometimes the horse is unspoken, 
               the horse is this feeling
               that will be forgotten, 
                              is the self unable to alter its ineffable horse. 
Late last night, a pervasive clopping
of the horse on the hill. 
               Late last night, the horse as a foghorn
               over the Bay. 
                              I should be rained on.
                              I should not be forgiven.
 


^^EOP^^

my father’s body is a map
a record of his journey
 
he carries a bullet
lodged in his left thigh
there is a hollow where it entered
a protruding bump where it sleeps
the doctors say it will never awaken
 
it is the one souvenir he insists on keeping
mother has her own opinions bố cùa con điên—your father is crazy
 
as a child
i wanted a scar just like my father’s
bold and appalling     a mushroom explosion
that said i too was at war
instead i settled for a grain of rice
a scar so small look closely there
here between the eyes
a bit to the right
there on the bridge of my nose
 
father says i was too young to remember
it happened while i was sleeping
leaking roof the pounding rain
drop after drop after drop
 


^^EOP^^

it has long been forgotten this practice of the mother
weaning a child she crushes the seeds of a green
chili rubs it to her nipple what the child feels
she too will   share in this act   of love
my own mother says it was not meant
to be cruel when cruelty she tells me
is a child’s lips   torn from breast as proof
back home the women wear teeth marks
 


^^EOP^^

The entrance at the back of the complex
led onto a road, where an upended couch
tilted into a ditch and a washing machine
gleamed avocado beneath pine needles.
 
From the end, you turned left and left again,
then cut a trail to find the cul-de-sac
of bright brick houses. We'd walk as far
as we dared before a man pushing a mower
 
might stop to ask, "whadda you boys need?"
That was a question we could never answer.
I loved the name of the place, White Hall,
imagined that each interior was a stretch
 
of marble perfect wall adorned by smiling
photos of the family. Our own halls
were brailled with nail holes of former
tenants, the spackled rounds of fists.
 
But doesn't longing clarify the body?
The boys I left behind: Tommy, wearing
the World War II trenching tool;
Danny, whose father, so much older
 
than the other parents, died in his recliner
one sunny afternoon while watching baseball;
Duke, who stole his mother's car and crashed
into a wall. Boys who knew when you were posing,
 
waiting for someone to say, "smile." Boys
who, on those latch-key days, held themselves
in narrow passages when no one
was there to show them what to do. 
 


^^EOP^^

How quiet is the spruce,
the wind twills
through the uppermost tier
of splayed leaves.
Now the song of a bird
like the squeaky lock
over a canoe's oar,
followed by startling chirps,
the sky pushing its clouds
like sailboats,
and I think, what kind of God
keeps himself secret
so that to find him out
we have to seek, as children do
for something like the beetle
scuttling between grass,
hidden in plain sight.


^^EOP^^

You think we are the pointed argument,
the man drunk at the party showing off
his gun collection, the bed of nettles.
 
What we really are is hidden from you:
girl weeping in the closet among her stepfather's boots;
tuft of rabbit fur caught in barbed wire; body of the baby
in the landfill; boy with the shy mouth playing his guitar
at the picnic table, out in the dirt yard.
 
We slide into this world benign and pliable,
quills pressed down smooth over back and tail.
Only one hour here stiffens the barbs into thousands
of quick retorts. Everything this well-guarded
remembers being soft once.


^^EOP^^

I planted an apple tree in memory
of my mother, who is not gone,
 
but whose memory has become
so transparent that she remembers
 
slicing apples with her grandmother
(yellow apples; blue bowl) better than
 
the fruit that I hand her today. Still,
she polishes the surface with her thumb,
 
holds it to the light and says with no
hesitation, Oh, Yellow Transparent . . . 
  they're so fragile, you can almost see to the core. She no longer remembers how
 
to roll the crust, sweeten the sauce, but
her desire is clear—it is pie that she wants.
 
And so, I slice as close as I dare to the core—
to that little cathedral to memory—where
 
the seeds remember everything they need
to know to become yellow and transparent.
 
 


^^EOP^^

I will not speak ill of Jack Flick.
I will rarely look
at the scar he made on my cheek
one summer at the lake. 
I won't speak ill of Jack whose freckles
and gangly legs are gone.
So is the drained face I saw when he saw
what he'd done with a sharp rock
nonchalantly skipped. 
I will speak well, for it was somewhat
sweet to lie on the dock while Jack
and his friends bent down
and wiped my face with a sandy towel.
I will speak well of them,
for most are gone
and the wound proved small. 
I will speak well, for the rock
missed my eye. I can hardly find
the scar. Jack went into the air
corps, fought in one of the wars,
retired, and lived less than a year
before his tender heart gave out. 
I will speak well of Jack.


^^EOP^^

She couldn't help but sting my finger,
clinging a moment before I flung her
to the ground. Her gold is true, not the trick
evening light plays on my roses.
She curls into herself, stinger twitching,
gilt wings folded. Her whole life just a few weeks,
and my pain subsided in a moment.
In the cold, she hardly had her wits to buzz.
No warning from either of us:
she sleeping in the richness of those petals,
then the hand, my hand, cupping the bloom
in devastating force, crushing the petals for the scent.
And she mortally threatened, wholly unaware
that I do this daily, alone with the gold last light,
in what seems to me an act of love.


^^EOP^^

Sometimes after the flight show when my father
flew in formation with the other pilots,
diving and somersaulting in his Cessna,
he took us up. The crowd was driving off,
the windsocks disappeared. We flew above
the empty air strip, past the silver hangar,
the ballpark, then the bridge, beyond the school; 
and then, if there was fuel enough, we flew
to Hidden Lake where, just below us, Grandpa
was fishing in his rowboat, looking up,
waving his hat, and Grandma hurried out,
wearing her yellow apron. Oh, if only
we could go down and fish for perch with Grandpa!
But it was nearly sunset, and we flew 
back over woods and highways toward the town,
and finally there we were above our block,
our house, my Kool-Aid stand, my brother's blue
two-wheeler in the drive. How small it was—
how strange it seemed to look down on your life
from somewhere else. And suddenly I was sick
with loneliness. But we were all together: 
my brother with my father up in front,
Mother beside me in the back. And yet we must be small from there: our empty yard,
the Thompsons on their porch, the Barton's Airedale
trying to climb the fence, and Mother's clothesline,
my sweater hung to dry. Just then, if I had seen
myself on the swing set, I would not have been surprised.


^^EOP^^

                    
                    
                    Hour in which I consider hydrangea, a salt or sand plant, varietal, the question of varietals, the diet of every mother I know, 5 pounds feels like 20, I have lost … I have lost, yes, a sense of my own possible beauty, grown external, I externalize beauty. Beauty occurs on the surface of plants; the sun darkens the skin of my child, he is so small, he is beautiful (I can see; it is obvious) and everything about him is beautiful. Because he is small the bite of some insect, its venom makes his hand swell. He appears to feel nothing. He smashes his skull against the floor. He screams. I hold him in my lap on the kitchen floor in front of an open freezer, pressing a pack of frozen clay against his forehead. He likes the cold. I see; it is so obvious. Hydrangea. When I move, when I walk pushing my child’s stroller (it is both walking and pushing or hauling, sometimes, also, lifting; it is having another body, an adjunct body composed of errand and weight and tenderness and no small amount of power), I imagine I can feel this small amount of weight, this 5 pounds like 20, interfering with the twitch of every muscle in my body. As an object, a mother is confusing, a middle-aged mother with little spare flesh, I feel every inch of major muscle pulling against gravity and against the weight of my child, now sleeping. This is the hour for thinking hydrangea. Let no man look at me. I stop to brush the drowsy child’s little eye. His face. He barely considers his mother. I am all around him. Why should he consider what is all around him? Perhaps what is missing is a subtle power of differentiation. I am in, therefore, a time of mass apprehensions.
                

^^EOP^^

Is anything central?
Orchards flung out on the land,
Urban forests, rustic plantations, knee-high hills?
Are place names central?
Elm Grove, Adcock Corner, Story Book Farm?
As they concur with a rush at eye level
Beating themselves into eyes which have had enough
Thank you, no more thank you.
And they come on like scenery mingled with darkness
The damp plains, overgrown suburbs,
Places of known civic pride, of civil obscurity.
 
These are connected to my version of America
But the juice is elsewhere.
This morning as I walked out of your room
After breakfast crosshatched with
Backward and forward glances, backward into light,
Forward into unfamiliar light,
Was it our doing, and was it
The material, the lumber of life, or of lives
We were measuring, counting?
A mood soon to be forgotten
In crossed girders of light, cool downtown shadow
In this morning that has seized us again?
 
I know that I braid too much on my own
Snapped-off perceptions of things as they come to me.
They are private and always will be.
Where then are the private turns of event
Destined to bloom later like golden chimes
Released over a city from a highest tower?
The quirky things that happen to me, and I tell you,
And you know instantly what I mean?
What remote orchard reached by winding roads
Hides them? Where are these roots?
 
It is the lumps and trials
That tell us whether we shall be known
And whether our fate can be exemplary, like a star.
All the rest is waiting
For a letter that never arrives,
Day after day, the exasperation
Until finally you have ripped it open not knowing what it is,
The two envelope halves lying on a plate.
The message was wise, and seemingly
Dictated a long time ago, but its time has still
Not arrived, telling of danger, and the mostly limited
Steps that can be taken against danger
Now and in the future, in cool yards,
In quiet small houses in the country,
Our country, in fenced areas, in cool shady streets.


^^EOP^^

           Fresh out of the icebox, this brain looks
the wrong way from time to time, and misses
the cat stepping by, Gerry on the screen
laboring to tell the nuances his pink matter
almost notices, he’s not my brother, not really
my close friend, just my necessary neighbor
on a bicycle going by like a whistle from
the lips of someone I trust. He has a peculiar
skeleton arranged his own way in the mind’s pasture.
We were as they say “of an age” and so inter-
twine somehow, though I wanted to work when
he wanted to play. That long nose is in my life
and in my writing and so is the Okanagan River.
I sometimes get to the river when I am at work,
the sun on my back not the ink in my pen.
There was, when I was last in the Okanagan Valley, a
cat with big paws in the neighborhood, I was told,
fires I could see along the hillside, stunning heat
from the sky, enough to thaw any brain.


^^EOP^^




After Robert Hayden’s “Bone-Flower Elegy”



In the dream I enter him
I      the eater of numbers
the black-lipped barcode
of cost have come for him
because he owes me. He
owes me the broken machine
the bone structure gone limp
over leg of time. I      irreverent
as safe sex breathlessly
whispering this is not a threat
but a promise

^^EOP^^

Where we’d recently lain,
exchanging a kiss,
stork consorted with crane,
limpkin with ibis. 
Was this as much wedding
as there would ever be,
the fowls’ foot-webbing,
the identificatory 
ring around a throat?
Exchange of earth and air:
not a vow but a vote
of confidence a feather 
might tip by a single scale ...    
That one’s a raconteur,
so much salt in his tale;
this one’s a countertenor, 
lilting above the feast.
The archon of his hectare
 — spotted — spotted least.
Here’s a little heckler ...     
penciled seagull in the margin.
Following line by line
the path you took, I imagine
no print so fine.


^^EOP^^

Mother Dear, never apologize for nettles
I yanked in fury
from Lottie Shoop’s side yard —  
they stung me into seeing
fairy mosses lilypad
her middened juniper, 
the quivering gobble of her chin,
teacup clicking dentures as she sprang
up into her wattle hut
and broke a rib 
of aloe vera — 
gel belling the top of that claw goblet. 
It didn’t cool the sting, and yet, noticing
sunshine thumbing plums in a string
catch-all —  
I was already well.


^^EOP^^

                            look like birds. Scrawny
winter   birds   balanced by   two   sarong 
                                                      tail   feathers.   Some   look west,
                                        others north- 
east   toward   the
                                            mountain.   Stiff in the   cold & 
remote.   They  haven’t  been   loved
                                                        enough.   They grow 
                                           thinner   and thinner   in their   woody
streaked   feathers,   held together  only   by 
the exposed   spiral   of   internal
                                        organs.   After  a  while ,   the sun comes 
out and   all o f   the birds,   clutching   wire,   turn
                          an     electric            silver. 
This is     hopeful,,    but doesn’t   last.         Clouds
  take a  break   from   one   another , , 
                          re-
                          convene.   A half-inch of 
snow is rolled out   with   perfect    evenness
              across               the picnic   table,   as though 
                                                        someone made a blank
                                                     for what was 
                coming.    The nice thing
about   clothespin    birds   is             they   don’t 
“excrete.”
                           Jays   &   grosbeaks   &   finches 
&      mourning    doves    + ravens   leave
                their   paintings 
                everywhere , on   benches & limbs ,, , on fallen
pine needle fascicles \|/                    feldspar & quartz _ __ 
though   all  has  now   become
gesso    beneath    snow.   After   a  certain amount   of 
                           feeling
                hopelessly under- 
                         accomplished,   you look at   your   nails
and   want   to
                         paint them.         Is this how   birds 
              feel?                 No.         Birds fly
and   don’t    look 
                       down.      Or,   they   sit   `’’   amid branches
             and    peck   at the   brittle   waffled   bark 
                         & tiny    bugs    buried
              in   the marrow.  .< sszt sszt sszt .<   You, too, 
peck.  Familiar letters    on t he   keys have   lost
their    definition        and   resemble   finger- 
                            tip-size   daubs of   bird   paint   on back-
               lit platforms.   You   recall the   s   e   &   m 
only   via   entrenched   neural   pathways ,
            while   the   l   and   c      continue to 
morph   into tiny   archaic
                             symbols.    As though,  the  unconscious 
is forming      a message.       ( Always   “it”   has   something
                       unearthly     to say. ) Except 
the unconscious   is
                                        the earth ,    it’s   just   we 
don’t  know   how   she               does it. 
           St. Thomas of Aquinas  got  a delirium 
                                     hit of   t hat   at the end
          and decided  to   marry   it.   Each day 
your thumbs   grow   paler,   nails   coarser,   evolving
             toward   the ptero- 
                                dactyl: part  reptile,  part   bird.
As  a  child 
                        pterodactyls   scared you,         which meant
            they   had  your             attention.   Refusing to stay 
                        in   the   lineage,         they became
                                      their  own            form. 
             They had  an  iguana       for     a     father
and  a   pelican   for  a    mom, 
crispy  and  dipped  in  molasses.
If you were big enough 
                                      you could   eat   them
                          the  way   some people   eat grass- 
          hoppers.  Compulsive hole-
                         punchers,  if less   manic 
could be    sculptors,
             though it requires d-e-t-a-c-h-m-e-n-t 
to see  it    that way , , if  you  are
                                        a   lilac   leaf   sketching   outside 
the   library   window.        What are those    books
               doing   in there   together ?!                  Nothing ! 
When a   new    one arrives,   they   fall  in
               love,,  one   by one.  Inside  their  covers, 
                           a   million   leaves, each
w/  black   growth.     A pattern of       fungus , 
               the  shed  skin  of          snakes  &  dna
traces.   Like   bird   poop, 
but   more orderly     and the message is   see-
                                                   through. Don’t you 
             wish    you   could   lift   the   letters
                         and   release them       halfway 
               back   to
the  liquid   state ,, ,   before they   got   connected   to 
the   circuitry?   It might be    kind   of
                                      relaxing.  You might be 
                                                                as good of a
                                                                painter 
             as a         cuckoo    bird.    A few nights   ago
you  dreamt   you were very     pregnant & 
in need of    a  place       to give   birth.   Your  boyfriend
              had   left         you     and  2    therapists 
                         let   you    live         w/ them
because   you    resembled   their     daughter  —  
though they were     suspicious.   Who    can blame  them?
                                                       As for your nails, 
                                 find  a     mani-
curist,   someone  who   knows   what they are 
            doing.  Druids never  lived   here,
            that was    Europe,    but  you 
and   the   sage-
brush 
             are   distantly   related      via     microbial
ancestors;         in spite of    yourself,   you are 
                               surrounded
by   family.   \\|/


^^EOP^^




Child. We are done for
in the most remarkable ways.
— Brigit Pegeen Kelly



It would be winter, with a thin snow. An aged sunbeam
would fall on me, then on a nearby summit, until a mass
of ice would come upon me like a crown of master diamonds
in shades of gold and pink. The base of the mountains
would be still in darkness. The snow would melt,
making the mountain uglier. The ice would undertake
a journey toward dying. My iliacus, from which orchids bloom,
would learn to take an infant’s shape, some premature creature
weaned too soon. My femoral nerve, from which lichen grows
in many shades, would learn to take breaths of its own
and would issue a moan so labored it could have issued
from two women carrying a full-length wooden casket, with dirt
made from a girl inside. The dirt would have been buried
with all of the girl’s celestial possessions. Bearing the casket
would demand more muscles than earthbound horses have.
The girl would have been twenty-four. This was my visio.
Sometimes I think of it as prophecy. Other times, history.
For years it was akin to some specific land, with a vessel
that would come for me, able to cross land, sea, the spaces
of the universe, able to burrow deep into the ground.
Anything could summon it — a breaking in cloud cover,
wind chimes catching salt outside my mother’s window,
a corner of a painting. And I learned how to call it, too.
This is the only skill of which I have ever been proud.
When my sister died, from the head of my visio came offspring
in the thousands, armed to the teeth, each its own vessel.
My first, their mother, lived on. For itself and its hoard
it found a permanent home in a cave at the bottom of a lake.
And it waited until I was standing on a mountain to sing to me: You will call this mountain home until I tell you to move again.
There will always be more of it underground than you

^^EOP^^

Would you rather hear the louche pun drawn
from glory hole, lip wrap or fingering 
or hear a tiny hammer striking wire?
Would you rather see the molten birthing glass? 
Seat Eros next to Kronos, for the banter. I heard she’s yet unplowed — I heard your quiver dangled down —   I heard you dwell in borrowed forms — love’s nothing but glimmer-to-wither, dawn’s fireflies expired. 
In this place we sift & bounce the words like dice
thrice dip a pipe into the magma, o my stars. 
Lear & Gloucester walk into a bar
debating again the color of bluffs or moors 
or cormorants: like craquelure     like damp tea leaf driftwood    no, peat steam    no, brined sand-apple ink 
Were all your letters in fact suns?
Forgotten, after all that trouble —  
Are those bellows blowing some?
A field of broken bottles, fragments blue. 
A tune invented to divert a girl.


^^EOP^^

paint over the dead end sign
           are police writers?
           yes they are writing into
                                 books our
                         little cherub of
                  misunderstanding
             a thinking to push us
              back into body of the
                                          whole love yourself more next time
                     their reports read
stones sink as they please everything expands at the very end a lit cigarette into our dark hello


^^EOP^^

                           this is
                          exactly
                       the kind
                       of space
                      I want to
           follow you into
      holding your little
mute worm on a twig
make it marble
make it touch like tough winter
in the next life we will have longer love
better places with extended embraces
now we leave the song to return to the front
    leaf closing on closeness of
    mothers in the next world overseeing premium waste of the planet reincarnate anywhere but here
   land on a different rim


^^EOP^^

Bouteloua black grama grass red
chino side-
oats blue grama grass hairy buffalo- grass toboso three-awn
land’s dawn 旦 sun
over sand, tumble
wind- mill witch- cup- saltgrass
plains love- indiangrass, prairie
cordgrass, pink pappusgrass, sprangle- top green knotroot bristle, bluestem, tangle-
head, sacaton
panicles open, golden drop-
seed blooms desert winter- grass, awns twist, un-
twist, such syllables flicker out of grass : Nanissáanah
thirst, ghost dance native
spirits, active
roots, footstalks
to soil as to site, stems bend, range- lands wave, seiche
fields sway, clouds
pass over- grazed grass
staked, fenced dries, weakens, dies,
fallen crowns, the grasslands
what comes to pass, ranch-
hand lands, live- stock livelihood
wildlife gone, displaced, migrations
impeded, scales im-
balanced the years spread, each itself hitched to everything else in the universe nodes hollowed, drought-
land years, drops on the hardpan nature
is endless regeneration
trichloris, muhly, switch-
grass, wind misses 沙 沙 shasha through the pass-
es, whispering seeds will pass, will pass within leaves
listening grasses, not only the revelation
but the nature behind

^^EOP^^

There’s a spirit in me that admits no weakness.
Is it the best of me or worst?
Cow daisies burn their stars into the stalled air of pastures.
No one else cares whether they’ll last. 
I shirk the sick and go out to pick flowers,
Bushels of the tough and prickly-legged,
Whichever I can pull out of the gulch,
And push them into thunder-pitchers.
An invalid in a peignoir pulls the covers over her head
In the high cherry bed great-grandmother had made
To match the chest of drawers. 
Solitudes gather under the Beau D’arc.
I ache for the meanness, the glorious meanness
That knocked croquet balls into its soft meal trunk,
To hear the thwack of that mallet,
To be it, as it cleanly cracks and lets the other ball be gone. 
Acquisitive gall made my people call themselves victorious.
They thought they won the Mexican War, among others.
One ancestor drove his bayonet into the dirt when he returned — 
This tree is what took root and bloomed,
Though Beau D’arcs grow complex in illness.
The locusts have chewed its thatch into fretwork,
Its leaves fluted crisp, poxed yellowish, kissed by the worm. 
Huptemugs believed that train rides to the capital to hear
Charlemagne singing Franz would cure the soul
(As venison is cured) against life’s turmoil — 
They could not tolerate complaints of the feet,
Corns and hammertoes, evidence of rot. 
If generous you might have called us committed to transcendence,
Though who that ever fought her way into an opera box
Ever let the arias consign her to a fate of constant care?
There is a spirit in me that admits no weakness.
When it sings, the rest of me despairs.


^^EOP^^

Come our one great bushfire
pigs, sty-released, declined to quit
their pavements of gravel and shit.
Other beasts ran headlong, whipping 
off with genitals pinched high.
Human mothers taught their infants creek-dipping.
Fathers galloped, gale-blown blaze stripping
grass at their heels and on by 
too swift to ignite any houses.
One horse baked in a tin shed,
naked poultry lay about dead
having been plucked in mid flight 
but where pigs had huddled
only fuzzy white hoofprints led
upwind over black, B B B
and none stayed feral in our region.


^^EOP^^




Everything is made of everything.
— Leonardo da Vinci



I found Rome in the woods. 
Fair to admit it’s mostly
tundra to the west in the park, past Toklat
the Denali I revised, low grasslands
engineered to freeze deep
by October — this being Alaska — the great 
            Tabularium close to the Temple of
            Castor and Pollux I rebuilt that same summer — 
            not superimposed, exact as any scheme 
in secret — the Arch of Septimius Severus at the gravel bar
        where fox drank from a river turned stream,
           a Theater of Marcellus near
               the ranger station where one raven,
                                                                                    such a brat,
   complained of
                      my Circus Maximus, Trajan’s Column,
                              my Baths of Diocletian,
too many spots
soaked in unpronounceable Latin. 
                    I really did, I shouldered bits of it,
      a ruin-hushed haunted business, my brain
                                                         a truck bed, a lift,
pulleys big as a whale’s heart,
expletives of cheap wonder all over
                                                                  my woodlot
and expanse.
                          One self-anoints to embellish
day, years, life thus far, and think oneself so ...     
                       Then busted — 
by a raven! 
Well, that’s memory for you, that’s so-called
        civilization for you, to layer up,
                         to redo the already done. 
I mean it’s a fact, the puny life span we’re allotted.
              And proof — Denali in August, fireweed,
spunky scrawny first Latinate — Erechtites hieracifolia —  
               giving off flowers to mark
               what weeks left, little
               time bomber, time traveler, ancient
               slips red-flagging the countdown to winter
               by climbing its own stalk. 
Something perverse about that.
Something perfectly fiendishly self-conscious about that.
 
• 
From the start perverse, any premise.
      Ask ... We can’t know. To be compelled 
            makes an occasion. Rome’s grand
     past horrific, fire and ash, swamp into bog, lust
              and bloodlust —  
The Alaska Range dreams lurid as Rome,
                                        the worst
way below being fire, summer snow at night
      off the highest peaks by noon
              as distant from our cabin as the size
of a hand if I
                         held up the one with
                         an eye in the middle 
to know how this works. Some have the power to
raise from the dead a before, before
scary and beautiful
           back to mystery cults, in caves, rubble
far under a Roman street, the altar to
Mithras still slaying his bull, crumbling the stonework.               All things being equal. But they’re not.
                    Agony, it’s older.
                      Ask the moose at Denali,
                         the snowshoe hare, the lynx, 
such a wily courtly lot.
                                           Ask Ovid
      banished to his hovel on the Black Sea, aching
                for Rome’s exalted rude cacophony, each
      exiled month a big thick X down                                     Februarius,                                  Aprilis to home-shattered sick enough 
for an undersong.
Look it up! Undersong: a strain; a droning;
the burden of a song — 

^^EOP^^

He slips on ice near a mailbox —  
no gemsbok leaps across the road —  
a singer tapped an eagle feather on his shoulders —  
women washed indigo-dyed yarn in this river, but today gallium and germanium particles are washed downstream —  
once they dynamited dikes to slow advancing troops —  
picking psilocybin mushrooms and hearing cowbells in the mist —  
as a child, he was tied to a sheep and escaped marauding soldiers —  
an apple blossom opens to five petals —  
as he hikes up a switchback, he remembers undressing her —  
from the train window, he saw they were on ladders cutting fruit off cacti —  
in the desert, a crater of radioactive glass —  
assembling shards, he starts to repair a gray bowl with gold lacquer —  
they ate psilocybin mushrooms, gazed at the pond, undressed —  
hunting a turkey in the brush, he stops —  
from the ponderosa pines: whoo-ah, whoo whoo whoo — 


^^EOP^^

She sits there on that high hill    just sits there and lets things pass through her until one snags and she fits it into the pattern of this fine mesh of    what    spirit?    But, ah, there’s a cowboy hat and a cherry bomb tattoo and it snags    and what she lets through may,  I say, may be caught second time around like that oil pan off an old Hudson or that artificial leg    toward morning she’s collected some radio signals from a dead ship    and a janitor’s song and some folderol from a church picnic with iced tea fried chicken collards and a whole lot of stentorian god-speak with apple pie and ice cream.    I’ll be damned if all those things aren’t moving around in one another’s magnetic fields, some kind of counterpoint that happens each time she breathes    it’s a mobile only no wires    there’s a piece of mirror turning on a spider web and now she’s a    signal beacon    says come on up I’ve got something to read and somehow it all works. Then she pulls this silk thread and it becomes a form.


^^EOP^^

Though I am more Che than Chavez, I am still a dove.
I do not apologize  to you. Or to the state
of California. The IRS. New York. That administrator I bit in the third grade, who was delicious and sweet. I, oh,
so cold.
In the mind, the Dionysian defiles walls the Apollonian protects. I am always looking to take something 
down. Usually it’s me.
Two bulls stand on a hill. The younger says, Father, let’s run down and fuck a cow. The father, wiser, longer in the horn, higher on the grass, 
reminds his son how Moses was also horned, beamed with light, that to handle a massive snake,
to charm Pharaoh, to steal fire, to fly, to unzip the sea, is to speak and not tap vanity.  Moses descended Mount Sinai with cracked slabs
and saw a golden calf. The father said to the young bull, No son, let’s strut down and fuck them all.  Thus begins the beef  between bird and bee, the isthmus isolating order from chaos. 
My mind is made up of so many different cuts of meat.
My marbles stay as mixed as my metaphors. As my myths. As myself. 
At parties my favorite icebreaker involves asking strangers
to describe themselves with three words. Their descriptions  are a slipping 
away to change clothes. Identity and irony neatly knit in an ugly Christmas sweater. 
Sometimes I feel so Socratic: oft-laureled, poison-palmed,
toga-partied, exasperated by the masses: I wouldn’t have guessed ambitious. Free-spirited, you don’t say.  Other times I feel like the woman rambling among the vapors escaping the ground
in Iceland’s volcanic canyon, making a bus an em dash in a rest stop,
where some fifty-odd persons
searching for themselves in true existentialism  are yellow lupines growing on the side of the road. An epiphany can not be achieved, as a cedar waxwing
cannot be more cedar qua waxwing. Eventually what we’re looking 
for appears. Sometimes incitation opens
at the bottom of a straw, a spoon, a barrel of wine, the windfall happens while eating farfalle,  while flipping through The Autobiography of a Brown Buffalo. At the moon  me the animal roofs atop brownstones, sin vergüenza. Upwards our eyes scamper, a reflex action, when inserting an object in the mouth, 
even when the object
is a gun. Over hills a road erodes the way home. Only after the Coast Guard 
has readied a helicopter,
do we descend the cold volcano in Eldg já
to realize we are the woman  in the search party looking for ourselves.  to poetry. In moments of ecstasy  we are lifted
 
     
At the shore of the Aegean Sea or at the banks of the river Evros, 
he loosened his sandals while Pegasus stamped the soil, crushing reeds  and hoofing away stray wood. The sun bandaged light on a sky 
that would not heal. Perseus,  with eyes heavenward, formed the shapes of gods into clouds,  slipped his hand into the woven sack, and felt the flint  of primped snakes. He thought, But it is the cold weight of scales that protects.  As sure as a child,
he lined leaves rocked to sleep by salt water waves  for a bed, so as not to, with sand, or with hubris, bruise Medusa’s disunited head. One day, like a beam through skylight,  we realize life is a puddle jumper of  tragedy. Some stones sink fast  yet still hold light. So phantom are a statue’s busted arms and toes. Everything must go. 
And yet I still hanger hope when shopping the racks of discount  stores. Veni vidi vici when I see Vince,
freeze when I see the coiled coif  of Versace’s emblem. Like Sisyphus,
errybody think they headed for the top.  Sing, started from the bottom, to my reflection in the dressing room mirror,  now we here boy when I remember  that Oh my god Becky, look at her butt passes the Bechdel test. 
I have eaten from the tree the fig that sullies and seen that the meat’s not always  fair. I was, like Perseus and Sir Mix-a-Lot,
born by a riv of water,  felled by pride when a brown boy, tattooed with age, 
obsessed with fame, took his talents to Vermont to kiss trees and tap syrup from the sap. There and there and there, he kissed. Here and here
he drank. So drunk he hugged an old white woman off the ground. None of the gods I love
love me. To be tipsy  is to leverage one’s self. Or so I’m told. The pulley
is considered civilization’s  highest achievement. Icarus killed himself  being lifted.


^^EOP^^

1 
Since the irrational
“because I said so”
start, 
they’d had their differences: 
color that isn’t really
color, spin
that isn’t spin 
because attitude’s
best
when it has no content. 
Ask a physicist
what “charge” is; 
he’ll say your question
makes no sense.  
 
2 
Word had it
that if they surrendered 
their feckless ways 
and their lives
with no end, 
if they joined up,
they would get a head, 
something to speak for them:
The head says, 
“I don’t want to die.” 
Says, 
“I am all
alone here.”


^^EOP^^

Strand. String.
In this dream, 
the paths cross
and cross again. 
They are spelling
a real boy 
out of repetition.
 
• 
Each one
is the one 
real boy. 
Each knows
he must be 
wrong
about this, but 
he can’t feel
how.
 
• 
The fish
and the fisherman, 
the pilot,
the princess, 
the fireman and
the ones on fire.


^^EOP^^




And as to the poets — it is those straying in Evil that follow them:
Do you not see that they wander about bewildered in every valley?
And that they say what they practice not?
— Qur’an 26:224–226



The man I confused Allah for speaks into the microphone while the angels on my shoulders chew a mouthful of my hair. I wake up to a severed goat head and look at it hard enough to remember the animal in its entirety, a functional thing. The Saudis have built skyscrapers taller than the mountains in Makkah. This is a sign of the apocalypse; we worry with our backs to each other and look for Isa in the faces of men who appear to spin gold straight from the guttural source.  I repeat the word mustaqbil like a new prayer; when the dog barks at a brick wall mustaqbil, when anemones collapse back into gothic buds mustaqbil, when I wet my arms to my elbows in the sink mustaqbil. All while Israfil kicks his feet against a stone wall and cleans his trumpet with each utterance. In the village, three men dragged a boy into our orchards and beat him to a pulp. The woman who eloped was strangled and thrown into the river. Pickpockets robbed the mourners at my uncle’s funeral — mustaqbil mustaqbil mustaq — my throat is infected by the thick-tongued promise; each night diluted into its prior belly. I use language to build the gardens I’m destined to be expelled from, each imagined rose rendered true.


^^EOP^^

This is the sound of the bell. It rings,
full of brass and the end it brings:
once for the children, once for the child
who sits alone. His eyes hurt and mild,
he waits, holding his things. 
Time should hold no meaning
for him yet. You don’t learn
how to play; you forget. But he knows a while
well, and longs for the clang of the bell. 
A bell is a room of nothing.
No, a dome with a hidden swing — 
a will, a sway, a tone, a peal,
the beginning of song. The wild
crowd nears, passes, laughing.
Here is the sound of the bell.


^^EOP^^

refuge temple  254 Purdy Street, Buffalo, NY, childhood home of Lucille Clifton 
There will be another storm always on the air
Or in the air or are you the air
Cold unrecognizable following
The inside road
This vessel bears one through
Snow or time to find the house
Paint peeling and maybe unfamiliar but the address
Is to a place that doesn’t exist anymore
An empty lot
Now owned by the woman
Next door who leases it to a
Storefront church that needs the space for parking
I take a selfie with the snowbank
254 Purdy Street
Sunday morning they will plow and cars will fill the place
Worshippers filing next door
Names of the family who lived here forgotten Sayles their name was Sayles
Well there’s Miss Bowden says the neighbor
Who lives over there
Ninety years old
Lived here her whole life
If anyone’d remember she would
Though if the house don’t hold against the world
And the body don’t hold against the world
Snow falling down
What can hold
The church house the neighbor next door
The snow Old Miss Bowden
This empty lot
We empty now
Everybody drive home
Song done over
Snow river hover
House is gone
Stormsent era
That Miss Bowden may remember
The twelve-fingered girl who lived here
We tell the neighbor: her name was Lucille
Playing in the street
Afraid of the dark
Bringing the light  
 
salon des refusés  East Side, Cleveland, OH, apartment building of Julie Patton 
In the house of Julie Patton
Bumblebees do sing pollen
In the cave of ears
Every thing listens
Jimi, Barack, and Marilyn Buck
The saints of the place
In vigil of excellent beings
Light poles hold typical beasts
Though here they empty themselves
Into me
Orange spaces do make
A world again for though the gods are mythic
The goddesses spin
Dear Julie sing
Me through the long hallway
The dark one sleeved in your mother’s
States of mind
State of mine is the one that opens my body
In heat through dark and salted moments
Body is a book
House does quiver
Unwritten the way of how to find you
House is the book
In the language of feathers that launch
Whose heart could race
Winter air winter season that rushes
How we in dark are slung
The dark that opens its hallways
Time mastered by Shiva and Hanuman
I did stand in the empty space
Filled by snow
Then here in the sun-flirted front room
Watched by Saint Nina Simone and Saint Joan Baez and Saint  Buffy Sainte-Marie
I wonder forward in Sapphic tongue
Who is remember me
Who is open me with their tongue
Who languages the space of a house that don’t exist
Better thought sun see Julie sing sanctified
Sing swung sing one and one and one and one  
 
school house  Barrington, Rhode Island, right near the Bay, home of C.D. Wright  and Forrest Gander 
When she gives me directions and describes it to me
I expect a red-room schoolhouse
Driving across the water from Providence
Into the stream-laced far shore
Far shore where a boat unlands
To determine the shape of what isn’t
There I drive past wrong streets
Wrong houses places whose bells I ring
Stranger in the forest and dark-skinned too
Where do I belong
From the bathhouse I came
Where I worshiped at all manner of strange altars
Does this make me more or less human
Tongue makes you human
And how it translates the body into language
To find the door as it was described to me
Frosted glass and Japanese characters lining it
School saying the language of the sun
No sums add up here
But she calls me in
And I frown to know long to know
What holds the house against the world
How will words survive the dissolution of the body
Of the planet’s core
Sore and soar it came down through the cloud cover
Gray-white curtains
House of a dozen languages
At the cold lake the far away lake
She grabbed me post-lecture where I told about how
I could not translate the words of the poet until I came to her own sun-loved city
She begged me to always love all manner of strangers
I thought she meant the regions of the body
I’d have promised her anything though years later in Rhode Island
Named for an island no one can find
Lover I love you forever
House that disappeared
Books that live in the air
Island that no one knows
While on Purdy Street good people park their cars in the snow
Go inside and sing
We don’t have nothing more than this anymore
No planet no lover no words no nothing no more


^^EOP^^

So you see why it could not have been a more humble moment.
If there was any outward sign of regalia
It might have been the twilight crowning of the day, just then,
A perfect moment of dusk, but changing, as a wave does
Even as you admire it. Because the southbound stop
Mirrors the one northbound where we so often find ourselves
At the beginning, southbound’s return holds the memory
Of northbound’s setting-out, and the grassy median between
With its undisturbed trees defines an elusive strip of the present
Where no one lives. After twenty-eight years of the trip,
It’s like two beakers of colored water — one green, one blue — 
Have poured themselves back and forth, because
On one side we are tinted by remembering the other.
But this aspect of the journey, at least, we know we will repeat.
As dusk cohered that moment — aquas, pinks, violets — 
Just at that moment as I was returning to the car
A woman came the other way, her two young daughters
Holding her hands, and the gloaming sparkled around them
So that I froze, as they were backlit, starry,
They were the southbound reminder of who I had been beginning
The trip. She didn’t look like me, but what I did recognize
Was her clarity of purpose, in what Sharon Olds called the days of great usefulness, making life as nice
As she could for them, always writing the best story,
And also, beneath her skin, living with delight as quiet
As the shoots anchoring grass beneath the earth.
I walked back to my car. My husband sat in the driver’s seat,
Our weekend’s luggage thrown in back. Tell me we really had those girls, I said, and that they held my hands like that. When I got home
I pictured her helping them each into bed — I knew it was
Later than she had hoped — then reading
Each section of the paper’s terrible news, finally alone.


^^EOP^^

                                 Being in a coma can play
havoc with your sense of time. It can
turn your eyes from brown to blue. It can
grow hair on your belly, it can get you lost
between bedroom and office. If you are to
live in extra innings, you’ll have to watch the corners,
step around bad things, ignore insults and welcome
loving hands that sculpt you in your chair. Being
refrigerated and put to sleep, dropping out of time,
you have to save your humor and guard it, a precious
trove to bring out as needed, white strips on the
road flying beneath your vehicle, eat them up, wake
to a busy underground world, where people in
body bags keep passing by, tilted toward you know where.
Where half the people in your life have gone, dissolving
your sense of time, which was never supposed to have
an end.


^^EOP^^

Imagine that — my last words
might have been spoken to the dog, she
who saved my life, it has been said, spoken
with no thought
of reply nor of understanding, a genial insult
maybe, a philosophical conundrum
posed aeons before any household pet ever
turned an ear. In the ambulance I made no remark
about trees nor how tired I was of them,
and in the second ambulance our dog’s heart
beat hard with terror.


^^EOP^^

One son plays monster rage. His brother
plays ship crashed in a maze. We
are reading Hulk. We are reading
Theseus. White sails, green men,
bright women who give everything
and get nothing. The monster son
would never sail a ship into
a maze, but brothers are not
the same. They hear the same stories
and make different toys of them,
muscled figures in their fists, walls
of wood and magnets. Who knows
why a part of me always departs
this place, glides out the window
to rain and falling leaves, dresses
of wetness and gold. She floats
there, blessed by air, but when
she tries to slip back in, she can’t;
she hangs beyond the glass, panicked,
then bulging with fury. Days later
another part of me flies, into a maple
the color of platelets, and another into
bareness and sky. I’ve lost count of
how many fists are now pounding
my house, how many mouths are
braying how many cries, but here
inside, for now, my dear sons call to me
for their fallen castles, built again,
to find all the missing arrows.


^^EOP^^

Where there’s smoke
there are mirrors 
and a dry ice machine,
industrial quality fans. 
If I’ve learned anything
about the present moment
 
• 
But who doesn’t
love a flame, 
the way one leaps
into being 
full-fledged,
then leans over 
to chat
 
• 
Already the light
is retrospective,
sourceless, 
is losing itself
though the trees
are clearly limned.


^^EOP^^

It is Hermes stepping off his winged sandal. ... I saw the Writing Spider sitting with aplomb
Even his caduceus, despite the scandal dead center her creation, above the compost
of its forfeiture, lies abandoned (sage location); what I wondered most
like an Android or iPad on a nightstand was whether the sweetgum burrs and dried leaves
grown footed for the purpose of bearing away were ornaments or accidents she interweaves
any such device or gadget as may in the clearly golden silk, whose subwebs
distract him from a more pressing matter. are occupied by diminutive male sub-celebs
Herse is perched on the precipice of the mattress holding down the fort (as she holds court)
with its luxurious bedspread, where tapestry long after she vanishes, stopping short
vis-à-vis itself interleaves the allegory. of the epiphany or apotheosis
Real gold thread weighs the covers we expect from genteel arts, or a goddess
a cherub heaves to turn down for the lovers. “Who thereupon did rende the cloth in pieces every whit,
Would that the same in his wings might tip the scales, Bicause the lewdnesse of the Gods was biased so in it.
and with tears, put salt in these mythical tales And with an Arras weavers combe of Box she fiercely smit
by sinking level with us l’enfant in the room ... Arachne on the forehead full a dozen times and more.”


^^EOP^^

A circle.
What was needed was a circuit,
and a good operating system. 
What’s within is without being seen
to be so.
Optical anomaly as unexceptional. 
Four left’s a square.
One way turning system
until it becomes its other way. 
A passive insistence on multiples
until that divorces itself,
becomes single. 
A single pitch made up of the
sounds of multiples. 
Conduction, instrumental absence.
Fundamentals establish separate
planets.
Similarity wars upon their lines,
planes. 
Said well, here opens, his, sits
at its bottom.
The bodies. 
Spoke well, agreed in kind, general.
But the way of its expression
requires hurt and then, treatment
of skin for leather clothes or whatever,
it’s old, sometimes, often. 
Depending on the question, it can be
the answer. 
One shouldn’t be proud to not
have it. 
A knee, an elbow, three arms up.
Then a last one, a fourth. 
Last and happiest, willing, fully
skin end. 
The whey, foam, on the head
of the safest society in human
civilization. 
Amnesia to people
who will actually
harm and hurt.


^^EOP^^

b-boy Wordsworth beatbox vocal cord
code switching through the wheat fields at daybreak
clicking his teeth against the corn’s high yellow thighs
prying open like the sunlight’s tear ducts
on the morning the moon forgot how to speak Twi
the cicadas having screeched all night in Old English
like a man who has forgotten his name
calling out the leaves of grass as though
stalks of letters at right angles have meaning
a way of theorizing the rhetoric of beauty
a fig tree trembling at the rain’s hungry lick
a finch weaving myth into a nested crown of logic
the wildflowers’ arms on dial-up internet
a virgin using the petals as her service provider he loves me, he loves me not, with every flick of her wrist
the wind knowing the typeface her lips are set in
pockmark cheeks peppered with salt
the politics of resentment seasoning the spittle true poems flee like a slave in Mississippi
Googling “home” with no filter or cookies
the tuning fork having shorted in the eardrum’s mouth
the devil was in the details when he read the star’s hands
prongs of a serpent’s embrace, steam dancing on
a cloud’s rolled tongue, wet and pregnant
with words so soft the dirt could swallow the sound
what must we remember, to forget how we were born?
when we ask for advice it is rather for permission
for we know not what we do when we do it in free will
a robot puts a conch shell to its lips and blows
a man puts a seashell to his ear and hears the ocean
tell a lie long enough and it will surely turn to truth


^^EOP^^

Terrible are the rose names ...    
Stakeholders in a tradition of
“Grande Amore” and “True Love”
(one carmine, the other blush ... ), their aims 
are, for the most part, scattershot.
“Mothersday” and “Playboy,”
“Senior Prom” and “Let’s Enjoy”
vie with a lyrical “Lady of Shalott,” 
while a flyweight “Pink Knockout”
comes “Outta the Blue” to mock
“Honey Perfume,” “Pillow Talk”
— jock Cupid wielding clout. 
Then maybe a puckish curator
pairs “Las Vegas” with “Nearly Wild,”
“Buttercream” with “Julia Child,”
“Aloha” with “Hello, Neighbor ... ”
 
• 
Misenus, son of Aeolus, god of the wind,
don’t you think it’s bad form
to practice trumpet on this platform, 
what with the dentistry squeal
at construction site decibel levels
of braking blade shaving molar steel, 
dropped-in blare of delays and arrivals
squelched against granite, at close intervals,
while you riff on “Over the Rainbow” — ? 
You received some negative attention
from Triton, after blowing his conch so loud
you inadvertently entered yourself 
in an unwinnable contest; now,
stuck in a twenty-first-century translation
of hell, you press the stops, and for an obol 
prepare our burial in an infinite axial scroll
with a tinier and tinier turning radius,
as if we were those hordes, the unsanctified, 
who shoved one another along the Cocytus,
none led on to the golden bough
by Venus’s semaphore, the unloved rock doves, 
whom Virgil treats so gently in the Aeneid.


^^EOP^^

                    
                    
                    Don’t bother the earth spirit who lives here. She is working on a story. It is the oldest story in the world and it is delicate, changing. If she sees you watching she will invite you in for coffee, give you warm bread, and you will be obligated to stay and listen. But this is no ordinary story. You will have to endure earthquakes, lightning, the deaths of all those you love, the most blinding beauty. It’s a story so compelling you may never want to leave; this is how she traps you. See that stone finger over there? That is the only one who ever escaped.
                

^^EOP^^

                    
                    
                    Invisible fish swim this ghost ocean now described by waves of sand, by water-worn rock. Soon the fish will learn to walk. Then humans will come ashore and paint dreams on the dying stone. Then later, much later, the ocean floor will be punctuated by Chevy trucks, carrying the dreamers’ decendants, who are going to the store.
                

^^EOP^^

I was given a city, with coffee and sunlight. “The coin-purse smell of the subway,” I wrote. In the mornings policemen would stand, lightstruck and pleasured, over trays of danish. Mornings I wrote and workmen raised up their nets. Hallelujah the brick, the debris! I was given a city. The city got between me and God.
 
I was given a house. The curtains breathed over wide sills. There was a leaf in the middle of the floor, I loved the crispness of the leaf. I loved the privacy of sills. The sills sailed, I fell into the sills. The sills got between me and God.
 
I was given a mud hut. The walls curved to meet the ceiling like a tongue curves to make a word.
 
I was given God, with salt and sweet together. I was given a piece of meat. I loved the flesh. I was given bread only. I was given only water. I loved the coolness of the water. The water got between me and the feast.
 
I had an empty plate and there was the color of it. I cannot even describe the color of it.
 
I was given a cell with a window. There was a certain light at evening.
 
I was given nothing but the air, and the air dazzled.
 


^^EOP^^

My ancestors weren’t hippies, cotton
precluded fascination with flowers.
I don’t remember communes, I remember
ghettos. The riots were real, not
products of hallucinogens. Free love had
been at Redbones since black unemployment
and credit saturation.
 
The white women my mother cleaned
for didn’t notice she had changed. I guess
it was a small event, a resurrected African
jumping out the gap in her front teeth. I
guess it looked like a cockroach; that’s
what she was supposed to have, not dignity.
 
My mother just couldn’t get excited
about the Beatles, those mops she swilled
in ammonia everyday on their heads. Besides,
she didn’t work like a dog but like a woman;
they aren’t the same. The hair was growing long
for the same reasons Pinocchio’s nose did.
 
I can think only of a lesbian draping
crepe paper chains over my head to make a
black Rapunzel possible; that’s how a white
woman tried to lift my burdens. At the time
I didn’t reject her for being lesbian or
white but for both burdens. That was when
I didn’t want Ivory soap to be what
cleaned me, made me presentable to society.
All the suds I’d seen were white, they still
are but who cares? I’m more interested in
how soap dwindles in my hand, under the faucet.
 
I’m old enough to remember blocks
of ice, old enough or poor enough.
I remember chipping away at it, broken
glass all over the floor. Later in the
riots, the broken glass of looting tattled
how desperate people were to keep cool.
 
There are roses now in my mother’s yard.
Sometimes she cuts them, sets them in Pepsi
bottles throughout her rooms. She is,
I admit, being sentimental. Looting her
heart. My father who planted them is gone.
That mop in the corner
is his cane growing roots.
 


^^EOP^^

Department of Trance
Department of Dream of Levitation
Department of White Fathom
Department of Winding
Sometimes my son orders me lie down
I like when he orders me lie down          close your eyes
Department of Paper Laid Gentry
Department of Sound of Sheets of Paper
                                                                           he covers me with
then sings
I like best the smallest sounds he makes then
Department of This Won’t Sting
Am I slipping away
Department of Violet Static
as if he were a distant station
Department of Satellite
My child says you sleep
Department of Infinitely Flexible Web
and covers my face with blankness
Department of Tap-Tapping the Vein
Department of Eyelash
I can’t speak
                           or even blink
                                                      or the page laid over my face will fall
Department of Clear Tape in Whorls and Double Helixes on the Wall
He says Mama don’t look 
Department of You Won’t Feel a Thing
I cannot behold
Department of Pinprick
He will not behold
Department of Veils and Chimes
of Lungs Afloat in Ether
 
I like this best
Department of Spider Vein
when I am most like dead
and being with him then, Department of Notes
Struck from Thin Glasses Successively at Random
I must explain to my child that sleep
                                                                    is not the same as dead
Department of Borderlessness
so that he may not be afraid of
Department of Fingertips Lightly on Eyelids
so I can lie and listen
not holding not carrying not working
Department of Becalmed             faint sound of him
 
                                                                                                 I am gone
 
His song is the door back to the room
 
I am composed of the notes
 


^^EOP^^

A tang approaches, like the smell of snow.
Illness like a color deepens—
pale gray, thick-in-a-cloak gray, secret coat silk,
and finally the weight of rough pelts heaped on the bed.
 
The last enchantment of the day is tearing pages out of a book.
The paper soft and thin, like falling asleep
(a hand backstage smoothing my hair:
the school friend, Lakamp, became an undertaker)
 
My baby laughs to rip the pages.
Stays by me, does this damage.
The tearing moves like voltage through my own hands.
                 Oh mother skimming fever
 
I need him to linger
                 are you still happening there, in your body?
 
I just want to lie at the edge of breaking.
 
Yes, I am still backstage, here in my body.
The baby pulls out another page—
leaving him would come this easily.
 
I will bind myself to the thinnest sounds,
the feather coming out of the pillow.
 
Please keep ripping up the words.
Please don’t need anything from me.
 


^^EOP^^

Food in the underworld, the Death
King
 
In his seedy, green nightgown
Holding up flowers.
 
The warden of the underworld
In her plastic, pink
 
Wheelchair
Serving silver trays of
 
Shit and death and black
Gelatinous.
 
Birth, the music
Reminds me and
 
Will not stop
When I turn it off,
 
A warped music box Trapped inside. 
 
I repeat what I cannot bear:
Chronic repetition.
 
This poem is its own
Language.
 
It marks the mind
Like a missing memory
 
Marks the body. Then it
Changes, makes it invisible.
 
Back form the edge of what
Becomes.
 


^^EOP^^

My brother is still alive and living
In Fresno.
 
All day he stares at the dead bodies
Of automobiles
 
In his garage. It isn’t a prison
He’d wish himself free of.
 
I visit him,
Dragging my boxes
 
Of books and awards
Behind me.
 
We are walking out of the city
Into the white flame of the desert.
 
Not unlike the Desert
Fathers walking out into Sinai.
 
My brother carries his briefcase
Loaded in icons and dollar bills.
 
He is wearing Larry Levis’s shining
Suit and black leather boots.
 
I am wearing a pale gown
Of sun-bleached flowers.
 
We are talking
About the Resurrection.
 
We are walking dead
Into it
 
Leaving the world and its sweet chorus
Of horrors behind.
 
There is no city
But the city within.
 
No door, but the door
To simple wisdom.
 
We walk, dumb
As newborns
 
Into the tremendous and endless
Blessing.
 


^^EOP^^

In this restaurant a plate of bluefish pâté
and matzos begin memorable meals.
 
The cracker is ridged, seems planked, an old wall
streaked sepia, very nearly black
in Tigrett, Tennessee
 
where it burned
 
into a matzo’s twin. While waiting
for a Martha’s Vineyard salad, I rebuild the church
with crackers, pâté as paste
 
as a flaming dessert arrives at another table where diners
are ready for a second magnum of champagne; every day
is an anniversary; every minute, a commemoration
so there is no reason to ever be sober
 
to excuse incendiaries who gave up the bottle,
threw alcohol at the church, spectacular reform
 
in flames themselves ordinary—there’d been fire in that church
many times, every Sunday and even at the Thursday
choir rehearsals. For years there’d been a fired-up congregation
 
so seething, neighborhoods they marched through ignited
no matter their intention; just as natural as summer.
There were hot links as active as telephone lines
whose poles mark the countryside as if the nation is helpless
without a crucifix every few yards; pity they are combustible
 
and that fire itself is holy, that its smoke merges with atmosphere,
that we breathe its residue, that when it is thick and black enough
to believe in, it betrays and chokes us; pity
that it is the vehicle that proves the coming of the Lord,
the establishment of his kingdom, his superiority because
fire that maintains him disfigures us; when we try to embrace
him; we find ourselves out on a limb    burning.  The meal
 
tastes divine, simply divine
and I eat it in the presence of a companion dark as scab,
as if skin burned off was replaced as he healed
with this total-body scab
 
under which he is pink as a pig, unclean at least
through Malachi.
 
In my left hand, a dash of Lot’s wife; in my right, a mill
to freshly grind the devil, since fire is power
both the supreme good and supreme evil are entitled
to it; most of the time, what did it matter
who was in charge of Job?     Both burnt him.
 


^^EOP^^

Snow White was nude at her wedding, she’s so white
the gown seemed to disappear when she put it on.
 
Put me beside her and the proximity is good
for a study of chiaroscuro, not much else.
 
Her name aggravates me most, as if I need to be told
what’s white and what isn’t.
 
Judging strictly by appearance there’s a future for me
forever at her heels, a shadow’s constant worship.
 
Is it fair for me to live that way, unable
to get off the ground?
 
Turning the tables isn’t fair unless they keep turning.
Then there’s the danger of Russian roulette
 
and my disadvantage: nothing falls from the sky
to name me.
 
I am the empty space where the tooth was, that my tongue
rushes to fill because I can’t stand vacancies.
 
And it’s not enough. The penis just fills another
gap. And it’s not enough.
 
When you look at me,
know that more than white is missing.
 


^^EOP^^

My mother’s named for places, not Sandusky
that has wild hair soliciting the moon like blue-black
clouds touring. Not Lorain with ways too benevolent
for lay life. Ashtabula comes closer, southern,
evangelical and accented, her feet wide as yams.
 
She’s Florida Missouri, a railroad, sturdy boxcars
without life of their own, filled and refilled with
what no one can carry.
 
You just can’t call somebody Ravenna who’s going
to have to wash another woman’s bras and panties, who’s
going to wear elbow-length dishwater to formal gigs,
who’s going to have to work with her hands, folding and
shuffling them in prayer.
 


^^EOP^^

You are the start of the week
or the end of it, and according
to The Beatles you creep in
like a nun. You're the second
full day the kids have been
away with their father, the second
full day of an empty house.
Sunday, I've missed you. I've been
sitting in the backyard with a glass
of Pinot waiting for your arrival.
Did you know the first Sweet 100s
are turning red in the garden,
but the lettuce has grown
too bitter to eat. I am looking
up at the bluest sky I have ever seen,
cerulean blue, a heaven sky
no one would believe I was under.
You are my witness. No day
is promised. You are absolution.
You are my unwritten to-do list,
my dishes in the sink, my brownie
breakfast, my braless day.


^^EOP^^

When I push your button
you fly off the handle,
old skin and bones,
black bat wing. 
We're alike, you and I.
Both of us
resemble my mother,
so fierce in her advocacy 
on behalf of
the most vulnerable child
who'll catch his death
in this tempest. 
Such a headwind!
Sometimes it requires
all my strength
just to end a line. 
But when the wind is at
my back, we're likely
to get carried away, and say
something we can never retract, 
something saturated from the ribs
down, an old stony
word like ruin. You're what roof
I have, frail thing, 
you're my argument
against the whole sky.
You're the fundamental difference
between wet and dry.


^^EOP^^

Adriaen het Kint, dead prisoner,
passes back through the eye of the needle
into the wombed-shaped anatomy theater
in a caul of umbra mortis, lo.
Tho I pass through the valley of the shadow
of death, I wear a caul stitched by the needle
through which a camel passed, like the condom
passed through the drug mule, sperm
through the pierced condom, a camera
through a heart.  Just as
the face of every Dutchman
is lit by a flashbulb conceived
two hundred years in the future,
Adriaen het Kint now lifts a flayed hand
to demonstrate
how to put the god back together
once he’s been dismembered
and scattered among the reeds.
Adriaen het Kint,
shall we gather at the river
to scoop up the disjecta membra? How,
with flayed hand,
shall we pluck the white lyre
that rides the black thorax
of the zika mosquito,
resplendent in her viral robes?
She is a messenger to all nations as she
lowers her improbable proboscis
into the human layer
and vomits an inky toxin
from the Greek
for arrow ink
for arrow, an arrow that
sinks its bleat into the alien chordata
so that the future contracts
into itself, slinks off, slips
further down the drain, sinks
further down the wall
outside the clinic,
the infected needle
blocking the stoma
of the future
with a crusty pus.
The sleeper juts
a canine up
through the gum
without meaning to,
and an answering moon
orbiting Jupiter
winks back
a salt signature,
betrays a vein of water
asleep beneath the frozen strata
whereunto a white-clad
nurse or rover soon will sink 
a toothed cannula
to draw it off
How complete
ly she circumvents
the eye of the needle
how completely she bypasses
that camel-route
to Heaven as she
drains away
for human use
the plasma and the data
 


^^EOP^^

Look, we have made
a counterpoint
 
of white chrysanthemums,
a dauntless path
 
of death-will-not-part-us petals
and revering light;
 
even here,
even here
 
before the once-wolfish ovens,
the desecrating wall
 
where you were shot,
the shrike-stern cells
 
where you were bruised
and emptied of your time-bound beauty—
 
you of the confiscated shoes
and swift-shorn hair,
 
you who left,
as sobering testament, the scuffed
 
luggage of utter hope
and harrowing deception.
 
Come back, teach us.
From these fearsome barracks
 
and inglorious fields
flecked with human ash,
 
in the russet-billowing hours
of All Hallows,
 
let the pianissimo
of your truest whispering
 
(vivid as the crunched frost
of a forced march)
 
become a slowly blossoming,
ever-voluble hearth
 
revealing to us
(the baffled, the irresolute,
 
the war torn, the living)
more of the fire
 
and attar of what it means
to be human.
 


^^EOP^^

This is not a waiting room
for souls. It is modern,
totally unwindowed.
 
The sun threw a ray away,
               lost two rays it’s
raining here in the room.
 
On the beach it looks very
evening already, money
removed from the world:
 
if one travels somewhere
and back again, one is
always different—we are not
 
separated on the journey.
My mouth keeps spr-
      inging open.
 
Everything does not
have to have
a limit
 
: varnish out,
dooryear—winter
ice is caught in winter,
 
I plunged myself but not
under. (I can’t
pull it out of my head,
 
      can I.) Godthrough:
a word with a star tied around
      it, it
 
has to hit someone.
Was such a storm
the trees fell over,
 
there was a storm
against. I have got a lot
more songs in my mouth:
 
Shudderhorror.
      Souldoll.
            Shiverbeard,
 
            is there much enough snow?
            is that supposed to be lakes
for the chessmen have
 
reached the bank?
Mother shakes the little tree.
Otherwise the darkness
 
will read it and will
remain dark forever.
A dream falls off,
 
a little shirt—
the sky is red. And
blue. How do the bones
 
get into my foot?
Ung-Ung-train,
                           Puff-Puff train
 
afraided me away.
No everything does not have a limit:
I saw that I lived
 
here. That there is a spider
      in the window here.
      That there is a mirror
 
here. Twinslight, the
      tongue, the garden flowers painted
      —almostyou: to
 
walk where it is very dark
and the small bell is
already hanging
 
in the air—
 


^^EOP^^

And when her son never returned
from the meant-to-crush-him camps,
 
the crucible of Poland,
always-hard-at-work Isa slept
 
for endless hours,
and once, under her lids, she was led,
 
by diligent female Virgils,
to a vast meadow
 
where an inspirited Isa embraced,
one by one,
 
countless women who remained
in mourning for their cherished sons.
 
Gallant and stricken,
together the myriad bereaved
 
but defiant women formed
an ever-widening circle,
 
prodigal with bitter tears,
and then, suddenly,
 
like a jackdaw darting
from eave to sun-drenched eave,
 
something flew between the throats
of the grieving,
 
heart-gutted mothers,
and a great beauty arose:
 
In the dream, Isa recalled,
the singing of the harrowed women
 
with war-taken sons
hushed the world's barrenness.
 
In the dream, the startling river of sound
altered the embattled earth.
 


^^EOP^^

What did we suffer for? why did we flee
our houses as if we had been hostages at our own
tables? Even free, we were not free, we kept
breaking down in thrift stores, our eyes
tearing in bins of glasses taken from the faces
of the dead; disoriented and dizzy as crows
swarming the corpses of our own hearts,
in the aisles of the department stores
filled with the glitter of plenty, we kept
spilling coffee on ourselves. Why
are we forever afraid of bathtubs, of water
hitting us in the face like the invisible
stoning of an anonymous crowd, why does buying
makeup make us feel guilty, why do we
eat our food like thieves? Why do we
sneak our friends in the back door
and make our love climb up a tree? Why
do our lies nest within one another like
diminishing dolls? Why do we jump
when the smallest child pushes open a door?
Why are we afraid of the whistling of teapots?
Who’s coming in to read over our shoulders
our most secret thoughts, who’s clinging
to our roofs like a demon? Why is his cheerfulness
even more frightening than his anger? Why does my hope
burn like the scar of a burn on my breast? Why are you
an eye floating in a pool of dead water, blue; and unable
to breathe? Why do we keep asking why?
How do we know how to stop it if we don’t know
why it began? How can we unravel so much
violence followed by so much lie? How will we know
when it’s ever over? or believe
it will ever stop?
 


^^EOP^^

Even here?
In this snowbound barrack?
 
Suddenly, the illicit sounds
of Beethoven’s concerto
 
erupt from Juliek’s smuggled violin,
suffusing this doomsday shed
 
teeming with the trampled
and the barely alive,
 
realm of frostbite and squalor,
clawing panic and suffocation—
 
Insane, God of Abraham,
insanely beautiful:
 
a boy insisting
winter cannot reign forever,
 
a boy conveying his brief,
bounded life
 
with a psalmist’s or a cantor’s
arrow-sure ecstasy—
 
One prison-striped friend
endures to record
 
the spellbinding strings,
the woebegone—
 
and the other,
the impossible Polish fiddler,
 
is motionless by morning,
his renegade instrument
 
mangled
under the haggard weight
 
of winter-killed, unraveling men.
Music at the brink of the grave,
 
eloquent in the pitch dark,
tell-true, indelible,
 
as never before,
as never after—
  Abundance,  emending beauty,
  linger in the listening, truth-carrying soul of Elie,
  soul become slalom swift, camp shrewd, uncrushable;
  abundance, be here, always here, in this not-yet-shattered violin.


^^EOP^^

Look for me under the hood
of that old Chevrolet settled in weeds
at the end of the pasture. 
I'm the radiator that spent its years
bolted in front of an engine
shoving me forward into the wind. 
Whatever was in me in those days
has mostly leaked away,
but my cap's still screwed on tight 
and I know the names of all these
tattered moths and broken grasshoppers
the rest of you've forgotten.


^^EOP^^

Oh, we fear our enemy’s mind, the shape
in his thought that resembles the cripple
in our own, for it’s not just his fear
we fear, but his love and his paradise.
 
We fear he will deprive us of our peace
of mind, and, fearing this, are thus deprived,
so we must go to war, to be free of this
terror, this unremitting fear, that he might
 
he might, he might. Oh it’s hard to say
what he might do or feel or think.
Except all that we cannot bear of
feeling or thinking—so his might
 
must be met with might of armor
and of intent—informed by all the hunker
down within the bunker of ourselves.
How does he love? and eat? and drink?
 
He must be all strategy or some sick lie.
How can reason unlock such a door,
for we bar it too with friends and lovers,
in waking hours, on ordinary days?
 
Finding the other so senseless and unknown,
we go to war to feel free of the fear
of our own minds, and so come
to ruin in our hearts of ordinary days.
 


^^EOP^^

“There is no muse of translation,” the translator reminds
as he struggles with Pindar’s victory odes, and what he means
is that the imagery is overwhelming: the hissing of snakes
as Medusa’s sisters mourn her death, the baby Iamos
“lying on a bed of yellow and purple violets,” Heracles
with his baby hands strangling the two serpents sent
“to devour him on the day of his birth” so every translator
must beware of “rank transplantation.” Just imagine,
if one were to translate the line as “Forge your tongue
on the anvil of truth.” How ridiculous that admonition
to a king. Better to transpose to the vague modern,
though Pindar “perversely, from our point of view—often
seems to relish... the concrete image,” and it’s just
there that I think perhaps all being is translation; the child
I was at the kitchen table, translating my mother into
my father, my father into my mother; each one’s
“inviolate honey” becoming the “blameless venom”
of the other. So now I too prefer the naked tongue,
even pained and writing, caught in hammer and tongs,
flexed and torqued upon the anvil, until the metal
turns mercurial, quick, spilling into and out of
the shape of everything that is. For all day, while that pair
of grey-eyed serpents feeds the abandoned
child on honey, and the e-mail box fills with a multitude
of voices debating the distinctions of the hoaxes
of authorship—the pseudonym, the heteronym, all the masks
we can put on—I have trembled
because of my tongue. Because it insisted
upon saying I love you. So it waits and waits for some word from you.
It’s late in the afternoon when you finally reply and then to the quote
I sent to a list. I read obliquely, wondering
if I should hope because you say you’re thinking
of Shakespeare’s sonnets (the beloved and the lover’s love)
or if I’m lost to the shadows you’re going off to dispel
with a cup of coffee, that “best” at the end
of your letter, my allotment from now on. Is it too much love
or too little that I have translated into being? Oh by now
I’m mistyping forget your tongue upon the anvil
that the tongue itself has made.
 


^^EOP^^

The old cupola glinted above the clouds, shone
among fir trees, but it took him an hour 
for the half mile all the way up the hill. As he trailed,
the village passed him by, greeted him, 
asked about his health, but everybody hurried
to catch the mass, left him leaning against fences, 
measuring the road with the walking stick he sculpted.
He yearned for the day when the new church 
would be built—right across the road. Now
it rises above the moon: saints in frescoes 
meet the eye, and only the rain has started to cut
through the shingles on the roof of his empty 
house. The apple trees have taken over the sky,
sequestered the gate, sidled over the porch.


^^EOP^^

Dog bone, stapler,
cribbage board, garlic press
     because this window is loose—lacks
suction, lacks grip. 
Bungee cord, bootstrap,
dog leash, leather belt
     because this window had sash cords.
They frayed. They broke. 
Feather duster, thatch of straw, empty
bottle of Elmer's glue
     because this window is loud—its hinges clack
open, clack shut. 
Stuffed bear, baby blanket,
single crib newel
     because this window is split. It's dividing
in two. 
Velvet moss, sagebrush,
willow branch, robin's wing
     because this window, it's pane-less. It's only
a frame of air.


^^EOP^^

There is the lightning-white moment
when I learn—
 
the way my costive train to Krakow
stopped
 
and I woke to find myself,
in jostling twilight,
 
at the Auschwitz platform—
that the Italian postcard
 
I garnered in Milan years ago
as a genial talisman
 
isn’t of a pipe-dreaming
Italian boy,
 
no, no, but an androgynous
image of Sophie Scholl,
 
the young, intrepid resistance heroine—
as if I’d registered,
 
in my Schubert-adoring daughter,
my school-resisting son,
 
a fire undetected before:
Doric-strong nouns demanding
  What would you undertake to stop tyranny?—
 
stouthearted nouns: integrity, probity, courage;
 
in benighted Munich,
the spit-in-the-eye swiftness,
 
the unbossed bloom
of a crossed-out swastika,
 
the fierce integrity
in the gust of the word freedom
 
sprayed over the walls
and ramparts of a deranged
 
fatherland that rent flesh
as if it were foolscap—
  Someday you will be where I am now,
 
a steely, premonitory Sophie
proclaimed to the rapacious
 
Nazi tribunal that rushed her
to execution—
 
Gazer, collector, in clarity’s name,
look close, then closer:
 
it’s not just a bud-sweet,
pensive beauty,
 
a bel ragazzo’s charm;
all these years:
 
it’s the spirit of crusading youth
that I’ve cherished.
 


^^EOP^^




Brooklyn, the present day



     I. The Spirit Box
 
Son:
  A son is a steadfast  keeper of secrets,
  a cupped palm, a calyx, a son is a spirit box, listen—
 
I was born after armistice,
the fissured cities,
 
but slept nights
with a human smoke.
 
And though I never shuddered
from a black rouge
 
of rationed coffee
to keep clean,
 
the frost and sullen mud
of a forced march,
 
the unspoken, the unspeakable,
became my life:
 
I was a boy bathed in dreams
by a menorah fashioned against
 
the penalty of death,
a mysterious klezmer.
  A son is a spirit box, imagine.
 
 
     II. Riders on the Back of Silence
 
Son:
 
As a boy, my old-world aunts and uncles
would weep when I entered the room:
 
What did I have to do with sadness?
Their cryptic tears
 
and purse-tucked Kleenex
were my own tantalizing
 
Hardy Boys case to crack.
Gradually, as a junior detective, I grasped
 
how much I resembled
an uncle lost in the war,
 
and like the savvy, querying boy
at the Passover Seder
 
become a scrupulous man,
an inquisitive reporter,
 
I set out to track my look-alike’s,
my family’s wartime destiny—
 
What my father marshaled against,
what my mother endured,
 
the unspoken, the unspeakable,
became my mission:
 
though I was born in a venomless
time and suburb,
 
phantoms, chimeras breathed
in our never-quite-here-and-now house,
 
secret calendars of fire:
Mother, I dreamed we were
 
riders on the back of silence,
the wild unsaid beneath us:
  horse, whale, behemoth.
 
We never spoke of the war.
So with stark reading,
 
a well-thumbed Diary of Anne Frank,
 
I resolved to imagine
pitiless showers,
 
whips and watchtowers
of brute commanders,
 
their Gypsy-less, Jew-less,
jerry-rigged heaven.
 
 
     III. The Photojournalist
 
Son:
 
In my search for your cloud-wrapped past,
Mother,
 
the wounded earth became mine,
and each time I aligned myself
 
with the exiled, the dispossessed,
I aligned myself with you.
 
Apprenticed to, obsessed with,
light and justice,
 
always I’ve tried to bring into focus
a girl, with war as her spur,
 
with hunger as her horse
and shadow—
 
Mother, in El Salvador
I couldn’t lift my camera
 
to capture the unearthed
bodies of silenced nuns:
 
I’m almost, but never quite,
inured to death:
 
a child in a jacket of flies;
the last typed lines of a friend,
 
a dissident poet whose body
was opened beyond belief—
 
In the Secret Annex, in the countless
precincts of strife, I’ve learned
 
an Esperanto of blood and hope
and forbearance,
 
as if someday I might receive my wish:
to read, on a night as serene as truce,
 
your long-awaited story:
the capo’s unrelenting curses,
 
a castaway’s pain:
I should know it by heart, Mother.
 
 
     IV. The Antimiracle
 
Mother:
 
At the spring’s start, there were fists
rather than fragrance,
 
April-upon-April hope
braided with arrests and betrayals,
 
as dark as the derided
spaces in our censored mail.
 
Garrisons, watchtowers,
checkpoints as daunting as Gorgons,
 
proliferated.
The borders became too-tight belts—
 
Long after the white of truce,
in restless sleep I struggled
 
to awaken the family dead,
to confess, unabashed:
 
Lampshades of sullied flesh,
linens fashioned of human hair—
 
I was not prepared
to stand outside humanity—
 
 
     V. The Pet Name
 
Son:
 
Soft as a fontanel, Dove was the pet name
 
you gave me as a boy,
and on the world’s battlefields,
 
like a drop of holy water,
its bolstering sweetness
 
became my talisman.
It was with me, mitigating, winged,
 
shielding me somehow,
as my lover Jaeger’s lens shattered
 
and his lifeblood
soaked into my shirt.
 
It was with me,
a thousand leagues from God,
 
when I photographed
a gassed village—
 
whole families
and their livestock hushed
 
as if by an invisible hand,
as if some heedless, insane baker
 
had dusted the afternoon
with flour.
 
 
     VI. Trains
 
Mother:
 
Today, amid the earliest birdcalls, the first
neighborhood sounds,
 
I swept the stoop,
leaned on the trusty broom,
 
and wondered:
If I could write, son, about those years,
 
where would I begin?—
Your grandfather was a stationmaster,
 
tall as a flagpole
and as taciturn.
 
And though his owl-gray eyes
have gone to earth,
 
I keep thinking he’ll round the corner
in his fastidious clothes,
 
carrying a sprig of asphodel
or fragrant honeysuckle—
 
so dignified with his gold
spectacles and timetables.
 
God took him the Sabbath before
the shouts and stones, the smashed
 
storefronts of Kristallnacht.
How it would’ve angered him to see
 
that his beloved trains
were used to betray us.
 
 
     VII. Dove’s Arc
 
Mother:
 
For years I dreamed maternal dreams
of your cozy security—
 
spacious freedom from pogroms,
all the misery the wide,
 
unmerciful world doles out
to Jews and scapegoats,
 
and always you seemed
determined to court danger—
 
So you want to know
about a prisoner’s,
 
a Häftling’s dignity?
This is what it meant:
 
at the roll call,
some anchoring wish—
 
or a shared shoe,
a black rouge of rationed
 
coffee in the camp,
to dodge selection for the flames ...
 
Truth to tell:
there’s barely been a day
 
when the filth of the barracks,
the fury of the camps
 
didn’t obsess my heart;
But I will go with you to Birkenau,
 
near the slain beasts
of the old crematoriums,
 
where everywhere you walk,
you are walking on human ash.
 
I want to leave something
sturdy in this world,
 
maybe a book
of live-to-tell truth,
 
grace and vitamins,
for those to come.
 
More than anything, son,
what I’ve wanted to tell you:
 
there was a woman of courage
in the camp,
 
and she shepherded me,
kindled me to keep me alive.
 
A clear light seemed to shore her
(as if we were seeing
 
a one-woman sunrise,
an unstoppable human dawn),
 
so that she garnered strength to share
her meager scraps,
 
strength to carry the ones
still minus an alphabet,
 
making up soothing rhymes,
little puddles of sound...
 
Like so many,
she died of typhus.
 
And after liberation,
in the DP camp,
 
amid the chaos, I prayed
my children would inherit
 
a portion of her spirit.
And it’s true,
 
you have some of her fearlessness,
her passion, you do.
 
Son, why didn’t I see it before?
How my hardscrabble prayer,
 
in it’s dove’s arc,
was answered.
 


^^EOP^^

My damn cat brings me a dead songbird,
wren or finch, I don’t know what it is—
I mistook at first its folded grey
for a strangely shaped piece of lint
in the cubicle beneath my desk—nor which
cat for I have two: Cricket with her dense
body and stubby legs who jumps down
from every shelf so reverberatingly, I call
her the Black Bomb, or Ingrid, the quiet
Russian Blue, whom I call Gritty because
her coat is stealthy with dust. They’re always
leaving me offerings—the mouse upon
the threshold when I return from some
trip, the redheaded grosbeak on the sill—
but death is different in the front yard
or even on the threshold, than Death
on a particular morning, crawling into the house,
carrying a warm form frozen in its warm mouth,
tongue and tooth salivating a fluff of warble and whistle
into a smoothly folded, iced, silenced thing, Death
triumphant, affectionate! as if anyone would be happy
feeding upon dead songs torn from the air.
 


^^EOP^^

the white of your skin, for skin, except
when truly albino, always has some other color
sleeping within it—a hint of red maple leaf,
a touch of the blue ice at the edge of a melting
stream, a richness implied of its many layers,
the deltas of cells and blood, that deep fecundity
that lies within and makes the skin shed, not
like a snake, but as a tree (one of those golden
cottonwoods flaring just now at the edge
of the river) that sheds its leaves each moment
while an eternity of leaf remains. Oh, nothing
seems to me as white as your skin, all your languid
ease of being—one resting upon the other,
the sliver of your shoulder against the black
fabric—reminds me so of the lost realm of beauty
that I am afraid of nothing, and only dazed
(as I was that day at the aquarium when the beluga
whales came swimming toward me—how white
they were, slipping out of the darkness, radiant
and buoyant as silence and snow, incandescent
as white fire, gliding through the weight of water,
and when they sang in that chamber as small
as the chambers of the human heart, murky
with exhaustion and captivity and the fragments
of what they had consumed, I was almost in love
with them; they seemed the lost children
of the moon, carrying in their milky mammalian skins
a hint of glacial ice and singing to each other
of all the existences they had left behind, their fins
like the wings of birds or angels, clicking and whistling
like canaries of the sea: there was no darkness in their bodies, like clouds drifting through unkempt skies, they illuminated the room).
So I did not think of you so much as I felt you
drifting through my being, in some gesture
that held me poised like a hummingbird above
the scarlet blossoms of the trumpet vine, I kissed you
above the heart, and by above I mean there,
not that geometric center, the breastbone
that so many use to divide the body in half and so mistake
for the place where the heart lies, but the exact
location, a little to the left, just on the crescent
where the breast begins to rise; oh, I know
all that drift of white implies, the vanished clothing,
the disappearing room, that landscape of the skin
and night that opens in imagination and in feeling
upon a sea of snow, so that just one kiss above
the heart is a kiss upon the heart, as if one could
kiss the very pulse of being, light upon the head
of that pin that pins us here, that tiny disk where
angels were once believed to dance, and all that
nakedness without could not have been
except for all that burning deep within
 


^^EOP^^

When Simone Weil said it would be wrong
to think the mystics borrow the language of love
for it is theirs by right, though she didn’t call it
the heavenly song of cock and cunt, perhaps that’s
the inevitable conclusion of the sacred heart wounded
into a womb, an arrow in the hand of an angel
piercing such a depth in the body until it’s beyond
what the body knows, delirious among the lilies
or tasting the sweet meats of that table. Yet
whoever the mystic woman is, she’s not ‘about’
sex; it’s not some sexual fantasy that she lies with
in the dark mansion of God, sleeping every night
in a different room, curling herself to the different shapes
of emptiness. It’s not some narrative of first
he this, then she that, that makes her tremble,
being naked and open to nothing but that noche oscura, when with love inflamed,
the saint runs out of the house into the hills,
for she remains, asleep and dreaming, and in God’s
innumerable rooms, innumerable forms and shapes
of love, she lies down with them all in the depths
of her body and blood, until every vision and icon
shines with a glimpse of the forgotten and atavistic
feminine body, pouring out of her as if out of the nipple
of that blue stone embedded in the miraculous
hand, as she herself becomes her own threshold;
no faces remembered or imagined flicker across the hymen
of her mind, for it’s not a penis, even God’s, that she imagines,
but the form of herself, the knowing of the body
of her own feeling, as in the Old Testament it was said
that Jacob knew Rachel or Lot knew his own daughters,
the knowing of the body allowed only to men;
women, only the known or unknown, as she is known and un-
known but as she knows herself as she knows the other
that she is not: she enters herself, with fingers
 of melting wax, of cold cucumber, with a thumb
of glow, with all the abandoned utensils
of domestic life, with a stalk from the forsaken
garden, and with the lost wing feather of the angel
of death and with the voice of a baby’s cry
nursing on the vestigial milk of the mother of mercy.


^^EOP^^

Behind the silo, the Mother Rabbit
hunches like a giant spider with strange calm:
six tiny babies beneath, each
clamoring for a sweet syringe of milk.
This may sound cute to you, reading
from your pulpit of plenty,
but one small one was left out of reach,
a knife of fur
barging between the others. 
I watched behind a turret of sand. If
I could have cautioned the mother rabbit
I would. If I could summon the
Bunnies to fit him in beneath
the belly's swell
I would. But instead, I stood frozen, wishing
for some equity. This must be
why it's called Wild Life because of all the
crazed emotions tangled up in
the underbrush within us.
Did I tell you how
the smallest one, black and trembling,
hopped behind the kudzu
still filigreed with wanting? 
Should we talk now of animal heritage, their species,
creature development? And what do we say
about form and focus—
writing this when a stray goes hungry, and away.


^^EOP^^




                                             the Platonic idea
      is “not only beauty, truth, and goodness,” but “the heavenly
             bed, created by God … a heavenly man, a heavenly
                             dog, a heavenly cat, and so on …”
                                             Bertrand Russell



               We’re not all lesbians at this bar and grill (not yet?         not practicing? only in heart?), chiaroscuro as the room is                  with expensive ambiance and dear cuts of meat
             and fish overlaid with nouveau fruit sauce, it’s clear                    that the most manly woman among us, older,                     wearing cowboy boots and a turquoise bolo,                   is probably neither entirely straight nor wholly                  queer. When she begins to confess her ‘secret’—                         it’s her holding of a piece of land, acres                     of sweet desert; its muddy roads, its remote                  sublime have four-wheeled deep into her being.                 She’s probably someone’s heavenly grandmother,                      as I’m still someone’s heavenly wife, despite                  the separation. Appearance does not really appear,                but it appears to appear, yet, for a moment, it seems                     our conversation may open up unexpectedly                       or shatter into awkwardness over the word                          girlfriends: who in the rainy summers                 of our youths, we all played with our girlfriends,
                    (what do I mean by ‘girlfriend?’ what do you              mean by yours?) It’s only then, as one of the younger                  women (the most lovely, so silver with bracelets                        and earrings and a noticeable ring) laughs                 that I begin to guess her inclination, Does it really                     appear to appear, or only apparently appear                to appear? It’s a long way from Plato’s symposium             to this bar and grill in Arizona. At that ancient feast—         whenever a number of individuals have a common name,                   they have also a common ‘idea’ or ‘form’—only            men reclined upon the couches, and the only the love                     of man for man was love’s ideal, the impulse                toward some boyish form becoming the ascension                   of being to some ever truer realm, as the souls                       of men became pregnant and gave birth to
                     “not only beauty, truth, and goodness,” but
           “the heavenly bed, created by God… a heavenly man,                a heavenly dog, a heavenly cat, and so on through          a whole Noah’s ark,” but no heavenly woman, much less              a heavenly lesbian, for since Aristotle, “Lesbian rule”          has meant that measure made of lead so it could be bent           to a curved or crooked wall. Because we are all women,             how can we speak of love? In the beginning, banished          from the realm of discourse, assigned to love’s servitude                   not its speech, to be love’s body not its tongue,             so no one here speaks of her feeling, much less thinks         to make it another’s measure. In our mouths, the tongue’s                a knife, each word a wild edge, where we stammer                    only our own wound, a drop of blood sensual                    on the tongue, a distinctive taste of salt, more
               mollusk perhaps—wrapped around an I of sand—                     than pearl, a syllable of milk or nipple, some
                    private body within the body, the you behind
              your eyes, as if being itself were poetry—passionate
            with nascent and protean neologism, full of the gaps
             of being, the oblique richness of a depth in which we
                begin to glimpse each other, mysterious and solo
                       as we are, black stubborn pearls of being.
                    If we spoke of Plato, and we don’t; each of us
                         was banished from the womb by virtue
                   of having a womb, to this unpredictable realm
                        where each of us would have to discover
                    her self, that wild tongue—never delineated,
               even in shadow, upon the philosopher’s cave wall.
 


^^EOP^^

To lie on a beach after
looking at old poems: how
slow untroubled by any
grouch of mine or yours, Father
Ocean tumbles in the bay
alike with solitary
 
divers, cripples, yelling girls
and pipestem kids. He does what
suits us all; and somewhere — there,
out there, where the high tight sails
are going — he wears a white
death flag of foam for us, far
 
out, for when we want it. So
on Gea’s breast, the broad nurse
who bears with me, I think of
adolescence: that sad boy
I was, thoughts crusted with ice
on the treadmill of self-love,
 
Narcissus damned, who yet brought
like a coal in a hallow
stalk, the seed of fire that runs
through my veins now. I praise that
sad boy now, who having no
hope, did not blow out his brains.
 


^^EOP^^

As I come down the hill from Toro Poutini’s house
My feet are sore, being bare, on the sharp stones
 
And that is a suitable penance. The dust of the pa road
Is cool, though, and I can see
 
The axe of the moon shift down behind the trees
Very slowly. The red light from the windows
 
Of the church has a ghostly look, and in
This place ghosts are real. The bees are humming loudly
 
In moonlight in their old hive above the church door
Where I go in to kneel, and come out to make my way
 
Uphill past a startled horse who plunges in the paddock
Above the nunnery. Now there are one or two
 
Of the tribe back in the big house—What would you have me do,
King Jesus? Your games with me have turned me into a boulder.
 


^^EOP^^

First sew yourself into a pom pom mushroom
Strut across the thirstland past faerie lights
Shout complaints inside volcanic mancaves
Scout for the last unlocated spring of ylem
Then plait a cottage out of kestrel fluff
Stir potato eyes into a vat of dislocated feelings
Write a luculent novel five winters long
Till dismay ferments enough nuclear energy to power
Your moon buggy beyond the nacaret fields
Stopping only to gather the pollen of the Umbiferous True
Then plunge over cliffs sporting moth wings
Dropping to the bottommost of the besprinkled sea
And make your way up through the rain shadow
On two cat feet in hostile territory
All the while you compose a callithumpian song
To nail a ritual within the astrobleme
So bend dragons and constellate your enemies
Fox on your shoulder spend a month sun-grazing
A hundred hawks exploding before your stride
Which will bring you luck on this godawful day
You must make a new life by yourself like all
Lurching tellurians stuck in eviternity


^^EOP^^

the truth flies     hungry, at least     and otherous,
of which—though it may be one—Kafka said troublingly,
it has many faces
 
                                                                                             it’s
the faces one wants, tripping the light shadows of     its
skin colours      of its wordy swiftness, angry and solvent,
of its loud remarks
 
                                     as of feeding flocks                      one
year, one, among the smallest birds in the Northwest, flew
into the house     a darting, panic thought     at the walls
and grasses     perched on the top right corner of the frame
 
of Tom Field’s painting wherein adulterous Genji is found
out—so Lady Murasaki reads from her blue scroll—and
permitted me to take it in my hand     soft, intricate
 
mind     honouring     and lift it out into the air
and the next year, again, one flew into the house,
almost certain, like a visitor, gold-crowned     winged
 
floating about     odd discoveries     and alighted on the brim
of the lasagna dish     my hand trembled as I took it up
and moved slowly to lift it out of the window     into
 
the air     a kind of thinking     like everybody else
looking     for a continuing contravention of limits and  of substance
 
for Sharon Thesen 
 


^^EOP^^

I first discovered what was killing these men.
I had three sons who worked with their father in the tunnel:
Cecil, aged 23, Owen, aged 21, Shirley, aged 17.
They used to work in a coal mine, not steady work
for the mines were not going much of the time.
A power Co. foreman learned that we made home brew,
he formed a habit of dropping in evenings to drink,
persuading the boys and my husband —
give up their jobs and take this other work.
It would pay them better.
Shirley was my youngest son; the boy.
He went into the tunnel.       My heart     my mother     my heart     my mother
     My heart     my coming into being.

^^EOP^^

Gauley Bridge is a good town for Negroes, they let us stand around, they let us stand
around on the sidewalks if we’re black or brown.
Vanetta’s over the trestle, and that’s our town. 
The hill makes breathing slow, slow breathing after your row the river,
and the graveyard’s on the hill, cold in the springtime blow,
the graveyard’s up on high, and the town is down below. 
Did you ever bury thirty-five men in a place in back of your house,
thirty-five tunnel workers the doctors didn’t attend,
died in the tunnel camps, under rocks, everywhere, world without end. 
When a man said I feel poorly, for any reason, any weakness or such,
letting up when he couldn’t keep going barely,
the Cap and company come and run him off the job surely. 
I’ve put them
DOWN from the tunnel camps
to the graveyard on the hill,
tin-cans all about—it fixed them!—
TUNNELITIS
hold themselves up
at the side of a tree,
I can go right now
to that cemetery. 
When the blast went off the boss would call out, Come, let’s go back,
when that heavy loaded blast went white, Come, let’s go back,
telling us hurry, hurry, into the falling rocks and muck. 
The water they would bring had dust in it, our drinking water,
the camps and their groves were colored with the dust,
we cleaned our clothes in the groves, but we always had the dust.
Looked like somebody sprinkled flour all over the parks and groves,
it stayed and the rain couldn’t wash it away and it twinkled
that white dust really looked pretty down around our ankles. 
As dark as I am, when I came out at morning after the tunnel at night,
with a white man, nobody could have told which man was white.
The dust had covered us both, and the dust was white.


^^EOP^^

These roads will take you into your own country.
Seasons and maps coming where this road comes
into a landscape mirrored in these men.
 
Past all your influences, your home river,
constellations of cities, mottoes of childhood,
parents and easy cures, war, all evasion’s wishes.
 
What one word must never be said?
Dead, and these men fight off our dying,
cough in the theatres of the war.
 
What two things shall never be seen?
They : what we did.     Enemy : what we mean.
This is a nation’s scene and halfway house.
 
What three things can never be done?
Forget.     Keep silent.     Stand alone.
The hills of glass, the fatal brilliant plain.
 
The facts of war forced into actual grace.
Seasons and modern glory.     Told in the histories,
               how first ships came
 
seeing on the Atlantic thirteen clouds
lining the west horizon with their white
               shining halations;
 
they conquered, throwing off impossible Europe—
could not be used to transform; created coast—
               breathed-in America.
 
See how they took the land, made after-life
fresh out of exile, planted the pioneer
               base and blockade,
 
pushed forests down in an implacable walk
west where new clouds lay at the desirable
               body of sunset;
 
taking the seaboard.     Replaced the isolation,
dropped cities where they stood, drew a tidewater
               frontier of Europe,
 
a moment, and another frontier held,
this land was planted home-land that we know.
               Ridge of discovery,
 
until we walk to windows, seeing America
lie in a photograph of power, widened
               before our forehead,
 
and still behind us falls another glory,
London unshaken, the long French road to Spain,
               the old Mediterranean
 
flashing new signals from the hero hills
near Barcelona, monuments and powers,
               parent defenses.
 
Before our face the broad and concrete west,
green ripened field, frontier pushed back like river
               controlled and dammed;
 
the flashing wheatfields, cities, lunar plains
grey in Nevada, the sane fantastic country
               sharp in the south,
 
liveoak, the hanging moss, a world of desert,
the dead, the lava, and the extreme arisen
               fountain of life,
 
the flourished land, people with watercourses
to California and the colored sea;
               sums of frontiers
 
and unmade boundaries of acts and poems,
the brilliant scene between the seas, and standing,
               this fact and this disease.
                    ______________
Half-memories absorb us, and our ritual world
carries its history in familiar eyes,
planted in flesh it signifies its music
 
in minds which turn to sleep and memory,
in music knowing all the shimmering names,
the spear, the castle, and the rose.
 
But planted in our flesh these valleys stand,
everywhere we begin to know the illness,
are forced up, and our times confirm us all.
 
In the museum life, centuries of ambition
yielded at last a fertilizing image:
the Carthaginian stone meaning a tall woman
 
carries in her two hands the book and cradled dove,
on her two thighs, wings folded from the waist
cross to her feet, a pointed human crown.
 
This valley is given to us like a glory.
To friends in the old world, and their lifting hands
that call for intercession. Blow falling full in face.
 
All those whose childhood made learn skill to meet,
and art to see after the change of heart;
all the belligerents who know the world.
 
You standing over gorges, surveyors and planners,
you workers and hope of countries, first among powers;
you who give peace and bodily repose,
 
opening landscapes by grace, giving the marvel lowlands
physical peace, flooding old battlefields
with general brilliance, who best love your lives;
 
and you young, you who finishing the poem
wish new perfection and begin to make;
you men of fact, measure our times again.
                    _____________
These are our strength, who strike against history.
These whose corrupt cells owe their new styles of weakness
               to our diseases;
 
these carrying light for safety on their foreheads
descended deeper for richer faults of ore,
               drilling their death.
 
These touching radium and the luminous poison,
carried their death on the lips and with their warning
               glow in their graves.
 
These weaves and their eyes water and rust away,
these stand at wheels until their brains corrode,
               these farm and starve,
 
all these men cry their doom across the world,
meeting avoidable death, fight against madness,
               find every war.
 
Are known as strikers, soldiers, pioneers,
fight on all new frontiers, are set in solid
               lines of defense.
 
Defense is sight; widen the lens and see
standing over the land myths of identity,
               new signals, processes:
 
Alloys begin : certain dominant metals.
Deliberate combines add new qualities,
               sums of new uses.
 
Over the country, from islands of Maine fading,
Cape Sable fading south into the orange
               detail of sunset,
 
new processes, new signals, new possession.
A name for all the conquests, prediction of victory
               deep in these powers.
 
Carry abroad the urgent need, the scene,
to photograph and to extend the voice,
               to speak this meaning.
 
Voices to speak to us directly.     As we move.
As we enrich, growing in larger motion,
               this word, this power.
 
Down coasts of taken countries, mastery,
discovery at one hand, and at the other
               frontiers and forests,
 
fanatic cruel legend at our back and
speeding ahead the red and open west,
               and this our region,
 
desire, field, beginning.    Name and road,
communication to these many men,
as epilogue, seeds of unending love.
 


^^EOP^^

All power is saved, having no end.     Rises
in the green season, in the sudden season
the white the budded
                                             and the lost.
Water celebrates, yielding continually
sheeted and fast in its overfall
slips down the rock, evades the pillars
building its colonnades, repairs
in stream and standing wave
retains its seaward green
broken by obstacle rock; falling, the water sheet
spouts, and the mind dances, excess of white.
White brilliant function of the land’s disease.
 
Many-spanned, lighted, the crest leans under
concrete arches and the channeled hills,
turns in the gorge toward its release;
kinetic and controlled, the sluice
urging the hollow, the thunder,
the major climax
                                   energy
total and open watercourse
praising the spillway, fiery glaze,
crackle of light, cleanest velocity
flooding, the moulded force.
 
                    I open out a way over the water
                    I form a path between the Combatants:                     Grant that I sail down like a living bird,                     power over the fields and Pool of Fire.                     Phoenix, I sail over the phoenix world.
 
Diverted water, the fern and fuming white
ascend in mist of continuous diffusion.
Rivers are turning inside their mountains,
streams line the stone, rest at the overflow
lake and in lanes of pliant color lie.
Blessing of this innumerable silver,
printed in silver, images of stone
walk on a screen of falling water
in film-silver in continual change
recurring colored, plunging with the wave.
 
Constellations of light, abundance of many rivers.
The sheeted island-cities, the white surf filling west,
the hope, fast water spilled where still pools fed.
Great power flying deep: between the rock and the sunset,
the caretaker’s house and the steep abutment,
hypnotic water fallen and the tunnels under
the moist and fragile galleries of stone,
mile-long, under the wave. Whether snow fall,
the quick light fall, years of white cities fall,
flood that this valley built falls slipping down
the green turn in the river’s green.
Steep gorge, the wedge of crystal in the sky.
 
     How many feet of whirlpools?
     What is a year in terms of falling water?
     Cylinders; kilowatts; capacities.
     Continuity: Σ Q = 0
     Equations for falling water. The streaming motion.
     The balance-sheet of energy that flows
     passing along its infinite barrier.
 
     It breaks the hills, cracking the riches wide,
     runs through electric wires;
     it comes, warning the night,
     running among these rigid hills,
     a single force to waken our eyes.
 
     They poured the concrete and the columns stood,
     laid bare the bedrock, set the cells of steel,
     a dam for monument was what they hammered home.
     Blasted, and stocks went up;
     insured the base,
     and limousines
     wrote their own graphs upon
     roadbed and lifeline.
 
Their hands touched mastery:
wait for defense, solid across the world.
Mr. Griswold. “A corporation is a body without a soul.”
Mr. Dunn. When they were caught at it they resorted to the
     methods employed by gunmen, ordinary machine gun racke-
     teers. They cowardly tried to buy out the people who had the
     information on them.
Mr. Marcantonio. I agree that a racket has been practised, but the
     most damnable racketeering that I have ever known is the
     paying of a fee to the very attorney who represented these
     victims. That is the most outrageous racket that has ever come
     within my knowledge.
Miss Allen. Mr. Jesse J. Ricks, the president of the Union Carbide
     & Carbon Corporation, suggested that the stockholder had
     better take this question up in a private conference.
The dam is safe. A scene of power.
The dam is the father of the tunnel.
This is the valley’s work, the white, the shining.
                                                                                                                                                             
                            Stock and                
                          Dividend in                                                                 Net             Closing         
   High  Low            Dollars                   Open   High   Low    Last   Chge.   Bid    Ask    Sales  
    111   61 ¼  Union Carbide (3.20)...67 ¼   69 ½  67 ¼  69 ½   +3     69 ¼  69 ½ 3 ,400
                                                                                                                                                                    
                         
The dam is used when the tunnel is used.
The men and the water are never idle,
have definitions.
This is a perfect fluid, having no age nor hours,
surviving scarless, unaltered, loving rest,
willing to run forever to find its peace
in equal seas in currents of still glass.
Effects of friction : to fight and pass again,
learning its power, conquering boundaries,
able to rise blind in revolts of tide,
broken and sacrificed to flow resumed.
Collecting eternally power. Spender of power,
torn, never can be killed, speeded in filaments,
million, its power can rest and rise forever,
wait and be flexible. Be born again.
Nothing is lost, even among the wars,
imperfect flow, confusion of force.
It will rise. These are the phases of its face.
It knows its seasons, the waiting, the sudden.
It changes. It does not die.
 


^^EOP^^

 
Race, friends, is boring.  Everyone says so.
Hashtag all lives matter, the channel turns,
we ourselves live and turn,
and moreover the TV told me yesterday
(unendingly) ‘Ever to talk about race
means you have no
 
Inner Resources.’ I conclude now I have no
Inner Resources, because all I see is race.
People have race,
literature has race, especially great literature,
Henry has race, with his blacks & whites
made up as his feelings
 
about love & sex & art, which have race.
And our social ills, & sin, in Chinese drag
are somehow a dog
that’s eaten itself, & its tail miserably remains
as our mirror, bone or breaker, heaving
on tide: us, flag.
 


^^EOP^^

About twilight we came to the whitewashed pub
On a knuckle of land above the bay
 
Where a log was riding and the slow
Bird-winged breakers cast up spray.
 
One of the drinkers round packing cases had
The worn face of a kumara god,
 
Or so it struck me. Later on
Lying awake in the veranda bedroom
 
In great dryness of mind I heard the voice of the sea
Reverberating, and thought: As a man
 
Grows older he does not want beer, bread, or the prancing flesh,
But the arms of the eater of life, Hine-nui-te-po,
 
With teeth of obsidian and hair like kelp
Flashing and glimmering at the edge of the horizon.
 


^^EOP^^

I mean to say
 
I mean I keep meaning to
 
I mean amending
 
I mean correcting
 
I mean qualifying
 
I mean collecting
 
I mean X + X + X
and so forth
 
I mean all possible values
 
I mean adding
 
I mean and also
 
I mean pileups happen
when you can’t see
where you’re going
 
I mean where you are
 
I mean your hand
in front of your face
 
I mean my hand
 
I mean if that’s all
I can see
 
I mean if that’s all
I’m looking at
 
I mean that’s not all
 
I mean there is no end
 
I mean this isn’t the beginning
 
I mean only means
 
I mean blow the house down
with breathlessness
 
I mean a house of breathlessness
 
I mean the walls
are braced
against themselves
 
I mean brace yourself
 
I mean to take the house down
with its own components
 
I mean throw the whole deck at it
 
I mean two-by-fours and oven mitts
 
I mean rocks
hucking them
at walls of rocks
 
I mean self-healing walls
 
I mean with insipid pocks
 
I mean BB dings in street signs
 
I mean bullet holes in stop signs
 
I mean to riddle
 
I mean all signs point to “yes”
 
I mean eyelids are designed to admit some light
 
I mean sound
 
I mean boom
 
I mean faster than gravity
 
I mean I am not equal to the work
 
I mean I’m over my head
 
I mean hovering
 
I mean levitating
 
I mean light as a feather
wide as a plane
 
I mean fight as a feather
(infinitesimally)
 
I mean I’m going to talk about it
 
I mean talk about it
by talking about
talking about it
 
I mean write about it
 
I mean scrape it all towards me
with the edge of my hand
 
I mean like a spray of crumbs
 
I mean pile
 
I mean to pile up
and get on top of
 
I mean for the prospect
 
I mean for the pea
beneath the mattress
 
I mean to feel the ceiling
 
I mean to figure it
like a mime
 
I mean just imagine it
 
I mean kiss it
 
I mean I’m already running out of air
 
I mean steam
 
I mean fire
 
I mean fight it
 
I mean feed
 
I mean with fire
 
I mean fire
is not finite
only fuel
 
I mean light
is not finite
only illumination
 
I mean things to illuminate
 
I mean to throw shadows
 
I mean I have an important
question: is this important?


^^EOP^^

Hard, heavy, slow, dark,
Or so I find them, the hands of Te Whaea
 
Teaching me to die. Some lightness will come later
When the heart has lost its unjust hope
 
For special treatment. Today I go with a bucket
Over the paddocks of young grass,
 
So delicate like fronds of maidenhair,
Looking for mushrooms. I find twelve of them,
 
Most of them little, and some eaten by maggots,
But they’ll do to add to the soup. It’s a long time now
 
Since the great ikons fell down,
God, Mary, home, sex, poetry,
 
Whatever one uses as a bridge
To cross the river that only has one beach,
 
And even one’s name is a way of saying —
‘This gap inside a coat’ — the darkness I call God,
 
The darkness I call Te Whaea, how can they translate
The blue calm evening sky that plane tunnels through
 
Like a little wasp, or the bucket in my hand,
Into something else? I go on looking
 
For mushrooms in the field, and the fist of longing
Punches my heart, until it is too dark to see.


^^EOP^^

The small grey cloudy louse that nests in my beard
Is not, as some have called it, ‘a pearl of God’ —
 
No, it is a fiery tormentor
Waking me at two a.m.
 
Or thereabouts, when the lights are still on
In the houses in the pa, to go across thick grass
 
Wet with rain, feet cold, to kneel
For an hour or two in front of the red flickering
 
Tabernacle light — what He sees inside
My meandering mind I can only guess —
 
A madman, a nobody, a raconteur
Whom He can joke with — ‘Lord,’ I ask Him,
 
‘Do You or don’t You expect me to put up with lice?’
His silent laugh still shakes the hills at dawn.


^^EOP^^

One writes telling me I am her guiding light
And my poems her bible — on this cold morning
 
After moss I smoke one cigarette
And hear a magpie chatter in the paddock,
 
The image of Hatana — he bashes at the windows
In idiot spite, shouting — ‘Pakeha! You can be
 
‘The country’s leading poet’ — at the church I murmured, ‘Tena koe,'
To the oldest woman and she replied, ‘Tena koe’—
 
Yet the red book is shut from which I should learn Maori
And these daft English words meander on,
 
How dark a light! Hatana, you have gripped me
Again by the balls; you sift and riddle my mind
 
On the rack of the middle world, and from my grave at length
A muddy spring of poems will gush out.
 


^^EOP^^

Three dark buds for the Trinity
On one twig I found in the lining of my coat
 
Forgotten since I broke them from the tree
That grows opposite the RSA building
 
At the top of Vulcan Lane — there I would lay down my parka
On the grass and meditate, cross-legged; there was a girl
 
Who sat beside me there;
She would hold a blue flower at the centre of the bullring
 
While the twigs on the tree became black
And then slowly green again — she was young — if I had said,
 
‘Have my coat; have my money’ —
She would have gone away; but because I gave her nothing
 
She came again and again to share that nothing
Like a bird that nest in the open hand.
 


^^EOP^^

I had not vomited in so long
Someone put the hex on my true-to-selfness
Some sorcerer kept me far from my guts
The guts I feared would choke me
And make me ashamed of having no wings
And drown my own heart
I know how to survive a feeling
But I forgot that I knew it
A manic forgetter froze my meats
I kept asking for help when I didn't need it
My demons stared out from the ice
When they finally thawed they'd been dead all along
And now I am the walking thawed
You survive yourself if you wait long enough
And vomit your guts down your defrosted breast
And bathe in your mess and say baby it's fine


^^EOP^^

We saw a lot more of them dead than alive
the living diffident by the side of the road
as the far-off mountains flanked and intoxicated
the speedometer into saunter
 
The dead were interspersed on the asphalt
their poor vision uncorrected by their auditory keenness
like a blind spot in a poet
 
and their fender-mangled corpses
were occasionally ripped in two
before vultures reached them
 
In our rental van
we left no mother bereft
and orphaned no piglets
 
Turkey buzzards and American vultures
were the javelinas’ gift to us
 
red and black scavengers
that perched on ranchland fences
the full span of highway
they’d circle above in diminishing downward spirals
 
or flinch at each other’s puffs and swells
or away from incoming vehicles
 
Still they shared the dead among them
as we sometimes share our dead
when we love our dead
 
Javelina the Arabic word for mountain
in its root and then the mountain
coming closer to an ear
became a spear


^^EOP^^




(for Monte Holcroft)



These unshaped islands, on the sawyer’s bench,
Wait for the chisel of the mind,
Green canyons to the south, immense and passive,
Penetrated rarely, seeded only
By the deer-culler’s shot, or else in the north
Tribes of the shark and the octopus,
Mangroves, black hair on a boxer’s hand.
 
The founding fathers with their guns and bibles,
Botanist, whaler, added bones and names
To the land, to us a bridle
As if the id were a horse: the swampy towns
Like dreamers that struggle to wake,
 
Longing for the poets’ truth
And the lover’s pride. Something new and old
Explores its own pain, hearing
The rain’s choir on curtains of grey moss
Or fingers of the Tasman pressing
On breasts of hardening sand, as actors
Find their own solitude in mirrors,
 
As one who has buried his dead,
Able at last to give with an open hand.
 


^^EOP^^

A downpour drumming on the rooftop, 
engine running, car, idle, interior 
bathed in the pungent intoxicating spices 
radiating from the carry-out 
in the passenger seat. Inside the Taj, 
neon beacon in a strip mall 
dark with the common sense of folks 
long gone home, red lamps 
glowered. A pair of headlights 
glared back. A downpour drowning 
out its own drumming, so loud 
I could barely make out the whispered venom 
streaming from a mobile into my right ear. 
She was saying something about something 
as I reached across the steering column 
with my left hand, as if my left ear 
had been bent by the loudspeaker of the law. 
Engine off, everything—the car, the carry-out, etc.— 
went cold. I tossed the phone into the passenger seat, 
put her into reverse, backed up, out, 
and drove home with my double order, 
her running commentary as undertow.
 


^^EOP^^

Summer brings out the girls in their green dresses
Whom the foolish might compare to daffodils,
Not seeing how a dead grandmother in each one governs her limbs,
Darkening the bright corolla, using her lips to speak through,
Or that a silver torque was woven out of
The roots of wet speargrass.
                              The young are mastered by the Dead,
Lacking cunning. But on the beaches, under the clean wind
That blows this way from the mountains of Peru,
Drunk with the wind and the silence, not moving an inch
As the surf-swimmers mount on yoked waves,
One can begin to shake with laughter,
Becoming oneself a metal Neptune.
                                                                 To want nothing is
The only possible freedom. But I prefer to think of
An afternoon spent drinking rum and cloves
In a little bar, just after the rain had started, in another time
Before we began to die — the taste of boredom on the tongue
Easily dissolving, and the lights coming on —
With what company? I forget.
                                                       Where can we find the right
Herbs, drinks, bandages to cover
These lifelong intolerable wounds?
Herbs of oblivion, they lost their power to help us
The day that Aphrodite touched her mouth to ours.
 


^^EOP^^

I advise rest; the farmhouse
we dug you up in has been
modernized, and the people
who hung you as their ikon
against the long passage wall
are underground — Incubus
 
and excellent woman, we
inherit the bone acre
of your cages and laws. This
dull green land suckled at your
blood’s frigor Anglicanus,
crowning with a housewife’s tally
 
the void of Empire, does not
remember you — and certain
bloody bandaged ghosts rising
from holes of Armageddon
at Gallipoli or Sling
Camp, would like to fire a shot
 
through the gilt frame. I advise
rest, Madam; and yet the tomb
holds much that we must travel
barely without. Your print — ‘from
an original pencil
drawing by the Marchioness
 
‘of Granby, March, eighteen nine-
ty seven…’ Little mouth, strong
nose and hooded eye — they speak
of half-truths my type have slung
out of the window, and lack
and feel the lack too late. Queen,
 
you stand most for the time of
early light, clay roads, great trees
unfelled, and the smoke from huts
where girls in sack dresses
stole butter . . . The small rain spits
today. You smile in your grave.


^^EOP^^

Often in summer, on a tarred bridge plank standing,
Or downstream between willows, a safe Ophelia drifting
In a rented boat — I had seen them come and go,
Those wild bees swift as tigers, their gauze wings a-glitter
In passionless industry, clustering black at the crevice
Of a rotten cabbage tree, where their hive was hidden low.
 
But never strolled too near. Till one half-cloudy evening
Of ripe January, my friends and I
Came, gloved and masked to the eyes like plundering desperadoes,
To smoke them out. Quiet beside the stagnant river
We trod wet grasses down, hearing the crickets chitter
And waiting for light to drain from the wounded sky.
 
Before we reached the hive their sentries saw us
And sprang invisible through the darkening air,
Stabbed, and died in stinging. The hive woke. Poisonous fuming
Of sulphur filled the hollow trunk, and crawling
Blue flame sputtered — yet still their suicidal
Live raiders dived and clung to our hands and hair.
 
O it was Carthage under the Roman torches,
Or loud with flames and falling timber, Troy!
A job well botched. Half of the honey melted
And half the rest young grubs. Through earth-black smouldering ashes
And maimed bees groaning, we drew out our plunder.
Little enough their gold, and slight our joy.
 
Fallen then the city of instinctive wisdom.
Tragedy is written distinct and small:
A hive burned on a cool night in summer.
But loss is a precious stone to me, a nectar
Distilled in time, preaching the truth of winter
To the fallen heart that does not cease to fall.
 


^^EOP^^

Not coop so much as aviary. The way
everyone thinks
the youngest two are twins
despite their differences.
This memory of a blue dress
the tall man called a cool drink of water. 
A carpet burning
the skin right off my back. What I needed
to say versus what I was able
—the way you can't see
an image in sunlight
unless it's matte.  Could you drink pee if there were nothing
else?

^^EOP^^

two oblong lobes
of rough ice
methane and ammonia
fallen far below
the Kuiper Belt
perturbed by Jupiter
into nearer perihelion
where they warm
the coma sublimes
the tail blurs
a trim probe
relays images from
the twilit surface
as gray and
vacant as sleep
this small craft
a little boat
a dim soul
in an afterlife
in attenuate gravity
in stifling quiet
in the Tuat
to be weighed
against the truth
Thoth and Anubis
at the Scales


^^EOP^^




Lubbock, Texas



Between 1985-1987, he writes sincerely, gratefully
to the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, 
the International Red Cross Central Tracing Agency,
Thai National Police, U.S. Department of State, and more,
to no real end, though each letter surpasses the last.
First he writes them in long hand, in Vietnamese,
then I think someone helps revise, translate, and type:
Don’t say the boat was stopped or encircled,
say the boat was surrounded by the Thai pirates;
it’s true they took away with them eight girls in our boat,
but abducted captures the situation better; say…—
“The Reading Room will be closing in 15 minutes.”
I sit and stare at the rust print left by a paperclip
coiling into the dead end of a labyrinth.
 
I’m reading the letters of Mr. Nguyen Van The
concerning the disappearance of his granddaughter,
Dinh Thuy Trang, when she escaped by boat… 
In the blue of his sentences a boat leaves Vietnam,
on October 24, 1985, ventures into the South China Sea,
and drifts dangerously along the coast of Thailand. 
I can just make out the boat, a small open “v”,
drawing its wake pattern, on the sea, in the letters. Around 9 A.M. of 26 October, the boat was surrounded by 5 fishing boats belonging to the Thai fishermen.
I recoil at the actions his apt verbs dramatize— invaded, searched, ransacked, pried, looked, seized:
I see teeth flashing inside mouths like knives.
No trace of Thuy. She’s gone…
 


^^EOP^^

Because you’re gone, I take a book to bed: The Flame of Passion. Scabbard at his thigh,
Lord Henry gets the girl. You’d only buy
top Booklist picks. “The romance genre’s dead,”
you’d say when promises of I-thee-wed
lured me to bargain bins. I learned to lie
about my day, hoard Harlequins on the sly
while you were off at work, your office spread
with red-inked proofs. But now it makes me yawn
to read beyond the lovers’ wedding night.
I close The Flame, not even halfway through.
His sword grows dull while she goes on and on
about how lovers must stay true. I’d write
another ending, if I could, for you.


^^EOP^^

A king did not die, a president
was not acquitted, a balloon
did not fly around the world
in twenty days, at 84
with white hair, Joe DiMaggio
was not mourned. And air strikes
launched street to street
in order to bring peace, or
a doctor convicted of doctoring
death? No, and no, nothing
happened, except flowers purple
the year before bloomed
white, but no viruses named
after women spread across
the globe, and the word
“columbine” did not enter
the consciousness of a nation.
What about the bomb
that made a mistake, or the famous
son of a famous president
mistaking the ocean for the sky?
That year, the weather was
unpredictable, that happened,
and if anything else did,
like shots fired at people
praying, no one heard them,
and if people prayed for war
to become holy, those prayers
went unanswered. In Turkey,
the ground split open and
the 17,000 who would die, let’s say,
miraculously, they did not, not
in 1999, the year two lifelong
enemies shook hands and said
there will be peace, but
their palms never touched, why
lie about that? Let’s say
the child from Cuba arrived
not an orphan but with his mother,
who loved and did not sink into
the sea. Let’s not talk
about rampages, disasters,
conflicts or coupes that never
ruined a perfectly good year
during which the sun shined
on the moon, the earth,
and six billion who, for once,
got everything right and not
a single thing wrong.


^^EOP^^




For Joseph Flum



When he got to the farmhouse, he rifled through
the cabinets, drawers, and cupboards,
and his buddies did too. The place was abandoned,
or so he thought, and his buddies did too. 
He tried to talk to people in town, and his buddies did too,
but he was the only one whose Yiddish made it
across into German. They took his meaning.
He, in the farmhouse, took a camera and a gun, 
but his buddies, who knows. About the gun,
it’s also hard to say, but after the war he took up
photography, why not, and shot beautiful women
for years. Got pretty good at it, and how. 
Won prizes and engraved plates, put them in a drawer, forgot
the war, forgot his buddies, forgot the women, forgot the drawer.


^^EOP^^

For this you may see no need,
You may think my aim
Dead set on something 
Devoid of conceivable value:
An Anthology of  Rain,
A collection of voices 
Telling someone somewhere
What it means to follow a drop
Traveling to its final place of rest. 
But do consider this request
If you have pressed your nose
Of any shape against a window, 
Odor of metal faint, persistent,
While a storm cast its cloak
Over the shoulder of every cloud 
In sight. You are free to say
Whatever crosses your mind
When you look at the face of time 
In the passing of one drop
Gathering speed, one drop
Chasing another, racing to reach 
A fork in the path, lingering
Before making a detour to join
Another, fattening on the way 
Until entering a rivulet
Running to the sill.
So please accept this invitation: 
You are welcome to submit,
There is no limit to its limit,
Even the instructions are a breeze 
As long as you include
Nothing about yourself
Except your name. Your address 
Remains unnecessary, for the rain
Will find you — if you receive it
It receives you (whether or not 
You contribute, a volume
Is sent). And when you lift
The collection you may hear, 
By opening anywhere, a drop
And its story reappear
As air turns to water, water to air.


^^EOP^^

When the puppy snarfles for breakfast
I wake to the radiator gurgling
then feet crunching the reticent snow.
Before I was born, Mother sewed her own suits.
What do her ashes know? 
                                         • 
Father shoved snow off the supine roof.
Mother crafted Christmas ornaments:
glue and glitter and red balls.
No tinsel, no angels.
Her death started in the living room. 
                                         • 
For bonsai, pliers the size of a nail clipper,
spools of wire and a fist-sized rock.
One bore a petite pomegranate,
never to eat, not to touch.
Her death began with a baseball bat. 
                                         • 
In the vineyard, he secured the strongest cane
from training stake to fruiting wire.
Pruning with handsaw and lopper.
He’d leave a spur for the next season.
He shoved her away with direct objects. 
                                         • 
In a cold snap if one pipe freezes,
the rest may freeze as well.
Even before the puppy snarfles.
Even before a baby brother arrived
in the misleading car in Mother’s arms.                                          
                                         • 
After the war, after she met Father,
she smoked cigarettes but didn’t cha-cha anymore.
She’d light up and blow smoke
out the apoplectic window.
He found the ashes on the sill. 
                                         • 
Fireflies blinked for mates or prey outside
the savvy window of my own first home.
On the stereo, a bluesman cried, I need my ashes hauled!
The dress was too smart to wear. 
                                         • 
I tucked away our baby’s pink layette
in circumspect mothballs
for a christening that never took place.
As well, a doll that Auntie crocheted.
More than anything, I love tidal pools. 
                                         • 
I know her ashes are at Father’s, lost
in his charnel of junk mail.
He claims that thieves have stolen that box,
his knob cutter and root hook.
He says, remains aren’t ashes anyways. 
                                         • 
Winter stripped everything to the limb
and dejected nest. No angels, no crèche.
I don’t know whose recollections are suspect:
after leaving Maui, Mother learned to swim.
She loved tidal pools more than anything. 
                                         • 
In my kitchen, the logs blink in the fire —
through blinds, the wind blusters and
the browbeaten trees creak in the orchard.
The rain pours then stops for sun. If
he lost Mother’s ashes what more could I stand? 
                                         •  Omusubi tastes best on black beaches.
Since Mother never learned to swim,
did she watch her five brothers from a blanket?
On the intransigent subway, I don’t know if
I’ve passed my station. (His mother said yes —)
Iron: I bit my lip again. 
                                         • 
Mother showed our baby how to sift flour
and how to crank an eggbeater.
After Father lost her,
he barred everyone from the rooms and the yard
where at night long red worms
slither up from the ground. 
                                         • 
Her ashes know: before the puppy snarfles,
Father shoves snow off the supine roof;
for bonsai, use pliers the size of a nail clipper;
in the vineyard, the strongest canes;
in a cold snap, a hair dryer on frozen pipes;
fireflies blinked for mates or prey outside
while I tucked away my baby’s pink layette.
Her ashes know their box is in the living room
where she didn’t cha-cha anymore.
Where has winter stripped everything to the nest?
In my kitchen, the logs blink in the fire and I know omusubi tastes best on black beaches.
She knew to show her granddaughter how to sift flour.


^^EOP^^

When I was laughed at for my clumsy English, I touched my throat.
Which said ear when my ear said year and year after year
I pronounced a new thing wrong and other throats laughed. Elevator. Library. Vibrating bells in their mouths. 
How to say azalea. How to say forsythia.
Say instead golden bells. Say I’m in ESL. In French class
a boy whose last name is Kring called me belle.
Called me by my Korean name, pronouncing it wrong.
Called it loudly, called attention to my alien. 
(I touched the globe moving in my throat, a hemisphere sinking.) 
Called me across the field lined with golden bells.
I wanted to run and be loved at the same time. By Kring.
As in ring of people. Where are you going? We’re laughing with you. 
The bell in our throat that rings with laughter is called uvula. From uva: grape.
A theory: special to our species, this grape-bell has to do with speech.
Which separates us from animals. Kring looked at me and said Just curious, do you eat dogs? and I wanted to end my small life.
Be reborn a golden retriever of North America.
Lie on a field lined with golden bells, loved. 
Today, in a country where dogs are more cherished
than a foreign child, an Oregon Senate candidate says no
to refugees. Says, years ago, Vietnamese refugees ate dogs, harvested other people’s pets. Harvest as in harvest grapes. Harvest as in harvest a field of golden rice. As do people
from rice countries. As in people-eat-dog worlds. 
Years ago, 1923 Japan, the phrase jūgoen gojissen was used
to set apart Koreans: say 15 yen 50 sen. The colonized who used the chaos
of the Kanto Earthquake to poison waters, set fire: a cruelty special to our species.
A cruelty special to our species — how to say jūgo, how to say gojit,
how jūgo sounds like die in Korean, how gojit sounds like lie —  lie, lie, library, azalea, library.  I’m going to the library, I lied, years ago, on a field lined with forsythia.


^^EOP^^

His father told him never start writing
or reading in the middle of a book. 
There’s a title, don’t go on without one.
And he didn’t go on without one — he had the title Private. 
This was life’s taproot — the obedient
boy began always at the beginning. 
Books start out with what the boy calls Beauty
— the boat’s still in port. The cat’s alive. Pantry’s packed. 
Even present tense has some of the grace of past tense,
what with all the present tense left to go. 
Usually, by the first page or second,
a relationship emerges between text and title. 
Some of the words blur on the page
and the key ones glow, 
as does the title, and a fat red arrow
with two heads connects them. Yum. 
It was like owning something. The way
when he paid for a fine hat and put it on, 
he felt a circuit through the rim and top
and sides, swilling gray hat blood. 
And he felt like his heart controlled this circuit
remotely, via microchip. 
If a book could not service him with this truth,
which was all the pleasure in the world, 
he would usually stop reading.
He saw the end of very few books anyway —  
who needs two climaxes? After that intense sensation
the book always changed. It was like looking 
at a plate of food he’d half-eaten
and had rendered him bloated and nauseous. 
Now he is on marches. Now his gun
makes a nest in his arm crook 
with nasty red welts for straw.
Now his rear leaks smelly water all day. 
His whole life he has balanced himself
on an absurdly slender proscenium 
and as he continues to edge out
he can’t tell if it isn’t maybe a gangplank. 
He doesn’t like the switch-up.
What’s out there? he wonders, in what he’ll call ocean for now. 
To his right is an alligator. But the head-ridge has no bone.
It’s propped up instead by fumes: rich, dark, and pungent. 
Far off, men are cradling cracked dolphins.
Arrows of fire shoot out the blowholes. The wounds bleed silver. 
Perhaps they are connecting to a title in the sky.
But he’s not seeing any of these things. 
The world is mostly brown and black,
and smells like a rotting fridge. 
What is it? What is it? Is it a hand?
Is it an eye? Is it a hat? It is time.


^^EOP^^




After Piranesi



The faded remains of ancient advertising — 
captives on parade in native costume.
Now the whangam, that imaginary animal
led by Wharfinger, keeper of the wharf.
And you, my puce, sitting between the paws
of the mechanical lion, his brittle heart of glass.
The regiments of holiday shoppers,
in formations two-by-two, are borne
along the sliding pavements between displays
into the Pavilion of the Encrusted Compass.
O hub of panopticon, each moment on display,
from the central monitor there is no escape.
This is all accomplished, even the symphonic
wrecking of the antique locomotive, in silence.
I have misplaced my whipcat and whinstone.
I try to recall something that I know.
A westing is a space of distance westward.
Wheep: the sound of steel drawn from a sheath.
What was the name of the Babylonian sidekick
of Sir Thomas More’s lead warren?
Time for the steam-driven, slow reckoning,
for the chains and block and tackle dangling
from the eternally unfinished dome, the chrome-
plated waterfall and the ascension
into the arcades, the arcades and their broken promises.


^^EOP^^

        I am as guilty as many. No one speaks of David Ignatow anymore.
No one speaks of  your lonesome time in the New York boonies,
those outer reaches of Jamaica,
where the Z & J Lines go no more.
No one speaks of your sparsely furnished rooms,
the low-slung Danish sofa where you sit and muse and daydream
out the grimed window on rainy days.
Even in the warmth of spring, there is no spring.
You don’t go out much, I would imagine.
I imagine much for the both of us.
All those darknesses at noon.
Those woodlands filled with songbirds twittering.
Even scribblings on the morning Times
are but a momentary respite.
Words we’ve been blessed with,
still blessed, even in our nightly dreams unfinished.
Where art thou now, dear David?
Where is the love for my desperation
that I may fight your fears?


^^EOP^^

By way of my mother, the deacon with the slick gray hair and money
clip in his pocket can claim a percentage of my body like tithe rights.
And on this Sunday, as with every other Sunday, he is a slender
ebony panel in the fence of faith, one man in the company of men
standing shoulder to shoulder in suits, tapping their toes, clapping
their hands, putting muscle to work in the making of praise music.
We Baptists call this devotion, my working definition of which
is faithfulness to the light. To the extent that God is as white
as the clouds of heaven, this theory holds. To the extent these
particular men are dark, I must consider other possibilities:
that God remade himself in my image so that we could be closer
or that devotion means the commitment of black men to stand
with one another

^^EOP^^

                                      1 
My ear amps whistle like they are singing
to Echo, goddess of noise,
the raveled knot of tongues,
of blaring birds, consonant crumbs
of dull doorbells, sounds swamped
in my misty hearing aid tubes.
Gaudí believed in holy sound
and built a cathedral to contain it,
pulling hearing men from their knees
as though atheism is a kind of deafness.
Who would turn down God?
Even though I have not heard
the golden decibels of angels,
I have been living in a noiseless
palace where the doorbell is pulsating
light and I am able to answer.  
                                      2  What? 
a word that keeps looking
in mirrors like it is in love
with its own volume.  What? 
I am a one-word question,
a one-man
patience test.  What? 
What language
would we speak
without ears?  What? 
Is paradise
a world where
I hear everything?  What? 
How will my brain
know what to hold
if it has too many arms?  
                                      3 
The day I clear out my dead father’s flat, 
I throw away boxes of molding LPs, Garvey, 
Malcolm X, Mandela, speeches on vinyl. 
I find a TDK cassette tape on the shelf, 
smudged green label Raymond Speaking. 
I play the tape in his vintage cassette player 
and hear my two-year-old voice chanting my name Antrob 
and dad’s laughter crackling in the background 
not knowing I couldn’t hear the word “bus” 
and wouldn’t until I got my hearing aids. 
Now I sit here listening to the space of deafness —   Antrob Antrob Antrob  
                                      4 
And no one knew what I was missing 
until a doctor gave me a handful of Legos 
and said to put a brick on the table 
every time I heard a sound. 
After the test I still held enough bricks 
in my hand to build a house 
and call it my sanctuary, 
call it the reason I sat in saintly silence 
during my grandfather’s sermons when he preached 
the good news, I only heard 
as Babylon’s babbling echoes.  
                                      5 
          And if you don’t catch nothing
          then something wrong with your ears —
          they been tuned to de wrong frequency                                    — Kei Miller

^^EOP^^

        Is she still Faith Franckenstein? Is she still the past
somewhere between Frankfort, Kansas, and LA?
Le Moulin du Soleil Ermenonville; her mom’s haunt
with Harry Crosby, winter ’29,
also haunted, still haunted. Those open fields haunted.
The Faubourg Saint-Germain. The Faubourg darknesses
and weeping willows, the drizzled cul-de-sacs.
Is she still of memories thus deleted,
giving her a certain absent aura, tall-shouldered?
An uncertain world of make-believe made more believable, I wanna say.
Those whims and glossy chance encounters,
tossing caution to the wind.
As such, a darkened moonless night,
down by South Beach sans the Verrazzano, c. ’61.
We plunged headlong, skinny-dipping in the languid surf
with dreams of no tomorrows, no eternities.
None but those decades lessened,
disappeared. Those moments becoming one less and less.
The near-to-next impossibility.
The careless and carefree.
The half-remembered face.
The voice also half-remembered.
Her hair way past shoulder-length, soft, satiny.
Wordsworth’s “emotions recollected in tranquility” tout passé.
The midnight skinny-dip.


^^EOP^^

Large green-tailed lizard, zucchini-mottled
flicks and swirls. But, no! It’s not some random lizard:
that’s the snake! A rill of water falling up the stone,
he’d heard my light, quick foot     as human-hard. 
And the dream? that wildly handsome man
who had no wife,     his wife had “gone away”
(but where?)     so he wanted to meet more     women
he needed help    with his decor, his place 
was encumbered with little ceramic, clay-
kitsch banalities —      I did not see the snake’s head,
since it faced away.     I could not fix 
it being vipera or serpente.
That question hinged on poison in his mix. 
From what I saw, though, ’twas a very handsome snake.
                                                                •  Options: “scaled to the human boy” or was it “scaled to the human body”? Which did I write?  Options: Desire? temptation? yearning for danger? thralldom? lust? You can add to the list yourself. You can add yourself to the list.  Options: Teasing enchantment. “How still the Riddle lies.”  Options: Insistent     “Shaft”     “a tighter Breathing”  The sibyl’s many leaves are laurel made for wreathing.


^^EOP^^

Looking up, “The purple now,” she dips
her brush and finishes the day. The flag 
descends. She draws the fire with a marker
on fax paper uncurling from its spool. 
Inventory of glasses, the handblown ones
blue-edged could hold a sunset neat, the new 
regime is softball-sized and etched with tigers.
In town they’re pulling draughts for every swinging 
door. Don’t get angry, don’t get angry.
The soaker’s washed and left to dry. Iron 
Hessians oversee the fire gone
to bed beside the harbor, geese calling 
each to each triangulate the dark.
Passing through or are they wintering over? 
In chevron resolve. Like waking to
the rain and walking anyway. She 
thinking of what to do with pawpaw  jelly,
he of mildew and of marrow, while 
their youngest bouncing gums the leather dice
cup, sister rolls, counts, and makes 
a point. Get even says the horizon
like the sun, democratic and unsparing.


^^EOP^^

        It will be a while before recollections in tranquility set in,
as time in its adversary mode of darker days
ticks on transfixing you in newsprint.
It will be a while before those sudden winds descend upon the Po.
A while before the laughter echoes in the dark;
before the sounds of seagulls and accordions, harmonicas
mix in those parting shots of long-forgotten flicks
with names like La notte brava, I Pugni in tasca, L’oro di Napoli.
Your show-offy had intelligence; not the “unconscious”
your friend Calvino claims you lacked. Ha-ha.
It will be a while before the tranquility comes round again.
A while before you’re able to get up and move about;
stare out from your Swallow’s Nest
on those dappled waters of Salerno’s Gulf, almost fable-like.
“Didn’t it go by awfully fast?”
your buddy Howard once sweetly asked.
It will be a while and sometimes more and not your last.


^^EOP^^

When I close my eyes there’s a white key.
But maybe it’s a box, so I can’t press it. 
The sides are shell blue, but I can’t check
without turning the box. The musician 
told me his sister and he would say Morgem
and expose the teeth and flare the nostrils 
to express a particular affection. The white box
won’t say Morgem. Or Corbemsalad. 
It must be a heartbreaking desk.
It says to be in on a secret 
just means to know you’re in a secret — 
the pleasure’s like two people 
beheld by a third in the act
of making meaning. 
It says on one hospital floor
the humans die. 
Another they give birth.
A third they grow new chins.
At a fourth they’re lopped. 
When the floors mix by mistake,
it’s usually in the middle
where the desk rasps 
under husks of  ink, and the nostrils
grow for air. We talk, never sing, 
because music gives the god room to stretch
and the god kills by growing in the head.


^^EOP^^

these are my people & I find
them on the street & shadow
through any wild all wild
my people my people
a dance of strangers in my blood
the old woman’s sari dissolving to wind
bindi a new moon on her forehead
I claim her my kin & sew
the star of her to my breast
the toddler dangling from stroller
hair a fountain of dandelion seed
at the bakery I claim them too
the sikh uncle at the airport
who apologizes for the pat
down the muslim man who abandons
his car at the traffic light drops
to his knees at the call of the azan
& the muslim man who sips
good whiskey at the start of maghrib
the lone khala at the park
pairing her kurta with crocs
my people my people I can’t be lost
when I see you my compass
is brown & gold & blood
my compass a muslim teenager
snapback & high-tops gracing
the subway platform
mashallah I claim them all
my country is made
in my people’s image
if they come for you they
come for me too in the dead
of winter a flock of
aunties step out on the sand
their dupattas turn to ocean
a colony of uncles grind their palms
& a thousand jasmines bell the air
my people I follow you like constellations
we hear the glass smashing the street
& the nights opening their dark
our names this country’s wood
for the fire my people my people
the long years we’ve survived the long
years yet to come I see you map
my sky the light your lantern long
ahead & I follow I follow


^^EOP^^




“Café-Concert at Les Ambassadeurs,” 1876–77 by Edgar Degas



i have a red dress and no eyes.
i have a dress that is blood
red and i have eyes that don’t blink 
when the balcony sucks in. my dress is a beet
swollen with thought, and hangs like a body
on my body. i have eyes that don’t blink 
at being seen. i was halfway finished
before i saw i’d begun. my dress drips
down the center. my eyes are needle holes 
and my dress is an over-red thread. i hang
my words in the air by their feet, limp
and damp, and my dress is my only laugh 
that is actually red. my eyes
are the backs of moons and afterwards men
jest us like children, and smoke, 
and women who have been my dress circle
their stomachs with their hands.
i’m an actress. this is not my mother 
tongue. i have a dress that is
yellow. my lines are written by a parisian
man. we met in london. i came dancing 
out like god upon a crimson wave. my dress hung
like a question or a suddenness. he wrote me
coming out this way, he says, to make me 
like a lioness. the constellations are full
of dead women, he says. he says
my dress is the coat of a great lion. 
i turn like the blood inside
a rose. the crowd is a great gasp. i can feel myself
become a pear. it’s as if you haven’t taken 
pills, he says. i still have that dress.
it’s not too blonde or red. you can grasp
it with your eyes, he said, the way you wear it.


^^EOP^^

        I would imagine underneath those warming bear hugs
was a kinda kind of soul
as your many poems attest. Those summer breezes.
Those many hazy sunsets nature’s voices echoing afar.
A life continually fulfilled bordering on the empty
and those inexplicable tragedies,
those bad timings unreconciled, then reconciled with time.
You had no answer that would satisfy your curiosity
and the why, the wherewithal just round the bend.
The morning mists descending in an angled quietude.
A birdcall here and there.
A rising wind unfurled and furling at the top-most branches of a conifer.
Those wetlands mysterioso.
A last-known address unknown at last.


^^EOP^^

        I never really knew if Johanna Hirshhorn was actually Joe’s only daughter.
Jim Brodey made the match and claimed as much, and then he left.
It was my last weekend in Labor Day New York
before boarding a one-way Milan Alitalia flight
where I disembarked with less than 10 bucks to my name
and this sense of wonder
                                              what would unfold and take me far.
It was a blinding day, September, almost still,
when Flavio Lucchini came to fetch me.
It would be Giangiacomo, Montale, the irascible Nanda,
Ettore Sottsass when he was still taking pictures,
when he hugged me when he could.
In Olga Hirshhorn’s obit in the Times,
no mention of Johanna. Where art thou? Dove? Dove?
Perhaps she wasn’t Joe’s daughter after all.
Perhaps I’d been mistaken, misheard, misremembered.
Perhaps she was a long-lost grandchild dangling on that family tree.
Perhaps Jim misled me. Perhaps,
perhaps my memory is faulty after all,
as when I woke to the abrupt jolting of the Rome
Express.
                 All else is but a blur,
a flight from memory, a future without one, far from home.


^^EOP^^

If I die, you say you will let your hair
turn silver, grow long, and you will go
into the dark place, for you’ve already begun
to forget what Mecca means. 
Where we come from, you and I, maqam means home, means music; the Qur’an
can only be read as a song; a sheikh recites the Fatiha
as if he has built a house among the lines, the ayas. 
We’ve both called our daughters Aya, and when they ask
about their name, we play holy verses for them, listen
to how the sheikh lingers long enough on each letter,
how the audience claps and whistles — Is it Umm Kulthum? 
our daughters ask. He knows all his maqamat,
this sheikh, says God is greater, and Allah, Allah,
reply the faithful and the unfaithful alike,
for the earth is such a small planet, and look, 
there is Ithaca, almost always on the horizon — 
float, my friend. Ithaca — It is rough, but raises good men, says Homer, but oh, the women, the women
know how to house the bodies of the drowned. They sing,  In the Name of the Cross, of God, the Merciful. A child
in Syria has amputated legs because he has ventured
into a minefield to eat grass. He still has two eyes,
two arms, a mouth. God is greater, is greater, stay 
with me in the light a little longer. You light two cigarettes
at the same time, give me one. Tomorrow you will fly to Lesbos
to translate. The refugees will say shai, and you will say tea, home, Mecca, Ithaca, maqam, maqam, maqam.


^^EOP^^

At the podium
measured and grave as a metronome
the (white, male) poet with bald-
gleaming head broods in gnom-
ic syllables on the death
of 12-year-old (black, male) Tamir Rice
shot in a park
by a Cleveland police officer
claiming to believe
the boy’s plastic pistol
was a “real gun”
like his own eager
to discharge and slay
 
while twelve feet away at the edge of the bright-lit stage the (white, female) interpreter signing for the deaf is stricken with emotion — horror, pity, disbelief — outrage, sorrow — young-woman face contorted and eyes spilling tears like Tamir Rice’s mother perhaps, or the sister made to witness the child’s bleeding out in the Cleveland park. We stare as the interpreter’s fingers pluck the poet’s words out of the air like bullets, break open stanzas tight as conches with the deft ferocity of a cormo- rant and render gnome-speech raw as hurt, as harm, as human terror wet-eyed and mouth-grimaced in horror’s perfect O.


^^EOP^^

The body wicks
away its nest, leaves 
sediment. In salt
the silhouette of a wolf 
or a sheepshead. Who
knows who steals bones 
if  not the connoisseur
of  bones, and who drops 
a crank behind the body
if  not the one who drains 
the river bed? In unrest,
buzzards. Or a flat 
line. The probability
of  sparrows a spark 
between two enemy pistons.
A dirigible built 
solely for the grave.


^^EOP^^

So grateful the process is clean
and faithful. Does not cheat
like a disenchanted spouse
dozing on a haggard couch. 
Take heart: the process is always right — 
is automatic, phlegmatic. Clean, cold,
and always refreshing. Brewed to perfection
some say. Guaranteed to satisfy 
you might say. Give thanks the process
is organized. Synchronized and sterilized.
Optimized but not disguised, like
the grown man at my door long after 
trick-or-treaters have gone, hand
outstretched, mask covering his eyes.
Thankful, too, for the oversight: no
boogeyman standing over the drain pipe, 
clogging it with debris when no one sees
so he can charge you your life
for the cleaning; name your price.
And how shall we praise the instruments 
of investigation? So shiny, so new, gleaming
with silver and glass? No traces of fingerprints
or funders. No whispered voices
softly requesting, of the results, a first glance. 
There’s no need to come clean. We know
the process won’t fall prey to steak and wine
and then slink upstairs to spend some time,
just a little. The process doesn’t. The process 
wouldn’t. The process isn’t that kind.


^^EOP^^

The woman in the documentary reaches her hands
to the fence      touches her child through an opening
De mis manos      dolor     When I was a child      my mama
drove me to the swap meet on the other side
for a white dress & flowered wreath      my first
Holy Communion      the mamas nursing
on the roadside     selling chicle con sus
manos libres      Abuelo once rode in the casket
of a trunk      He rose again on our side of the border
which crossed Bisabuela’s family      Look
from my balcony      the sleeping sister
volcanoes shaped like breasts     I’ve
thought about leaving      Shoving
a duffel bag & laptop into the car     taking
the dog      But these babies I’ve wanted since
I was a child      That’s what girls do where I grew up
down the road from a landfill in the humid stench
of a beef plant & sugar beets     hulled & boiled
for their sweet white meat      I found an animal in a trap
who’d fought her way through high grasses
wasting to carcass in my own backyard
& I believe you know what a merciful act means
     I don’t know the words for the shame I’ve carried
The woman in the documentary needs papers
to get back to her children     They’d found her
in the hospital      without insurance      la migra
Mama nursed women who’d run through asparagus fields’
crackling heat      bellies full against the barbed wire
they’re still burying like umbilicals      roots on a battlefield
if the child’s a boy or the place where tortillas are made
for a girl      Don’t you dare say desert
The heat is unbearable & I’ve seen
them pulling anchors from legs
cursing bullet shells      In the hospital facing pig barns
& a graveyard      Mama in her scrubs & gloves
pulling newborns      bloodied like suicide wrists      Jars
of coins for the ferryman & La Virgen burning
an altar on my nightstand      Mis manos      Mis hijos
     Whatever fence I’ve erected from that salted curse
in my family’s blood      Release us
The woman on the screen whispers a prayer      Fly us free as birds      Sin vergüenza I admit the darkness
I’ve swallowed      the hollow inside      Now      who will
unpin our hands      & toward sky      upraise them


^^EOP^^

Two bedtimes ago, through my window,
I heard a cat get eaten. 
As the cat split, it sounded like
a balloon string put to scissors 
to make curls so the birthday boy
would smile extra wide. 
Last night, by the same window,
I heard mostly my breath, inside of which 
was a small baby suckling
my air for his milk. 
When I bolted upright, the baby
grew up into a carpenter, 
nailing his brains into the side of my lung
to babyproof the light switch. 
Flip the switch and it lights
a picture of my emaciated, sore-ridden bum 
for my breath to laugh at.
Why is my breath so unlike yours? 
My ears? Why do I only hear such unnatural things?
Although, come to think of it, death is completely natural. 
I’m just exasperated. Everywhere life-sounds
swarm this, our shared pond, like mating turtles. 
Cars whoosh, schmoozers hum,
snakes spit poison, Martin and Martina say yes 
and sob and hold, but my ears fill up instead
with eggshells cracked by the bumbling parents. 
I cleaned my left ear out,
but my nail cut the drum. 
It filled with water
and is deaf for now. 
I’m leaving the right one dirty. No sudden changes.
Keep everything dry. Let it figure out a way to heal itself. 
And me:  just practice living with yourself  deaf.
Sometimes your brain is as unwelcome 
as muscles or guns. It’s obvious to others. Maybe even
everyone. Don’t wish for anything. Don’t get organized. 
Don’t buy a book. Don’t go to bed early.
Seek out beige, in foodstuffs and landscapes. 
Chew gum if  you’re overwhelmed.
You’re in this alone. That means there’s nobody to stop you. 
You’re almost at the finish line.
But first, you have to pick a finish line.


^^EOP^^

Standing at a desk of cranberries     a small triumph of jumps     I wait longer than the rescue of rains     I send prayers to the terror walking north

I do a pantomime on the edge of the cliff     overreacting to the sea and the creatures in back of the house     if  you had just looked out I would have said this is my little resonance

The guile of parrots     a carnival     a killing     a crusade    the final  pursuit either a panorama or a demon

The fan click refuses to stop or to cancel its insistence     stubborn in the face of carnage     the once famous once child fortunes     the fifty days of posters     all the field deaths     all the cries of Jimmy! Caddie! Victor! Are you coming?

Today not to beard but to wear black     today not to trace the creases on my face     today caught in parts     today to bicep toward justice but not to beard     as if that were even a possibility     even with lasers and goats     an ocean of black dogs and boats     searching for better swells     a more favorable forecast     a mast out of water     I want what the pelican sees

An answer comes in the smell of woodsmoke as he passes     by a personal note at the slope of his neck    trials of bridges and the moon alongside Pont Marie     I follow that smell with the O of sails and sorted shoes     with brushes and the corners of candles     a firm clap then the rubber stickiness of stones     I follow the tremble with the white noise of busses and a can of coins     surrounded by Joyce and daughter     blind on a broken chair     hearing cobbles

I’m just like you     some dying     some grief     some scotch     my final please unhooked from fire and earrings     knees in the grass     sinking into the sorted dirt     my beach a tree pleading with the summer surf    walking or chased    a finned orange fish that sucks at my sleep    a morning trail in lavender musk     preacher mounds    a human fever    a corner room settled in blue plaid    a pot of red bowls     a curtain of frames     a pitted eye    a hill    a chimney     a pear

Where would these words be without a subject?    little carvings of mosquitoes landing on my hands     headaches digging an elision of craters     a great empty blow of air that follows my feet    the big lumber of my dog’s no longer here     his hair an excursion still fluttering on the tile     slush and whispered breath     where the naked man on the street washes his back with purple flowers

You keep saying boy like it’s the belt that was used to tie you to the bed     you keep saying bull like you were forced to fight     you keep saying dragon as if courage had no sound     you keep saying hair and crib like babies come out of shells

From button to button     what spunky rope    what cold claustrophobe    what caravan of pack dogs    what kink and rocky tunnels do I have to sliver through     every exhausted moon    batteries dwindling toward unnameable and permanent night     my knees pray the floor will open to a new city

A door to my back     the molding cheesy and rectal     I run with the horses across the field     the town wiped off the track and left behind    you curl up at the back of my neck and we go bucking over the whole knot of trails     the whole veiny land


^^EOP^^

        Stefan Zweig, come back, come back.
Do not be afraid. Do not look the other way,
but on all sides.
Come take the road with me into those dark woods
where eerie sounds of nature coalesce,
where fledglings kiss you on the head and talk to you.
Come fly with me,
come be my friend in those darkest hours, in those darkest
woods where even dreams are not permitted,
but they move in nonetheless,
because their darkest hours share with yours
and mine to light the light,
where our angels lead us on with whisperings . . .    
                                                                                           and they look on.
Stefan, it’s safe now.
Come hold my hand.
We circle home.
The light is in the window.
The dance is picking up. The dance is done.
Can’t you feel it now? Can’t you . . . can’t you . . . ?


^^EOP^^

A lavender fog breeds with our children.
Our girls are dying on the roadsides,
their wombs pried open by the scramble that grows inside. 
Save us from the lavender fog — 
it’s the ghosts of your dead people,
who have never bothered our village before. 
Their shapes convulse in our water sources.
When we get close enough to hear their ghostly voices,
they say yum-yum pleadingly
and shout out better better as in I’ll get better. 
Some of our children have taken these as lyrics.
Your ghosts are corrupting the youth. 
Stop using us as musical instruments,
this is a great taboo you have violated! 
Go back to making tubes of wood vibrate
and scraping your goat gut.


^^EOP^^

There is a white stone cliff over a dropping slope
sliced along with bare trees. 
In the center of the cliff is a round dry fountain
of polished stone. By seizing my whole body up 
as I clench my hand I am able to open
the fountain into a drain, revealing below it 
the sky, the trees, a brown and uncertain ground.
This is how my heart works, you see? 
This is how love works? Have some sympathy
for the great spasms with which I must open 
myself to love and close again, and open.
And if I leapt into the fountain, there is just no 
telling: I might sever myself clean, or crack
the gold bloom of my head, and I don’t know 
onto what uncertain ground I might fold like a sack.


^^EOP^^

These are the lines on which a committee is formed.
     Almost as soon as work was begun in the tunnel
     men began to die among dry drills. No masks.
     Most of them were not from this valley.
     The freights brought many every day from States
     all up and down the Atlantic seaboard
     and as far inland as Kentucky, Ohio.
     After the work the camps were closed or burned.
     The ambulance was going day and night,
     White’s undertaking business thriving and
     his mother’s cornfield put to a new use.
     “Many of the shareholders at this meeting
     “were nervous about the division of the profits;
     “How much has the Company spent on lawsuits?
     “The man said $150,000. Special counsel:
     “I am familiar with the case. Not   :   one    :    cent.
     “ ‘Terms of the contract. Master liable.’
     “No reply. Great corporation disowning men who made. . . .”
     After the lawsuits had been instituted. . . . The Committee is a true reflection of the will of the people.
     Every man is ill. The women are not affected,
     This is not a contagious disease. A medical commission,
     Dr. Hughes, Dr. Hayhurst examined the chest
     of Raymond Johnson, and Dr. Harless, a former
     company doctor. But he saw too many die,
     he has written his letter to Washington. The Committee meets regularly, wherever it can.
     Here are Mrs. Jones, three lost sons, husband sick,
     Mrs. Leek, cook for the bus cafeteria,
     the men: George Robinson, leader and voice,
     four other Negroes (three drills, one camp-boy)
     Blankenship, the thin friendly man, Peyton the engineer,
     Juanita absent, the one outsider member.
     Here in the noise, loud belts of the shoe-repair shop,
     meeting around the stove beneath the one bulb hanging.
     They come late in the day. Many come with them
     who pack the hall, wait in the thorough dark. This is a defense committee. Unfinished business:
     Two rounds of lawsuits, 200 cases
     Now as to the crooked lawyers
     If the men had worn masks, their use would have involved
     time every hour to wash the sponge at mouth.
     Tunnel, 3⅛ miles long. Much larger than
     the Holland Tunnel or Pittsburgh’s Liberty Tubes.
     Total cost, say, $16,000,000. This is the procedure of such a committee:
     To consider the bill before the Senate.
     To discuss relief.
          Active members may be cut off relief,
               16-mile walk to Fayetteville for cheque—
               west virginia relief administration, #22991
               to joe henigan, gauley bridge, one and 50/100,
               winona national bank. paid from state funds.
    

^^EOP^^

Every day in summer I'd cross the border;
he'd nod, pick up the horseshoes,
hand me one, triple the size
of my palm, and say, You first. We'd play
away the afternoon. Few words
punctuated the clank of horseshoe
against stake, until the fog rolled in
and I'd retrace my steps home.
I was five or six; he, white haired,
however old that meant. 
One evening my father sat me down,
spoke in the exaggerated tone
adults adapt for children, asked
if I knew who he was.
Admiral Nimitz, of course, though
I knew nothing of his command
of the Pacific Fleet and was less impressed
than if he'd landed a horseshoe. 
He was a calm man, a useful attribute
for sending young men to their deaths.
The only time I saw him upset,
raccoons had invaded from their hideouts
in the hills, attacked the goldfish in his pond,
leaving muddy footprints as they escaped.
As far as I knew, this was his only defeat.


^^EOP^^

Five daughters, in the slant light on the porch,
are bickering. The eldest has come home
with new truths she can hardly wait to teach. 
She lectures them: the younger daughters search
the sky, elbow each other's ribs, and groan.
Five daughters, in the slant light on the porch 
and blue-sprigged dresses, like a stand of birch
saplings whose leaves are going yellow-brown
with new truths. They can hardly wait to teach, 
themselves, to be called "Ma'am," to march
high-heeled across the hanging bridge to town.
Five daughters. In the slant light on the porch 
Pomp lowers his paper for a while, to watch
the beauties he's begotten with his Ann:
these new truths they can hardly wait to teach. 
The eldest sniffs, "A lady doesn't scratch."
The third snorts back, "Knock, knock: nobody home."
The fourth concedes, "Well, maybe not in church . . . "
Five daughters in the slant light on the porch.


^^EOP^^

“I am playing my oldest tunes,” declared she,
      “All the old tunes I know,—
Those I learnt ever so long ago.”
—Why she should think just then she’d play them
       Silence cloaks like snow. 
When I returned from the town at nightfall
      Notes continued to pour
As when I had left two hours before:
“It’s the very last time,” she said in closing;
       “From now I play no more.” 
A few morns onward found her fading,
      And, as her life outflew,
I thought of her playing her tunes right through;
And I felt she had known of what was coming,
      And wondered how she knew.
 


^^EOP^^

Just enough rain an hour ago
to give the wispy dry grass some hope,
turning it green instantly. 
This place has been abandoned,
the old faith overgrown, confused
by brambles,
and in these hard times,
its upkeep cut from the budget. 
But we walk, soaked to the knees,
making our slow pilgrimage
among gravestones, speaking
blurred names back into the world.


^^EOP^^

Because I love you, and beneath the uncountable stars
I have become the delicate piston threading itself through your chest,
 
I want to tell you a story I shouldn’t but will and in the meantime neglect, Love,
the discordant melody spilling from my ears but attend,
 
instead, to this tale, for a river burns inside my mouth
and it wants both purgation and to eternally sip your thousand drippings;
 
and in the story is a dog and unnamed it leads to less heartbreak,
so name him Max, and in the story are neighborhood kids
 
who spin a yarn about Max like I’m singing to you, except they tell a child,
a boy who only moments earlier had been wending through sticker bushes
 
to pick juicy rubies, whose chin was, in fact, stained with them,
and combining in their story the big kids make
 
the boy who shall remain unnamed believe Max to be sick and rabid,
and say his limp and regular smell of piss are just two signs,
 
but the worst of it, they say, is that he’ll likely find you in the night,
and the big kids do not giggle, and the boy does not giggle,
 
but lets the final berries in his hand drop into the overgrowth
at his feet, and if I spoke the dream of the unnamed boy
 
I fear my tongue would turn an arm of fire so I won’t, but
know inside the boy’s head grew a fire beneath the same stars
 
as you and I, Love, your leg between mine, the fine hairs
on your upper thigh nearly glistening in the night, and the boy,
 
the night, the incalculable mysteries as he sleeps with a stuffed animal
tucked beneath his chin and rolls tight against his brother
 
in their shared bed, who rolls away, and you know by now
there is no salve to quell his mind’s roaring machinery
 
and I shouldn’t tell you, but I will,
the unnamed boy
 
on the third night of the dreams which harden his soft face
puts on pants and a sweatshirt and quietly takes the spade from the den
 
and more quietly leaves his house where upstairs his father lies dreamless,
and his mother bends her body into his,
 
and beneath these same stars, Love, which often, when I study them,
seem to recede like so many of the lies of light,
 
the boy walks to the yard where Max lives attached to a steel cable
spanning the lawn, and the boy brings hot dogs which he learned
 
from Tom & Jerry, and nearly urinating in his pants he tosses them
toward the quiet and crippled thing limping across the lawn,
 
the cable whispering above the dew-slick grass, and Max whimpers,
and the boy sees a wolf where stands this ratty
 
and sad and groveling dog and beneath these very stars
Max raises his head to look at the unnamed boy 
with one glaucous eye nearly glued shut
and the other wet from the cool breeze and wheezing 
Max catches the gaze of the boy who sees,
at last, the raw skin on the dog's flank, the quiver 
of his spindly legs, and as Max bends his nose
to the franks the boy watches him struggle 
to snatch the meat with gums, and bringing the shovel down
he bends to lift the meat to Max's toothless mouth, 
and rubs the length of his throat and chin,
Max arching his neck with his eyes closed, now, 
and licking the boy's round face, until the boy unchains the dog,
and stands, taking slow steps backward through the wet grass and feels,
 
for the first time in days, the breath in his lungs, which is cool,
and a little damp, spilling over his small lips, and he feels, 
again, his feet beneath him, and the earth beneath them, and starlings
singing the morning in, and the somber movement of beetles 
chewing the leaves of the white birch, glinting in the dark, and he notices,
Darling, an upturned nest beneath the tree, and flips it looking for the blue eggs 
of robins, but finds none, and placing a rumpled crimson feather in his mouth
slips the spindly thicket into another tree, which he climbs 
to watch the first hint of light glancing above the fields, and the boy
eventually returns to his thorny fruit bush where an occasional prick 
leaves on his arm or leg a spot of blood the color of these raspberries
and tasting of salt, and filling his upturned shirt with them he beams 
that he could pull from the earth that which might make you smile,
Love, which you’ll find in the fridge, on the bottom shelf, behind the milk, 
in the bowl you made with your own lovely hands.


^^EOP^^

Today my heart is so goddamned fat with grief 
that I’ve begun hauling it in a wheelbarrow. No. It’s an anvil 
dragging from my neck as I swim 
through choppy waters swollen with the putrid corpses of hippos,
which means lurking, somewhere below, is the hungry 
snout of a croc waiting to spin me into an oblivion 
worse than this run-on simile, which means only to say: 
I’m sad. And everyone knows what that means. 
 
And in my sadness I’ll walk to a café, 
and not see light in the trees, nor finger the bills in my pocket 
as I pass the boarded houses on the block. No, 
I will be slogging through the obscure country of my sadness 
in all its monotone flourish, and so imagine my surprise 
when my self-absorption gets usurped 
by the sound of opera streaming from an open window, 
and the sun peeks ever-so-slightly from behind his shawl, 
and this singing is getting closer, so that I can hear the 
delicately rolled r’s like a hummingbird fluttering the tongue 
which means a language more beautiful than my own, 
and I don’t recognize the song 
though I’m jogging toward it and can hear the woman’s 
breathing through the record’s imperfections and above me 
two bluebirds dive and dart and a rogue mulberry branch 
leaning over an abandoned lot drags itself across my face, 
staining it purple and looking, now, like a mad warrior of glee 
and relief I run down the street, and I forgot to mention 
the fifty or so kids running behind me, some in diapers, 
some barefoot, all of them winged and waving their pacifiers 
and training wheels and nearly trampling me 
when in a doorway I see a woman in slippers and a floral housedress 
blowing in the warm breeze who is maybe seventy painting the doorway 
and friends, it is not too much to say 
it was heaven sailing from her mouth and all the fish in the sea 
and giraffe saunter and sugar in my tea and the forgotten angles 
of love and every name of the unborn and dead 
from this abuelita only glancing at me 
before turning back to her earnest work of brushstroke and lullaby 
and because we all know the tongue’s clumsy thudding 
makes of miracles anecdotes let me stop here 
and tell you I said thank you.


^^EOP^^




                              —for Patrick Rosal



Because I must not
get up to throw down in a café in the Midwest,
I hold something like a clownfaced herd
of bareback and winged elephants
stomping in my chest,
I hold a thousand
kites in a field loosed from their tethers
at once, I feel
my skeleton losing track
somewhat of the science I’ve made of tamp,
feel it rising up shriek and groove,
rising up a river guzzling a monsoon,
not to mention the butterflies
of the loins, the hummingbirds
of the loins, the thousand
dromedaries of the loins, oh body
of sunburst, body
of larkspur and honeysuckle and honeysuccor
bloom, body of treetop holler,
oh lightspeed body
of gasp and systole, the mandible’s ramble,
the clavicle swoon, the spine’s
trillion teeth oh, drift
of hip oh, trill of ribs,
oh synaptic clamor and juggernaut
swell oh gutracket
blastoff and sugartongue
syntax oh throb and pulse and rivulet
swing and glottal thing
and kick-start heart and heel-toe heart
ooh ooh ooh a bullfight
where the bull might
take flight and win!


^^EOP^^




               —after Steve Scafidi



The way the universe sat waiting to become,
quietly, in the nether of space and time,
 
you too remain some cellular snuggle
dangling between my legs, curled in the warm
 
swim of my mostly quietest self. If you come to be—
And who knows?—I wonder, little bubble
 
of unbudded capillaries, little one ever aswirl
in my vascular galaxies, what would you think
 
of this world which turns itself steadily
into an oblivion that hurts, and hurts bad?
 
Would you curse me my careless caressing you
into this world or would you rise up
 
and, mustering all your strength into that tiny throat
which one day, no doubt, would grow big and strong,
 
scream and scream and scream until you break the back of one injustice,
or at least get to your knees to kiss back to life
 
some roadkill? I have so many questions for you,
for you are closer to me than anyone
 
has ever been, tumbling, as you are, this second,
through my heart’s every chamber, your teeny mouth
 
singing along with the half-broke workhorse’s steady boom and gasp.
And since we’re talking today I should tell you,
 
though I know you sneak a peek sometimes
through your father’s eyes, it’s a glorious day,
 
and there are millions of leaves collecting against the curbs,
and they’re the most delicate shade of gold
 
we’ve ever seen and must favor the transparent
wings of the angels you’re swimming with, little angel.
 
And as to your mother—well, I don’t know—
but my guess is that lilac bursts from her throat
 
and she is both honeybee and wasp and some kind of moan to boot
and probably she dances in the morning—
 
but who knows? You’ll swim beneath that bridge if it comes.
For now let me tell you about the bush called honeysuckle
 
that the sad call a weed, and how you could push your little
sun-licked face into the throngs and breathe and breathe.
 
Sweetness would be your name, and you would wonder why
four of your teeth are so sharp, and the tiny mountain range
 
of your knuckles so hard. And you would throw back your head
and open your mouth at the cows lowing their human songs
 
in the field, and the pigs swimming in shit and clover,
and everything on this earth, little dreamer, little dreamer
 
of the new world, holy, every rain drop and sand grain and blade
of grass worthy of gasp and joy and love, tiny shaman,
 
tiny blood thrust, tiny trillion cells trilling and trilling,
little dreamer, little hard hat, little heartbeat, 
little best of me.


^^EOP^^




—after Gwendolyn Brooks



No matter the pull toward brink. No
matter the florid, deep sleep awaits.
There is a time for everything. Look,
just this morning a vulture
nodded his red, grizzled head at me,
and I looked at him, admiring
the sickle of his beak.
Then the wind kicked up, and,
after arranging that good suit of feathers
he up and took off.
Just like that. And to boot,
there are, on this planet alone, something like two
million naturally occurring sweet things,
some with names so generous as to kick
the steel from my knees: agave, persimmon,
stick ball, the purple okra I bought for two bucks
at the market. Think of that. The long night,
the skeleton in the mirror, the man behind me
on the bus taking notes, yeah, yeah.
But look; my niece is running through a field
calling my name. My neighbor sings like an angel
and at the end of my block is a basketball court.
I remember. My color's green. I'm spring.

      —for Walter Aikens


^^EOP^^

If you think you know enough to say this poem
is about good hair, I'll correct you
and tell you it's about history
which is the blacksmith of our tongues.
Our eyes. Where you see misunderstanding
I see knuckles and teeth for sale
in a storefront window. I see the waterlogged
face of the fourteen-year-old boy.
The bullet's imperceptible sizzle
toward an unarmed man. And as you ask me to sign the book
that is not mine, your gaze shifting between
me and the author's photo, whispering, but that's not you? I do not
feel sorry for you. No. I think only that when a man
is a concept he will tell you about the smell
of smoke. He will tell you the distance
between heartbreak and rage.


^^EOP^^

Since I stopped the flow
Of primordial ciswhite straight men
Whom I heedlessly collect
And from whom the spring feeds
Without reason I have been
Shopping so much more
Than suits a prophet in the forest. 
A man said he felt like an awful cad
But an admission as such
Does not irrigate a dry spell
Once it’s surpassed the length
Of a petty offense record
Because the body’s memory is not so
Mutated by language
And there’s very little pleasure in force
When the subject is inertia. 
I used to leave as soon as
The mysterious chemistry worked out
Now I am both the one who leaves
And the one who stays
Eco­-novelty is rare and common
And each design reforms
The future and the last.


^^EOP^^

We walked through some heartache in '62.
Gary liked Teresa but Teresa
asked Elizabeth to tell Peter that
she really wanted to go out with him
but Peter had been making out with Jane
in the theater, celebrating their
one month anniversary, so that was
out, and even though Jane broke up with Pete,
Peter kept asking Gail to talk with Jane
which Gail wouldn't do because she'd told
Brenda that she thought that Peter was cute
but Brenda wasn't listening to a word,
wrapped up in lonely teardrops shed for Greg.
The waters of 8th grade were never still.


^^EOP^^

I sent him from home hardly more than a child.
Years later, he came back loving avocados.
In the distant kitchen where he'd flipped burgers
and tossed salads, he'd mastered how to prepare 
the pear-shaped fruit. He took a knife and plied
his way into the thick skin with a bravado
and gentleness I'd never seen in him. He nudged
the halves apart, grabbed a teaspoon and carefully 
eased out the heart, holding it as if it were fragile.
He took one half, then the other of the armadillo-
hided fruit and slid his spoon where flesh edged
against skin, working it under and around, sparing 
the edible pulp. An artist working at an easel,
he filled the center holes with chopped tomatoes.
The broken pieces, made whole again, merged
into two reconstructed hearts, a delicate and rare 
surgery. My boy who'd gone away angry and wild
had somehow learned how to unclose
what had once been shut tight, how to urge
out the stony heart and handle it with care. 
Beneath the rind he'd grown as tender and mild
as that avocado, its rubies nestled in peridot,
our forks slipping into the buttery texture
of unfamiliar joy, two halves of what we shared.


^^EOP^^

Out along the last curve in the brick walk
the grass has begun to green,
with the freezing cold and coming snow
its certain fate. 
The cranes make the same mistake,
fields of red capped heads attest their arrival
just before the worst blizzard of winter
makes it impossible to tell the field from the river. 
And we, too, have known these mortal mishaps,
miscalculated our time, found ourselves out of step,
arriving too early, staying on too late,
misjudging the nearness, the vengeance of the storm. 
The cranes, the grass, they tell us:
this can go on for millions of years.


^^EOP^^

                                          I
One among friends who stood above your grave
I cast a clod of earth from those heaped there
Down on the great brass-handled coffin lid.
It rattled on the oak like a door knocker
And at that sound I saw your face beneath
Wedged in an oblong shadow under ground.
Flesh creased, eyes shut, jaw jutting
And on the mouth a grin: triumph of one
Who has escaped from life-long colleagues roaring
For him to join their throng. He's still half with us
Conniving slyly, yet he knows he's gone
Into that cellar where they'll never find him,
Happy to be alone, his last work done,
Word freed from world, into a different wood.
   
                                         II
But we, with feet on grass, feeling the wind
Whip blood up in our cheeks, walk back along
The hillside road we earlier climbed today
Following the hearse and tinkling village band.
The white October sun circles Kirchstetten
With colours of chrysanthemums in gardens,
And bronze and golden under wiry boughs,
A few last apples gleam like jewels.
Back in the village inn, we sit on benches
For the last toast to you, the honoured ghost
Whose absence now becomes incarnate in us.
Tasting the meats, we imitate your voice
Speaking in flat benign objective tones
The night before you died. In the packed hall
You are your words. Your listeners see
Written on your face the poems they hear
Like letters carved in a tree's bark
The sight and sound of solitudes endured.
And looking down on them, you see
Your image echoed in their eyes
Enchanted by your language to be theirs.
And then, your last word said, halloing hands
Hold up above their heads your farewell bow.
Then many stomp the platform, entreating
Each for his horde, your still warm signing hand.
But you have hidden away in your hotel
And locked the door and lain down on the bed
And fallen from their praise, dead on the floor.
   
                                         III
(Ghost of a ghost, of you when young, you waken
In me my ghost when young, us both at Oxford.
You, the tow-haired undergraduate
With jaunty liftings of the head.
Angular forward stride, cross-questioning glance,
A Buster Keaton-faced pale gravitas.
Saying aloud your poems whose letters bit
Ink-deep into my fingers when I set
Them up upon my five-pound printing press:  'An evening like a coloured photograph 
A music stultified across the water 
The heel upon the finishing blade of grass.')

^^EOP^^

Rinky-dink kale feeding guinea pig
Fonky bag uh cornchips plastic shoe
Wearing crinkle-fry bastard
. . . up in here TONIGHT
Wanchu go head mister plinth butt
And roll ya dumb ass a lavender
Cigarette don't make me slap a freeze
On this wart-o-matic bullshit
Get me a rancorous tinker toy
N turn this motherfucker out


^^EOP^^




for Pat Boran



That kind of summer's day when music comes
down from the hills and sings in small back-rooms
and half-sets from a century before
batter their complex hobnails on the floor
and long laments in overcoats and caps
draw tears, reluctant from the porter-taps —
that was the kind of day it was, that day
when I forsook the world of earn and pay.
There, on the cobbles of the market square,
where toothless penny ballads rasped the air,
there among spanners, scollops, hones, and pikes,
limp Greyhound cabbage, mending-kits for bikes,
velvet calves in creels, women's overalls,
she shook my hand beside the market stalls.
And there before the coulter of a plough,
aware of all the gifts she could endow,
aware, as women are, of all her powers,
as startling as a bunch of winter flowers,
she tricked from me my childish, sacred vow. 
I got to know her lovers one by one:
some saw her in an eclipse of the sun,
some saw her practise magic with strange herbs
and made her opaque alchemies of verbs —
some, for her sake, thought blood her favourite wine,
and some thought spirits helped them to divine
her arcane instincts and, as holy fools,
would chant her words not known to any schools.
Some thought that secret nurture made her grow
and more believed she thrived in public show;
some scattered syntax like the blackthorn snow
in flashy spangles on the mud below
and some, like me, immersed themselves in laws,
for what good are the sparks without the straws?
But none of these sufficed. All through the land
I see the poets in their mad distress —
all favoured rivals? No, but victims, yes.
A creature driven by a savage gland,
she takes, and then dismisses, out of hand,
the men and women that she most does bless.
She does not rest, she does not detumesce. 
I leave her by a river on a bed,
a silken landscape underneath her head,
and spread her in her finest courting gown
on a spectacular eiderdown
with painted eyes and rings to catch the light
by the oblivious water overnight.
Only the poets can make her come to life,
the stricken catalyst, who call her wife —
at dawn I give her bed a gentle shove
and amputate the antennae of love
and watch the river carry her away
into the silence of a senseless bay
where light ignores the facets of her rings
and where names are not the names of things.
 


^^EOP^^

Apart disclaimed wicked pea, split soft skin
of the principle princess, who writhes,
a little blood passes her perineum every night,
grey linen sheets flax talisman plot luxe
to strip and scrub all gore
a plain bar of secret white soap
it is a pine tree, it is an orange blossom, is it a rose hip
under a baby tongue, blood cuts
punisher, swear it closed, closes it
 


^^EOP^^

Unable to pour boiling water
over an edge from kettle to pot
water boils from kettle to neti pot
still boils from kettle to cup running over
boil pool steam pool leak pool 
little cooling pot over the boiled edge
of boil pooled salt vapors
sulfurous stank boil heal dangled over
the boiled edge of burnt earth
cooling salt pool nettle stung
black clotted blood at the bottom
of the sink


^^EOP^^

Since kindergarten
my son's class has practiced
for when a lion 
enters the building.
They have a safe wall
they crouch against. 
A closet some of the children
fit into.
The lion roams 
wild in the hall.
Races up the stairs.
When the lion 
is at the door
they are taught
to think of emptiness. 
Darkness.
A real lion not
some yellow-furred animal.
 


^^EOP^^

           1 
The sky is alone tonight —
the moon and stars
seek some presence
in the firm quiet, in the hard lack.
A meteor falls in the empty dark.
Someone is absent, the universe is bare
listen, God, are you there? 
Sand silts the world —
dockleaves in the yard,
broken teeth eat sadness
in the hayless barn.
Silence knocks on men's doors
and silence answers it —
but music is heard in space. 
Lichen eats the stone,
old arrogance eats peace:
female salt eats being,
angry rust eats blood.
Beetle and seal are dead,
poisoned children in lakes —
but music is heard in space. 
Weak whistle-music moves
beyond Orion's Belt,
silk threads in a cave
float in the dark.
Some player in the solitude
with a hopeful song
but destruction still goes on. 
Lard made from whales,
coats from the seals' fur —
shaving brush from badger hair,
burnt chicks are henfood.
God's lovely creatures last
though we eat them, trout and lamb —
there's a use for the whistler's tune. 
I saw a nest ablaze,
living wood sawdust.
I saw a bird on fire
fall soundless from the air.
I saw the ancient ramparts downed
and silence in the plover field.
I saw the killer's belly feed. 
A tongue hangs on a tree,
the magpies' might is right:
a noise of glossy black and white.
I heard their loud artillery.
My ears are withered leaves
from their cacophony,
the discord shuts God's eyes.
But a new musician plays
and music's heard in space.   
           2 
Listen, father, wait a while —
stay alive with me until
the universe's gown,
once as fresh as cabbage-heart,
is clean again.
Do you remember mothers' milk
like pigeons' milk that feeds the flock?
It will pour again — wait on. 
I saw it last night
in the northern sky
whiter than any blood
dripped from the moon's pap
and every parched grave opened up
and the dough of milk and earth
made a bread forever fresh. 
Listen, father, listen close —
though the sky's a tambourine
danced on by an iron fool
there's harmony beyond his noise.
Take time and slow your pace —
the dark drink waits for you
and strange music out in space. 
Did you see them last night,
night's-eyes brilliant bright
in the black grass
and dandelions en masse,
guineas on velvet once
on an old god's shoulders
dead since the ancient magic passed? 
Remember the age of the seed,
kingdom of creatures, power of air?
(Man was not alone,
man and his household.)
Waterfall tumbling from eldertree,
foam on pools like feather capes?
Remember pollen from grasses' ears? 
Listen, father, cry no tear
for evil seed, for history's débris,
for the cold eternal stones,
ruined towers, groves of graves.
Listen: a bullfinch sings sweetly
(musical anvil in forge) his harmony's all history. 
So, my father, wait a while.
There's no music after dying,
no inkling of a human sigh —
just worlds falling into suns.
Earth will be the brightest bride,
star-necklets on her gown —
tinwhistles cracking tunes,
platform dances in each town.
Easy, father, wait a while. 
But he did not wait.   
          3
 
One day when hope was ill
I took dangerous medicine
and hope died out and left me there,
a naked surgeon, my patient dead.
Like a hen at grips with death
my bill dumb down a well,
my plumage drowned in hate. 
I turned my back on Glendarock,
walked for a drink to ease
and to obliterate
pain and fear and grief.
Rats laughed from every hedge,
bones embossed the road —
in the wind a grey crow screeched. 
And then I saw the sign
that led my heart to peace —
barley like a green fire,
sheets of barley in live waves
quivering its thousand ears,
swaying flames of green
as quietly restless as a child asleep. 
I knew then no victory
would go to iron axe or spear:
our mother which art on earth
conserve us safe and clean.
Gale and 'quake knock flat
all laws, all walls, all treasuries —
bindweed chokes the telegraph.   
In spite of joy this peace waned
and ice ran through every vein:
all my pores were locked
and my heart turned,
a piglet on a spit, his blood steam,
panting like a dog's tongue;
the scythe taught the corn its dream. 
Caterpillars squashed on the roads,
the swallow snapping back flies,
frogspawn dead in pools dried up,
the horsefly craving blood.
Prick in a vice, a man screams.
The scythe taught the poet his dream. 
Barley, cover me up,
let me lie in your field.
I ask of you a green death
in the quiet milk of your stalks.
Yes, the world will survive
with neither you nor me alive.
Damn you, death, I will not then experience
the new gown of the universe —
just lie manure on immaculate earth.   
           4 
Once a perfect standing stone,
fame engraved on my side,
my statement unambiguous,
I had nothing to hide.
But the wind of curiosity blew
with its what? and how? and why?
and blunted the edge of my dignity. 
The cow of love rubbed its flank
against my sides and frost burnt:
the grain inside me shrank,
I flaked on the grass bank.
A flock of questions came seeking food
and the mother in me said 'chook, chook'
though I was dumb and mere rock. 
The anxiety mason chipped at me
with his heavy hammer,
carving his own design:
his chisel gouged my grammar,
engraved no notices of mine
and every passing stray has read
words not engendered in my head. 
And the lichen letters came
twisting the bare word
and their grey crust grew on me
and concealed my shape.
I lost all courage and desire,
my voice was just a shard
and all the silent world had ears. 
My body like a dead elm —
dumb lightning upside-down —
inquisitor's file eroding me,
wedges wearing me out.
Before me, in my mouth,
restraints and oaths — but my poem stayed,
I still stand. But where are they? 
The sky stands on my tip,
stars flow through me, inside:
I tame the sun and moon,
harnessed to my pride.
No friendships flourish in my shade,
no herb of love, no mint of help,
and I'm incapable of prayer. 
Now merely a lump of stone
smashed in the field of scythes,
a circle of calves around me
staring with silly eyes. 
I lonesome like a hawtree
while lichen hones me down
and a lizard-brooch sleeps.   
            5 
In Hammer Glen there's blood
in milk and a goose complains
on an empty hearth: a cat
swells in the churn, dead and full.
A flitch of bacon hangs itself
from rafters: a tongs stands like a bull.
My first trip to the house of thatch — 
home of the Slaughter Lad
who condemned his own kind —
a hammer-vision showed him how
to escape the bird-lime.
I was called, no scalpel packed.
I threw a saddle on the dark
and galloped to the threshold of his mind. 
Knots of briars slid from their nests,
each poisoned eye a blackberry.
I was pelted with a shower of fruit
from a bare blackthorn tree.
I heard the chick sing in the egg,
and the straw in the mattress grew,
the raspberry cried in the jam. 
But I came safe from these shades,
out of the battle-noise gales,
until I reached Slaughter Lad's
and saw there under the moon's eye
a hedgehog milking a jack snipe,
a goat beating a drum in the sky —
I had crossed over the borders of the live. 
I walked into his head —
no knife, no healing herb —
helix of a snail's shell,
into a complex corridor.
Prayers of hate, echoes of roars
fell from the faceted walls —
his father's face was carved on the floor. 
'I hit him hit him hit him again —
the goose drank the juice of this brain,
I made a pig-trough from his skull
and put his eyes under a hen.
One did not hatch at all,
the other shook and cracked.
Out walked a chicken's claw. 
'The claw still sticks in me —
it tortures and exhausts:
contrition runs from my nose,
surgeon, give me peace.'
I refused. And left the place.
I threw away all style and craft,
my heart was ash and chaff,
my soul was a gravel bed —
a naked surgeon, and my patient dead.   
         6 
The one-eyed monk sits,
half prays where millstones turn.
His body comes to life,
a need to travel grinds him up —
a need for pools full of hope,
a need for wells of honey and sweat,
a need for hills where torches burn. 
He walks the white-flowered field
looking for a ferny place
clad in sparse purple light
(a foxglove round a bee)
to a mild meadow of sheep,
to soft dark, root of history —
peace to all who walk this way. 
But only silence from his bell,
dead butterfly his manuscript
— unfinished, unrevised —
he is addicted to this trip,
this drug called pilgrimage
that kills all dignity and skill
and still's his reason to exist. 
And when the monk grows weak,
clumsy, worn, aged —
no more desire to roam,
wanting his bell and page.
But he can no longer illuminate,
has lost the power to pray,
lost his interest in the everyday. 
This travel's an enormous act,
a trip all have to take,
and meadows and mountains lure
all who want to escape
with coaxing honey, coaxing kiss,
'Do not search for new things,
do not search for new things'. 
I will drown all my books
in that honeyed well
and play like a foal
in the brownest fern.
I will swim in the pool of hope,
I will walk till night in the bright fields. 
But in the splendid dark I'll hear
wings of parchment shake and bells weep.


^^EOP^^

         1 The Poet Down                for Patrick Kavanagh 
He sits between the doctor and the law.
Neither can help. Barbiturate in paw
one, whiskey in paw two, a dying man:
the poet down, and his fell caravan.
They laugh and they mistake the lash that lurks
in his tongue for the honey of his works.
The poet is at bay, the hounds baying,
dig his grave with careful kindness, saying:
'Another whiskey, and make it a large one!'
Priests within, acolytes at the margin
the red impaled bull's roar must fascinate —
they love the dead, the living man they hate.
They were designing monuments — in case —
and making furtive sketches of his face,
and he could hear, above their straining laughs,
the rustling foolscap of their epitaphs.             2  The Poet as Mastercraftsman                 for Thomas Kinsella 
Eras do not end when great poets die,
for poetry is not whole, it is where man
chose mountains to conform, to carve his own
face among the Gothic richness and the sky,
and the gargoyles, and the lesser tradesmen.
Praise from the apprentice is always shown
in miniatures of a similar stone.
I saw the master in his human guise
open doors to let me in, and rhythm out.
He smiled and entertained into the night.
I was aware of work undone. His eyes,
like owls', warned images from the room.
Under the stairs the muse was crying; shields
clashed in the kitchen and the war drum's boom,
men in celtic war dress entered from the right.
I left, my conversation put to rout. 
To poets peace poetry never yields.     
        3  The Poet as Black Sheep               for Paul Durcan 
I have seen him dine
in middle-class surroundings,
his manners refined,
as his family around him
talk about nothing,
one of their favourite theses. 
I have seen him lying
between the street and pavement,
atoning, dying
for their sins, the fittest payment
he can make for them,
to get drunk and go to pieces. 
On his father's face
in sparse lines etched out by ice,
the puritan race
has come to its zenith of grey spite,
its climax of hate,
its essence of frigidity. 
Let the bourgeoisie beware,
who could not control his head
and kept it in their care
until the brain bled:
this head is a poet's head,
this head holds a galaxy.   
        4  The Person as Dreamer: We Talk about the Future 
              for Des Healy 
It has to be a hill,
high, of course, and twilit.
There have to be some birds,
all sadly audible:
a necessary haze,
and small wristlets of rain,
yes, and a tremendous
air of satisfaction.
Both of us will be old
and both our wives, of course,
have died, young, and tragic.
And all our children have
gone their far ways, estranged,
or else not begotten.
We have been through a war,
been hungry, and heroes:
and here we are now, calm,
fed, and reminiscent.
The hills are old, silent:
our pipe-smoke rises up.
We have come a long way . . . .   
           5  The Poet Dreams and Resolves                  for Macdara Woods 
To be alone, and not to be lonely,
to have time to myself, and not be bored;
to live in some suburban house, beside
the mountains, with an adequate supply
of stout and spirits (or of stout only),
and some cigarettes, and writing paper,
and a little cheap food, and a small hoard
of necessary books, where I could write
in dark as monks did, with only blue sky
as interference, wind as soul-reaper. 
But what would I do if on certain nights
I was mad in heat for the public lights?
I would chain myself to a living tree
to foil the Sirens of the distant city. 
 


^^EOP^^

She invents wilderness
out of absence, erases houses,
the husband, the sewer pipe 
and the suburb it empties.
Leaving the sparrow, the snake.
Daily walks in her Virginia suburb 
minus the curb. Biographers
struggle to account for these years
in the wilderness, the housewife 
off hiking. Maybe her Virginia should be
a West Virginia: wilder, less money,
the creek a holler 
not this empty cul-de-sac.
Some days she erased all but the air,
maybe the light. Husband 
of the space bar, carpool
a clean section break. She became
a man in the wilderness 
and won the Pulitzer.
I told the truth, she said,
only I left some out. 
What rises in such a clearing?
What stays home
checking and re-checking the egg.


^^EOP^^

The great pulsation passed. Glass lay around me
Resurrected from the end. I walked
Along streets of slate-jabbering houses, 
Against an acrid cloud of dust, I saw
The houses kneel, revealed each in its abject
Prayer, my prayer as well: 'Oh God,
Spare me the lot that is my neighbour's.' 
Then, in the upper sky, indifferent to our
Sulphurous nether hell, I saw
The dead of the bombed graveyard, a calm tide
Under the foam of stars above the town. 
And on the roof-tops there stood London prophets
Saints of Covent Garden, Parliament Hill Fields,
Hampstead, Hyde Park Corner, Saint John's Wood,
Crying aloud in cockney fanatic voices:
'In the midst of Life is Death!' They kneeled
And prayed against the misery manufactured
In mines and ships and mills, against
The greed of merchants, vanity of priests.
They sang: 'We souls from the abyss
To whom the stars are fields of flowers,
Tell you: Rejoice in the abyss!
For hollow is the skull, the vacuum
In the gold ball, St Paul's gold cross.
Unless you will accept the emptiness
Within the bells of foxgloves and cathedrals,
Each life must feed upon the deaths of others,
The shamelessly entreating prayer
Of every house will be that it is spared
Calamity that strikes its neighbour.'
 


^^EOP^^




"Organizers Abruptly Cancel 25"' Anniversary Gala Honoring NASA's
             Hubble Telescope As Riots Burn Through Baltimore"
 



The camera is having trouble
focusing. A blurry spot
where the universe is.
Outside, a storm is brewing,
trashcans into windshields.
Outside agitators, a nebula
of thick dust. The images
are black and white but you can imagine
the green of this star's birth
as its extra spirals out.
This spring a cosmic mirage
where you could watch, on every television,
the death of a star in a supernova explosion
nine billion years ago across the cosmos.
Here in Sandtown, six men
have broken the spine of another.
It was a mistake
to send the camera out so quickly.
Easy to fix the lens
but nearly impossible to reach it,
as far out from us as it has drifted already.  


^^EOP^^

She longed to be an island, 
She loved the unbridled madness of them, the islands, 
She longed to arrive to an island that, perhaps, wasn't an island 
Divest herself of the ruinous, stony loves 
She longed to be an island
To only inhabit the sea's waistline
And not leave or return
To only be an island
Island of the night
Island of the dawn
Islands.


^^EOP^^

The sun changed colors 
The moon enamored even the most elderly, 
The tomatoes blushed with joy upon seeing you pass by.


^^EOP^^

That autumn was abundant
In Istanbul the ancient and platinum
Women with their faces covered and discovered 
My grandfather arrived on foot to this Ottoman city 
From the desolate Sebastopol and from other burned villages,
From the bloody snow. 
He spoke about its minarets
Certainly he loved the fields of leaves. Autumn, like a river or
    a glowing bonfire
And I don't know where he went to pray,
Or perhaps he no longer did so in the city of the sultans 
But I know in his mouth he carried a needle
Noble metaphor of his trade. 
Perhaps he wandered astonished throughout lovely Istanbul
Searching for sustenance or clients
Perhaps inclined, he entered one of the thousand mosques
Where he prayed
While the clocks stood still,
Geographies were erased.
Because the city was merely a golden breeze falling upon the
     leaves 
A multitude of lights upon the holy minarets,
My grandfather, 
A Jewish tailor also took refuge in Istanbul
Also another small Jewish city
Among the thresholds of history. 
 
 


^^EOP^^

Except another black girl was with me. 
Mother. Always lonely. I am always.
Mother those girls. Forty-two. 
March summer. Light blue. Vermont.
Endless crescent. Invert as a tyke lake. 
Fernet Mother, I'm grown. Forest.
San Francisco. Lone cold. 
Stone turd. Talk three or none.
Kidding.
Kidding.


^^EOP^^

Family dinner night, and we are deciding what to save:
polar bears or slipper limpets. Girls in Afghanistan 
or the wolf. We can't save everything
but the kids are ready 
with their banks, the season's extra, the not-
ice cream. How does the Afghan girl feel 
to make our list? We bring more and more
money to the table but the list outruns it. 
My mother comes in from visiting a friend in hospice,
sick from all the chemo. When I get whatever it is, she says, 
I want you to do nothing. It's only May
and already they've declared a statewide drought. 
Yesterday I hiked over a river that was not there.
Coral reefs, my son says, that's what I want 
to save. And so we do. Whatever is happening to us
is deductible. Silence of the was-river, 
was-bear. In the movies everyone is building
some kind of ark.


^^EOP^^
